Agricultural Economics, 7 (1992) 141-153
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam

141

Gendered impacts of fertilizer subsidy removal
programs in Malawi and Cameroon
Christina H. Gladwin
Food and Resource Economics Department, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

(Accepted 27 September 1991)

ABSTRACT
Gladwin, C.H., 1992. Gendered impacts of fertilizer subsidy removal programs in Malawi
and Cameroon. Agric. Econ., 7: 141-153.
Since the early 1980s, development experts and donor agencies have agreed on the
importance of structural adjustment programs (SAPs) aimed at 'getting prices right'.
Adoption of reforms were made preconditions for new loans or grants in many sub-Saharan
African countries. In both Malawi and Cameroon, one such required reform was government's eliminating fertilizer subsidies to the small farm sector, previously used to increase
the profitability of intensive agriculture while keeping food prices artificially low. The aim of
this ,:>aper is to review fertilizer subsidy removal programs for their impact on farmers, who
in sub-Saharan Africa are women. In theory, SAP programs should benefit women producers, because much emphasis is placed on renewing agricultural production and aligning
farmgate prices with world prices. But in practice, will they benefit? Are SAPs gender-neutral and affect men and women equally, or merely gender-blind?

INTRODUCTION

Since the early 1980s, development experts and donor agencies have
agreed on the importance of structural adjustment programs (SAPs) aimed
at 'getting prices right'. Adoption of reforms - devaluation of overvalued
currencies, increases in artificially low food prices and interest rates,
privatization policies, wage and hiring freezes, removal of subsidies, and
the switching of resources from the production of non-tradables to tractabies - were made preconditions for new loans or grants in many subCorrespondence to: C. H. Gladwin, IFAS, Food and Resource Economics Department,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Ol69-5150j92j$05.00 © 1992- Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

142

C.H. GLADWIN

Saharan African countries. In both Malawi and Cameroon, one such
required reform was government's eliminating fertilizer subsidies to the
small farm sector 1 , previously used to increase the profitability of intensive
agriculture while keeping food prices artificially low (Timmer, Falcon and
Pearson, p. 288). The argument was that only when total fertilizer use is
low and the ratio of incremental grain yield to fertilizer application is high
can such subsidies be cost-effective, relative to higher output prices or
greater food imports.
The aim of this paper is to review fertilizer subsidy removal programs for
their impact on farmers, who in sub-Saharan Africa are women who
provide 46% of agricultural labor, on average, and produce most of the
food crops (Dixon, 1982). In theory, SAP programs should benefit women
producers, because much emphasis is placed on renewing agricultural
production and aligning farmgate prices with world prices. But in practice,
will they benefit? The question is: are SAPs gender-neutral (i.e., affecting
men and women equally), or merely gender-blind (i.e., ignoring the impacts
on women and assuming them to be the same as on men)?
Elson (1991) claims there is a male bias in the macroeconomic thinking
behind SAPs because the focus on monetary aggregates masks a hidden set
of assumptions concerning human resources and their allocation to production. Human resources are treated as if they were costlessly transferable
between different activities and different crops. This ignores the sexual
division of labor which determines that some sorts of work are suitable for
women but unsuitable for men, expressed in rules which require African
women to provision the household with food while men control export crop
production. This can present a barrier to SAP goals of reallocating resources - women's labor and land in Africa - from the production of
non-tradable subsistence crops to tradable export crops. To the extent that
SAPS are successful in switching resources from non-tradables to trad-

1 In Malawi, USAID negotiated a 1985 Economic Policy Reform Program (EPRP) with two
reforms (subsidy removal and substitution of high analysis for low analysis fertilizers) and
$15 million to be disbursed over three years (USAID, 1990). After initially cutting the
subsidy from 29% to 17%, in 1987/88 the government refused to cut the subsidy further,
claiming that transportation cost increases, the infusion of hungry Mozambique refugees,
and lagging maize production required an increase in subsidy to moderate fertilizer price
increases. USAID then cancelled the EPRP without releasing $5 million. Subsequently, the
price of fertilizer has increased 50%, although the subsidy has remained at 24% of delivered
cost. Cameroon started a Fertilizer Subsector Removal Program (FSSRP) in 1988, when the
subsidy was cut from 65 to 45%, decreasing government expenditures from 6 to 2.4 billion
(10 9 ) CFA. It was projected that the subsidy would decrease to 30% in 1989, 10% in 1990,
and 0 in 1991. Because it takes a while for fertilizer to filter down to the farmer, however,
fertilizer price increases had not yet occurred in December 1989, when this study started.

143

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON

ables, women lose out as more powerful men control the profits that result
from the added incentives to produce tradables or export crops.
If this is true, then what macroeconomic policies and SAP reforms
should be changed? In this paper, I argue against the removal of fertilizer
subsidies, at least for women farmers growing food crops. Section 1 shows
that even with fertilizer subsidies, fertilizer use is very low and women are
just starting to use it on food crops in Malawi and Cameroon. A further
decrease of the fertilizer subsidy would eliminate its use on food crops,
because lack of cash and imperfect credit markets are the main constraints
limiting women farmers' use of chemical fertilizer. Section 2 explores
government's other options to allow women access to fertilizer, e.g., an
increase in food product prices to offset the increased price of fertilizer
after subsidy removal andjor an expansion of women's credit clubs; and
finds that women farmers, especially female headed households, are often
net buyers of food and too poor to want credit. Section 3 concludes that
these options, while desirable in the long run, are not substitutes for
making fertilizer cheaper now via a subsidy targeted at women. If government wants to preserve food security and encourage more fertilizer use on
food crops, then it should target fertilizer subsidies at women farmers who
produce food crops.
1. CONSTRAINTS TO FERTILIZER USE

Data on fertilizer use from both Malawi and Cameroon show that it is
very low: on average one 50-kg bag per hectare is applied. Malawi data in
Table 1 from 501 households show that female-headed households use
significantly less fertilizer (34.4 vs. 51.3 kgjha) and have smaller farm size
(0.8 vs. 1.33 ha) than male-headed households. Data personally collected
from 36 households in Anglophone and Francophone Cameroon agree:
average fertilizer use is 52 kgjha, still lower on maize (30 kgjha), because

TABLE 1
Differences between male and female-headed households, Blantyre, Lilongwe, and Kasungu
Districts, 1986 j87

Number farmers
Total fertilizer (kg)
Fertilizer use (kgjha)
Landholding size (ha)

Male
HjHeads

Female
HjHeads

349
72.41
51.28
1.33

152
30.24
34.41
0.80

Source: Malawi Rapid Fertilizer Survey, 1987.

t value

Prob.

5.18
2.29

0.0001
0.011
0.0001

7.84

144

C.H. GLADWIN

two-thirds of the women interviewed (in the Anglophone North-West
province) use no fertilizer at all.
One reason farmers apply such low levels of fertilizer is that they
increase its use until the ratio of the marginal product of fertilizer to its
real price ( Pfert!Pmaize) is not 1 but greater than or equal to 2 (Timmer,
1974, p. 200). The ratio is usually 2 or more because farmers cannot base
their decisions to use or increase fertilizer on the criterion of profit
maximization alone. They also face constraints such as lack of cash, credit,
knowledge of how to apply fertilizer, and risk. Another reason stems from
the nature of the sexual division of agricultural labor in the African
household (Gladwin and McMillan, 1989). Although allocation of labor
rules vary across regions, even within the same country, in Malawi and
North-West Cameroon women produce the subsistence crop maize, and
men produce a cash crop: tobacco and hybrid maize in Malawi, and coffee
and cocoa in Cameroon. In Malawi, women produce 'local' maize which is
90% of total maize production and groundnuts as a cash crop; in Cameroon,
women produce only the food crops of maize, yams and beans. The very
nature of this division of labor often leaves women without any cash with
which to buy fertilizer for subsistence maize. Either they are dependent on
their husbands or sons to buy fertilizer for them, or they must take some
food away from the family to sell, to buy fertilizer for the next season. This
is very hard for women to do; it is impossible in a maize-deficit household,
i.e. one which regularly produces less maize than it consumes. The result is
that men buy fertilizer for women's maize if they have the money after
buying fertilizer for their own cash crop, and women apply little or no
fertilizer on subsistence maize.
Constraints limiting fertilizer use

It is necessary to show a link between imperfect credit markets and
women farmers' low use of fertilizer. Multiple regression analysis, with
results shown in Table 2, shows the link between smallholders' lack of cash
and/or credit and their individual fertilizer use. The data set was from
Malawi's Rapid Fertilizer Survey of 1986/87, carried out as a supplement
to the Annual Survey of Agriculture, and consisted of individual observation data from 185 Blantyre farmers, 145 Lilongwe farmers, and 196
Kasungu farmers. The data set has the advantage that all fields were
measured by experienced technicians, and is representative of districts with
the biggest farmers (Lilongwe, Kasungu) and smallest farmers (Blantyre).
Regression analysis is not used here to show causality, but merely the
link between the quantity of fertilizer, CFERT (or quantity per hectare,
CFHA) and five independent variables. These include: the quantity of land

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON

145

TABLE 2
Regression on quantity of fertilizer per hectare (CFHA), Blantyre, Lilongwe and Kasungu,
1986/87
Independant
variables

B

Intercept
AREA
CURCLUB1
NO CASH
GENDER
CMANURE

100.97
-0.19
36.33
-85.99
0.73
21.25

N
F

R square
Signif. F

?-value
12.37
-5.25
4.50
-12.33
0.11
2.45

0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.91
0.0146

498
57.79
0.369
0.0001

Source: Rapid Fertilizer Survey, 1987.

cultivated (AREA), a dummy variable representing the farmer's participation
in a credit club described in the next section (cuRcLuBl ), a dummy variable
which equals 1 if the farmer said his reason for nonuse of fertilizer was
'Insufficient money' (NOCASH), a dummy variable representing the gender
of the farmer which is 1 if the farmer is male and 0 if female, and a variable
CMANURE representing application of manure I compost which may either
be a substitute or complement for chemical fertilizer. The price paid by
farmers for fertilizer is omitted because it is constant across Malawi, due to
the monopsonistic control of ADMARC, the parastatal marketing board.
In fact, previous studies that tested for a price response have shown no
significant effect of fertilizer price on quantity demanded and even found
the wrong sign (Nyondo, 1987, pp. 116-126).
Results in Table 2 show that, as expected, access to credit has a very
significant and positive effect on the quantity of fertilizer applied by an
individual smallholder. The signs on the significant variables say that the
cash constraint decreases fertilizer use significantly, but membership in a
farmers' credit club increases it significantly. In addition, the positive sign
on manure application shows it is a complement to chemical fertilizer in
Malawi, probably for two reasons. First, wealthier smallholders can afford
to buy chemical fertilizer and also enough animals to make manure.
Second, farmers report that their soils need both chemical and organic
fertilizers: chemical to provide nitrogen and organic to help soil structure.
The amount of land cultivated is linked positively with the total quantity of
fertilizer (cFERT ); while it is linked negatively with the quantity of fertilizer

146

C.H. GLADWIN

per hectare (cFHA). This is because the smaller the area cultivated, the
more fertilizer is poured on- holding other variables (access to cashjcredit)
constant. The latter result is not a surprise when fertilizer comes as an
indivisible input of 50-kg bags to most smallholders. An alternative explanation for this result is that farmers try to overcome smaller landholdings
by using more fertilizer, given they can overcome the NOCASH constraint.
Note that all variables except gender are highly significant (P = 0.0001).
Then why have we included gender as an independent variable? Just to
show it has no direct effect on fertilizer use: although women household
heads apply uniformly less fertilizer per hectare than men heads, gender
does not matter when one holds constant access to credit and cash. But
without access to credit or cash, women household heads apply less
fertilizer than men, and get lower yields and incomes as a result (Due,
1991).
2. ALTERNATIVE POLICIES TO A FERTILIZER SUBSIDY: WILL THEY WORK
FOR WOMEN?

With fertilizer subsidy removal, there will be little or no fertilizer bought
by women farmers who are the smallest of the smallholders, because lack
of cash and credit are the main constraints limiting their use of chemical
fertilizers. Women's lack of fertilizer use means they cannot now intensify
subsistence maize production and raise factor productivity; in the future,
this may jeopardize the high level of food self-sufficiency traditionally
enjoyed in both Malawi and Cameroon (Goheen, 1991). Government will
then have to import maize, the main subsistence crop, or suffer greater
levels of malnutrition, and the cost of importing maize may be greater than
the cost of subsidizing fertilizer.
But, counter the subsidy removal advocates- usually found in the World
Bank, USAID, and Ministries of Finance - one way to offset the rising
price of fertilizer after subsidy removal is to increase producer prices of
food and cash crops which are kept artificially low. It is true that producer
prices are kept artificially low: in Malawi in 1986/87, maize prices had
been low relative to other cash crops, e.g., tobacco, cotton, groundnuts. In
Cameroon in 1989, farmgate prices of coffee, used by smallholders to buy
fertilizer for maize and coffee, were one-third to one-half of world coffee
prices.
Unfortunately, governments are more likely to decrease fertilizer subsidies than to increase artificially low producer prices, because since colonial
times, paying farmers less than the world price has been the way African
governments tax farmers (Bates, 1981). In 1989, for example, the Cameroon
government was in the 2nd year of a Fertilizer Subsector Subsidy Removal

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON

147

Program, but it also cut farmgate coffee prices in half in December, to
keep them at one-third the world price. Thus farmers were faced with a
double whammy: a 100% decrease in producer prices and a 50% increase
in the price of fertilizer.
Even when government does increase producer prices, as the Malawi
government has done with maize prices since 1987, increasing the price of
maize cannot by itself substitute for keeping the price of fertilizer low, as
most smallholders do not sell maize and are in fact net buyers of maize.
Peters and Herrera (1988) claim that less than 15% of Malawi's smallholders are fully self-sufficient in maize production. Lele (1989, p. 16) terms the
structure of Malawi's agriculture a "dualism-within-dualism" structure,
whereby the small farm sector is distinct from the large "estate" sector and
smallholders are split into two groups: a minority who have a farm size
large enough "to produce a marketable surplus and capable of taking risks
and a preponderant majority experiencing stagnation or near economic
paralysis." Increasing the producer price of maize will thus be detrimental
not only to the urban poor but also to the rural majority who buy maize.
According to Harrigan (1987), the only hope of increasing their incomes is
to encourage their use of fertilizer on subsistence (local) maize varieties, so
that more of their land can be taken out of subsistence and planted to cash
crops. Is this being done? No, 1984-1990 data show hectarage is stable in
local maize varieties and the supply inelastic (0.07) (USAID, 1990). For
farmers unable to "withdraw" into autarky or an "economy of affection,"
higher food prices can hurt (Hyden and Peters, 1991).
Expansion of credit facilities: a policy alternative?
Similarly, government's expansion of credit facilities, desirable in the
long run, is not a good policy alternative to a fertilizer subsidy targeted at
women in the short run. Why not? To answer this question, smallholders'
decisions to join a credit club were modeled with discrete, deterministic
'decision tree models' after personal interviews with 39 farmers in Malawi
in 1987 (Figs. 1 and 2) and 36 farmers in Cameroon in 1989 (Fig. 3) 2 . The
tree model is a qualitative research method which combines in a logical
order the reasons - decision criteria ( < ) ) - why some farmers choose one
The samples personally interviewed in both countries were chosen by snowball sampling
and are fairly representative. In Lilongwe, Kasungu and Salima districts, Malawi, 33 of 40
were household heads, 26 farmers were credit club members, and 14 were not; 22 farmers
got credit for fertilizer in 1986/87, while 18 did not; 17 farmers were women household
heads, 20 were male heads, and three were couples interviewed together. The Cameroon
sample included 21 women, 14 men, and 1 couple in both Anglophone (Kom area) and
Francophone (Dschang area) Cameroon.
2

148

C. H. GLADWIN

3'1 e.ases
I

(Get Credit for Some Fertilizer; Don't)
.j.

1Is there a club in the area
Don't
you have asked to join and been- No -7 Get .
denied entrance by the club club
Cred1t
committee or local leader?
7'- ea.s
I

e5

Yes, club exists

"'

2 Are you too old, poor, and
have too small a garden and/or too -yes""""""? Don't
many debts to be admitted to a
ask to
farmers or women's club?
join
no
.j,
3 If

no:

(;<./

<!a. ses

a woman: are you married
to a man· who is or will be a member of
a farmers' club and has he agreed
to get fertilizer for you?
}- yes

:

'i cases

5 Can

you join a
Women's Club?~
yes

-----:::1

19 ca s;es

yes~ :

I

~

CQ S

eS

left~~e ~~rmers'
f-

club or has it
defaulted?
no

\

no - - - 7 Don't Join;
No Credit

6 Are you so fearful of the
amount of the problems that may ensue if
you don't repay (because you've never had a
loan before or someone close to you has had- yes
a bad experience with repayment) that you
can't take the risk of not repaying?

no : :::<. """f

9

4

~itS E?S

l
.

No Credlt

3 c.ce.se s

7 Has your club as a whole
defaulted on a previous loan
yes --7 No Credit
so that in 1986/87 they allowed you no credit?
eA.
I
no: ~3 c.zses

Lf

ses

...

Go to figure 2

Fig. 1. Malawi farmer's decision to get credit for some fertilizer.

alternative, e.g. [get credit for fertilizer], while others decide to "go down
another path" and choose another outcome, e.g. [buy it with cash] (Gladwin, 1989). Because the decision criteria are elicited from farmers in
open-ended interviews, they can be used to identify farmers' constraints as
perceived by the farmers themselves. A test of the model is provided by
comparing the outcome ([ ]) chosen by the farmer with the outcome that
the model sends himjher to, based on hisjher responses to the questions
in the criteria.
The first seven criteria in the tree in Fig. 1 are 'elimination-by-aspects'
criteria that rapidly eliminate a farmer from getting credit via a farmers'

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON

0<3

149

cases

8 Cost

of Buying <C...<.. Cost of Fertilizer
Fert. thru ADMARC
on Credit?

~

I

no~

yes: Ol.O

j

3

Qa :;;es

9 HaveJ. you the cash
to buy all of the fertilize
you need?
I
'-..._
yes:3
no:/7-c:>t:tses

I
10 Have

other pressing
needs for this cash, and can
you make more money by investing
it on other activities than

;::''"' ''"iliw•? \ _____
BUY FERTILIZER
WITH CASH

yi

GETSOME CREDIT
FOR FERTILIZER

10 cases

3 C!Clses

llis there a risk
of your not being able
to repay the loan?

7

of L<. Risk of
Not repaying
Inviting Hunger
the loan
Now

12Risk

yt:

no \ E T CREDIT
FOR FERTILIZER

~0

r CaGes

BUY FERTILIZER
WITH CASH

'f Qases
(.;;(. e.vrors)

Fig. 2. Stage 2 of Malawi farmer's decision to get credit.

club which reach. 25% of Malawi's farmers, or a women's club, organized
by the Women's Programme. They include conditions such as: the farmer is
rejected for admission to a farmers' club by other club members (criterion
1); the farmer is so hopelessly poor that hejshe expects to be denied
entrance to the credit club so won't even try to join (criterion 2); the
(woman) farmer is married to a member of a farmers' club and he by law
must get the fertilizer on credit for her (criterion 3), unless he (or his
whole club) has defaulted on a previous loan and now cannot receive credit
(criterion 4); there is no women's club in the area which gives credit for
fertilizer directly to the women (criterion 5); women lack confidence in or
familiarity with credit clubs so that they won't take the risk of not repaying
the loan (criterion 6); the farmer or hisjher whole club cannot now receive

150

C. H. GLADWIN

1Are you or wife a member
of a MIDENO (women's) club
and are they giving fertilizer
/ on credit to you t~is ~?

'f cczse.s

yes :
/

GET CREDIT ~<----'
'f c_ a. s es

~

Are you or your husband
a member of Coffee Cooperative?

I

(;z f)

no : 3~ C! ctses

2

yes : ;<. 3

\

ca. ses

enough coffee last
year to buy this year's
fertilizer out of last
year's coffee?
yes:

13/
j

13

ct<.ses

'Are you a member of the
Credit Union, so that you
can borrow up to the amount
you have saved with them?

\no: /0yes:

(5 -¥)

6 Have

G

other, more important uses for
Credit Union money (e.g. school fees,
books, sickness, clothing) than
fertilizer?
\
no: J.

j

-

S' ca.se..s: yes

GET CREDIT for fertilizer
from Credit Union; pay
interest rate

I ease.

no :

5 Belong to a n jangi,
and have saved up enough
to cover fertilizer loan?

I

\

1/

7-

no:

7 Have other, J!!Q!Sl imp!rtant uses
for njangi money than fertilizer?

f

/3 cases

r--~
yes:

/o:
GET CREDIT for fertilizer
from njangi; pay interest

\

/

I

GET FERTILIZER
FROM COFFEE COOP
(Cash Transaction)

no '

/<t Qcvses

-13 Sell

cases

\

~: 1c:>~5
DON'T GET CREDIT
FOR FERTILIZER

J'f cc1ses

( // ¥ )
Fig. 3. Cameroon farmer's decision to get credit for fertilizer.

credit due to a previous default on their part (criterion 7). If any of these
conditions holds, credit as an option is eliminated for the farmer.
If the farmer 'passes' these constraints successfully, he or she passes to
the 'ordering aspect' in criterion 8, on which he or she qualitatively
minimizes the cost of acquiring fertilizer. The tree model is thus a discrete
version of 'maximization subject to constraints', the common choice princi-

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON

151

ple of micro-economics. If the cost of buying fertilizer is much less than the
cost of getting it on credit, the farmer 'goes down' the left hand path of the
tree. The farmer then buys fertilizer if: hejshe has enough cash to buy all
the fertilizer needed (criterion 9) and he/she hasn't other more pressing
needs for the cash such as school fees, clothing, etc. (criterion 10); or
hejshe has other uses for the cash so needs the credit, but thinks there's a
risk of not being able to repay the loan (criterion 11), and this risk of
non-repayment is greater than the risk of 'inviting hunger' if you grow
maize varieties (local or hybrid) without fertilizer (criterion 12). Why is not
repaying a credit loan so risky? Farmers in default report that club
members and extension agents steal their animals, oxcarts, and even the
doors and roofs to their houses to hold until the farmer or a family member
repays the loan.
On the other hand, the farmer 'goes down' the right hand branch of the
tree and gets the credit for at least some of the needed fertilizer if he 1she
thinks there is little difference in the costs of acquiring fertilizer or he j she
does not have all the cash needed to buy it or has other more pressing
needs for this cash and can also pass the risk. constraints. The farmer will
take the risks of credit, i.e., of not being able to repay the loan, if hejshe
thinks "you invite hunger if you grow local maize without fertilizer", and
judges the danger of hunger to be greater than the danger of not being able
to repay the loan (criterion 12).
Of what use is the model? By illustrating the reasoning farmers use to
make this decision, the model identifies the main factors limiting credit
use, and for the purposes of this paper, the major constraints limiting
women's credit use. In this sample, these are: lack of a credit club in the
village (4 women), fear of not being able to repay the loan (3 women); and
being too old or poor to want credit (2 women). Half of the women in the
sample thus eliminate the credit option rapidly, in the first stage of the
decision process, without considering aspects of cost or riskiness. I conclude that there are too many constraints on women farmers for much
credit expansion to be feasible in the short run. Although desirable in the
long run, it is not a good policy substitute for a fertilizer subsidy targeted at
women in the short run.

'Credit' decision in the Cameroon
Cameroon farmers do not process the same decision criteria as do
Malawians, when deciding whether or not to get credit, because there are
practically no credit clubs in Cameroon. Of 36 farmers interviewed, 32 say
no to criterion 1, "Is there a club in your area that you can join," in the
information-processing model of Fig. 3. Only four farmers interviewed in

152

C.H. GLADWIN

Cameroon reported receiving MIDENO government credit; two of them
belonged to a MIDENO women's club. In 1989, they had received their
first credit for fertilizer.
But there are other options called credit, supplied through the local
coffee cooperative (criterion 2, figure 3), the local credit union (criterion 4),
or the indigenous njangi or tontin systems of saving (criterion 5), to which
almost every Cameroonian belongs. Members of the local coffee cooperative sell their harvested coffee in January and receive their next year's
fertilizer at the same time, to be applied in February thru April to both
coffee and maize (criterion 3). This is called 'credit' but strictly speaking,
this is a cash transaction, and the cooperative does not give more fertilizer
than can be paid for with last year's coffee. Members of local credit unions
save on a monthly basis for a year and borrow against that collateral during
the second year; but they cannot borrow more than what they have saved.
Members of an njangi can do the same, i.e., build up their collateral to
borrow during the 2nd year, or put money into a common pot every month
to receive twelve times that amount once a year. With these sources of
'credit', more men get credit from the coffee cooperative (8 of a total 13),
and more women do not get credit (11 of a total 14). This is because
women in some regions (the Northwest) are not allowed to raise coffee for
sale, and so do not have a cash crop to save up enough njangi money to
cover a fertilizer loan.
3. CONCLUSION

Policy options are limited for African governments trying to juggle SAP
requirements with women farmers' demands for affordable fertilizer as a
way to intensify food production. This paper has shown that policy options
that work for men farmers - an increase in producer prices, an expansion
of credit - do not often work for women farmers, because they tend to be
net buyers of food who suffer when food prices rise, producers of subsistence and not cash crops, and too poor to want credit. To the extent that
SAPs are successful in switching more resources from non-tradables to
tradables, women will be unable to get access to fertilizer to grow their
non-tradable crops more intensively. Is there a solution to this dilemma?
One solution is to target fertilizer subsidies at women farmers for food
production. This can be done via women's credit clubs, like those of
MIDENO in Cameroon and the Women's Programme in Malawi. Government can strengthen each women's club's 'revolving credit fund', used to
bail out individual defaulting members, by giving the club a small amount
when a club member supervises the application of subsidized fertilizer on
another's farm. Credit clubs can thus serve not only to expand credit but

FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON

153

also to supervise the proper use of subsidized fertilizer bought with cash.
Will there be too much leakage of this subsidy from women's food crops to
men's cash crops? The answer comes from one Cameroonian who allows
his wife to fertilize her maize while he neglects to fertilize his coffee: "I
don't like to be hungry."
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The author is grateful to Mark Malin and Mercedes Rosalsky for
computer work, and farmers interviewed in Malawi and Cameroon for
hospitality.
REFERENCES
Bates, R., 1981. Markets and states in tropical Africa. University of California, Berkeley,
CA.
Dixon, R., 1982. Women in Agriculture: Counting the Labor Force in Dev.eloping Countries. Pop. Dev. Rev., 8: 558-559.
Due, J.M., 1991. Policies to overcome the negative effects of structural adjustment programs
on African female-headed households. In: C. Gladwin (Editor), Structural Adjustment
and African Women Farmers. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, FL, pp. 103-127.
Elson, D., 1991. Male bias in macro-economics: the case of structural adjustment. In: D.
Elson (Editor), Male Bias in the Development Process. Manchester University Press,
Manchester, pp. 164-190.
Gladwin, C., 1989. Ethnographic Decision Tree Modeling. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Gladwin, C. and McMillan, D., 1989. Is a turnaround in Africa possible without helping
African women to farm? Econ. Dev. Cult. Change, 37: 345-69.
Goheen, M., 1991. The ideology and political economy of gender: Women and land in Nso,
Cameroon. In: C. Gladwin (Editor), Structural Adjustment and African Women Farmers. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, FL, pp. 239-256.
Harrigan, J., 1987. Price Policy in Malawi. Mimeo, Ministry of Agriculture, Lilongwe,
Malawi.
Hyden, G. and Peters, P., 1991. Debate on the economy of affection: is it a useful tool for
gender analysis? In: C. Gladwin (Editor), Structural Adjustment and African Women
Farmers. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, FL, pp. 301-336.
Lele, U., 1989. Structural adjustment, agricultural development and the poor: some lessons
from the Malawian experience. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Nyondo, F., 1987. Price responsiveness of producers of basic food crops in Malawi. M.S.
thesis, Food and Resource Economics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Peters, P.E. and Herrera, M.G., 1989. Cash cropping, food security and nutrition: the
effects of agricultural commercialization among smallholders in Malawi. Mimeo, Harvard Institute of International Development.
Timmer, C.P., 1974. The demand for fertilizer in developing countries. Food Res. Inst.
Stud., 13: 197-224.
Timmer, C.P., Falcon, W. and Pearson, S., 1983. Food Policy Analysis. World Bank,
Washington, DC.
USAID, 1990. The Malawi Fertilizer Subsidy Reduction Program. USAID, Washington,
DC.

