Dial “A” for Agriculture
A Review of Information and Communication
Technologies for Agricultural Extension in
Developing Countries
Jenny C. Aker

Abstract
Agriculture can serve as an important engine for economic growth in developing countries, yet
yields in these countries have lagged far behind those in developed countries for decades. One
potential mechanism for increasing yields is the use of improved agricultural technologies, such
as fertilizers, seeds and cropping techniques. Public-sector programs have attempted to overcome
information-related barriers to technological adoption by providing agricultural extension services.
While such programs have been widely criticized for their limited scale, sustainability and impact,
the rapid spread of mobile phone coverage in developing countries provides a unique opportunity
to facilitate technological adoption via information and communication technology (ICT)-based
extension programs. This article outlines the potential mechanisms through which ICT could
facilitate agricultural adoption and the provision of extension services in developing countries. It
then reviews existing programs using ICT for agriculture, categorized by the mechanism (voice,
text, internet and mobile money transfers) and the type of services provided. Finally, we identify
potential constraints to such programs in terms of design and implementation, and conclude with
some recommendations for implementing field-based research on the impact of these programs on
farmers’ knowledge, technological adoption and welfare.
JEL Codes: D1, I2, O1, O3
Keywords: Agriculture; agricultural extension; information technology; program evaluation

www.cgdev.org

Working Paper 269
September 2011

Dial “A” for Agriculture: A Review of Information and
Communication Technologies for Agricultural Extension in
Developing Countries
Jenny C. Aker

This paper is forthcoming in Agricultural Economics.
Jenny C. Aker is a non-resident fellow at the Center for Global Development and
assistant professor of economics at Tufts University, Economics Department
and Fletcher School, 160 Packard Avenue, Medford, MA 02155. Jenny.Aker@
tufts.edu. She would like to thank Tanguy Bernard, Alain de Janvry, Jean-Jacques
Dethier, Travis J. Lybbert, Jeremy Magruder, Isaac Mbiti, Elisabeth Sadoulet,
Muzhe Yang, an anonymous referee and participants at the Agriculture for
Development Conference at the University of California-Berkeley for helpful
comments and suggestions. All errors are her own.
CGD is grateful for support of this work from its funders and board of directors.
Jenny C. Aker. “Dial “A” for Agriculture: A Review of Information and Communication
Technologies for Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.” CGD Working Paper
269. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development.
http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/1425497

Center for Global Development
1800 Massachusetts Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.org

The Center for Global Development is an independent, nonprofit policy
research organization dedicated to reducing global poverty and inequality
and to making globalization work for the poor. Use and dissemination of
this Working Paper is encouraged; however, reproduced copies may not be
used for commercial purposes. Further usage is permitted under the terms
of the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Working Papers are those of the authors and
should not be attributed to the board of directors or funders of the Center
for Global Development.

1.

Introduction

The potential role of agriculture as an engine for economic growth has long been recognized
(Byerlee, de Janvry and Sadoulet 2009). Yet despite the importance of agriculture for
development, agricultural production and yields have lagged far behind those in developed
countries over the past few decades. One potential explanation for this stagnating growth in
yields is the underutilization of improved agricultural technologies, which has remained
relatively low in developing countries since the 1970s (Figure 1).1
Numerous economic studies have identified the determinants of technology adoption and
the potential barriers to it (Feder, Just and Zilberman 1985, Foster and Rosenzweig 1995,
Foster and Rosenzweig 2010). While the specific determinants of technology adoption
depend upon the setting and the technology type, common factors identified in the
theoretical and empirical literature include education, wealth, tastes, risk preferences,
complementary inputs and access to information and learning. Of these, the role of
asymmetric and costly information has received particular attention.
Governments and international organizations have attempted to overcome some of the
perceived information failures related to technology adoption via agricultural extension
services, generally defined as the delivery of information inputs to farmers (Anderson and
Feder 2007). There were approximately 500,000 agricultural extension personnel worldwide
in 2005, with 95 per cent of these working in public agricultural extension systems
(Anderson and Feder 2007). Yet despite decades of investment in and experience with public
extension programs, evidence of their impact upon agricultural knowledge, adoption and
productivity remains limited. Furthermore, the systems themselves have been criticized for
high costs, problems of scale and low levels of accountability (Anderson and Feder 2007).
The rapid spread of information and communication technologies (ICT) in developing
countries offers a unique opportunity to transfer knowledge via private and public
information systems. Over the past decade, mobile phone coverage has spread rapidly in
Africa, Asia and Latin America: over sixty percent of the population of sub-Saharan Africa,
Asia and Latin America had access to mobile phone coverage in 2009. Coinciding with this
increase in mobile phone coverage has been an increase in mobile phone adoption: As of
1Low

levels of adoption do not necessarily indicate under-adoption, defined as a “situation in which there are

substantial unrealized gains to the use of a new technology or expansion of input use, and reflected in high
returns to adoption” (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010).

1

2008, there were approximately 4 billion mobile phone subscribers worldwide, with 374
million subscriptions in Africa, 1.79 million in Asia and 460 million in Latin America (ITU
2009). While initial adoption was primarily by wealthier, urban and more educated residents,
in recent years, mobile phones have been adopted by rural and urban populations in some of
the world’s poorest countries (Aker and Mbiti 2010).
Mobile phones significantly reduce communication and information costs for the rural poor.
This not only provides new opportunities for rural farmers to obtain access to information
on agricultural technologies, but also to use ICTs in agricultural extension services. Since
2007, there has been a proliferation of mobile phone-based applications and services in the
agricultural sector, providing information on market prices, weather, transport and
agricultural techniques via voice, short message service (SMS), radio and internet. While such
programs are innovative, they are not without challenges, and it is not yet clear that they will
substitute for existing agricultural extension systems. Furthermore, empirical evidence on
their impact remains limited. In order to measure the impact of such services on farmers’
knowledge, adoption and welfare, as well as their cost-effectiveness, rigorous impact
evaluations are needed.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides an overview of the rationale
for and impact of agricultural extension programs in developing countries. Section III
identifies the potential mechanisms through which mobile phones could improve farmers’
access to information and agricultural adoption in general, and facilitate the delivery of
agricultural extension systems in particular. Section IV surveys existing ICT-based
agricultural extension programs and identifies potential challenges to such programs in terms
of design and implementation. Section V outlines a framework for measuring the causal
impact of ICT-based agriculture programs. Section VI concludes.

2.

Technology Adoption and Agricultural Extension
2.1. Technology Adoption, Agriculture and Growth

The potential role of agriculture as an engine for economic development has long been
recognized (Byerlee, de Janvry and Sadoulet 2009). Since the seminal contributions of
Schultz (1964), Hayami and Ruttan (1971), and Mellor (1998), there has been a large body of
theoretical and empirical literature on the potential multiplier effects of agricultural growth
on non-agricultural sectors (Byerlee, de Janvry and Sadoulet 2009). Cross-country and
country-specific econometric evidence have indicated that GDP growth generated in
agriculture can be particularly effective in increasing expenditures and incomes of the poor
(Ligon and Sadoulet 2007, Bravo-Ortega and Lederman 2005, Ravallion and Chen 2007).
Despite the importance of agriculture for economic development, agriculture is yet to
perform as an engine of growth in many developing countries – especially in sub-Saharan
Africa (Byerlee, de Janvry and Sadoulet 2009). Agricultural yields have only shown slight
increases in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America since the 1960s, despite advances in

2

agricultural innovations during that time (Masters 2009).2 In addition, data on the adoption
of improved agricultural technologies paint a picture of low levels of adoption in developing
countries, particularly sub-Saharan Africa.3
The low rates of adoption in developing countries have been well-documented, and there is
widespread theoretical and empirical literature identifying the determinants of agricultural
technology adoption in different contexts (Feder, Just and Zilberman 1985, Foster and
Rosenzweig 1995, Suri forthcoming, Conley and Udry 2010, Duflo, Kremer and Robinson
forthcoming).4 While the findings differ according to the technology and context, numerous
studies have identified the importance information and learning for the adoption process.5
2.2. Information, Agricultural Extension and Technology Adoption
The agricultural production function implies that farmers need information on a variety of
topics, at a variety of stages, before adopting a new technology. Figure 2 provides a stylized
representation of the agricultural production function, including distinct yet nested adoption
decisions (de Silva and Ratnadiwakara 2008, Mittal, Gandhi and Tripathi 2010).6 Farmers
have different types of information needs during each stage of the process, ranging from
weather forecasts, pest attacks, inputs, cultivation practices, pest and disease management
and prices.

2

Masters (2009) notes that national estimates of crop productivity suggests that cereal grain output per capita in

sub-Saharan Africa now equals that of South Asia.
3Technology

is the “relationship between inputs and outputs” (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010), or the set of

hardware (physical) and software (techniques) tools that allow for a different mapping of inputs to outputs.
Technology adoption is therefore defined as the “use of new tools or techniques that relate inputs to outputs and
the allocation of inputs” (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010).
4Duflo,

Kremer and Robinson (forthcoming) find that the returns to fertilizer are high in Kenya and suggest that

fertilizer is under-utilized. Suri (forthcoming) suggests that some farmers with high returns to adopting hybrid
seeds do not adopt, and attributes this in part to poor infrastructure.
5Foster

and Rosenzweig (1995, 2010) develop a model of learning by doing and learning from others, defining

learning as taking place when “new information affects behavior and results in outcomes for an individual that
are closer to the (private) optimum.” Learning can therefore reduce uncertainty about the profitability of a new
technology, as well as help an individual to obtain information about how to optimally manage the new
technology.
6The

simplified model identifies six stages: The “pre-planting” stage, whereby farmers decide on the crops and

the allocation of land to each crop; the “seeding” stage, whereby farmers decide whether to purchase seeds or use
their own; the “preparing and planting” stage, whereby farmers prepare the land using own or hired labor or land
preparation machinery; the “growing” stage, which requires decisions about the application of water, fertilizer
and pesticides; the “harvesting, packing and storage” stage, which requires decisions about labor for harvesting
and storage; and the “marketing” stage, whereby farmers must decide whether, when and where to sell the
commodity (de Silva and Ratnadiwakara 2008, Mittal, Gandhi and Tripathi 2010).

3

Farmers can obtain information from a number of sources, including, among others, their
own trial and error and from members of their social network. Yet while traditional
economic theory assumes that information is costless, information is rarely symmetric or
costless in developing countries. This is partly due to the high cost of obtaining information
via traditional means, such as travel, radio or newspaper. As a result, information
asymmetries can be an important barrier to agricultural technology adoption in developing
countries.
Since the 1960s, agricultural extension has been put forth as a means of reducing the
information asymmetries related to technology adoption in both developed and developing
countries. Broadly speaking, agricultural extension is the “delivery of information inputs to
farmers” (Anderson and Feder 2007). The general extension approach uses specialists to
provide a range of services to farmers, from technology transfers to advisory services and
human resource development. 7 In some cases it has also sought to connect researchers
directly to the farmer in order to ensure that new technologies are better targeted to the
specific conditions of agricultural communities.
Agricultural extension models can take several forms.8 The most common approaches are
Training and Visit (T&V), Farmer Field Schools (FFS) and fee-for-service. In the T&V
approach, specialists and field staff provide technical information and village visits to
selected communities. In many cases the field agents train and work directly with “contact
farmers”, or farmers who have successfully adopted new technologies and are able to train
others. T&V was promoted by the World Bank and applied in more than 70 countries
between 1975 and 1995 (Anderson, Feder and Ganguly 2006).9 Farmer field schools (FFS)
were specifically designed to diffuse integrated pest management (IPM) methods in Asia.
FFS also utilize contact farmers, relying on participatory training methods that build farmer
capacities. Fee-for-service extension comprises both public and private initiatives with some
public funding. In these programs, farmer groups contract extension agents with specific
information and service requests.10

7

Information provided via agricultural extension can include prices, research products and knowledge about

particular techniques or inputs, such as the intensity and timing of fertilizers.
8Agricultural

extension has expanded in developing countries since the 1960s with significant public sector

financing. There are approximately 500,000 agricultural extension workers worldwide, and 80 percent of these are
publicly funded and delivered by civil servants (Anderson and Feder 2007).
9

The decentralized T&V approach is similar to the T&V approach, but the responsibility for delivery is given to

local governments (Crowder and Anderson 2002).
10While

agricultural extension services are primarily financed and implemented by the public sector, the

information provided via such systems is not always a public good. Table 1 shows the different types of
information provided via extension systems and their classification as either private, public, club or common pool
goods (Anderson and Feder 2007).

4

2.3. Does Agricultural Extension Work?
Despite decades of investment in agricultural extension systems, there are surprisingly few
rigorous impact evaluations of these services in developing countries. Table 2 provides an
overview of these studies, based upon the type of agricultural extension system (T&V, FFS,
fee for service and social networks) and the outcome variable of interest (knowledge,
adoption, yields, rates of return and general livelihoods) (Evanson 2001, Anderson and
Feder 2007). The results provide contradictory evidence of the impact of agricultural
extension programs.11
Do these results suggest that agricultural extension does not work? There are two potential
explanations for the mixed results in Table 2. First, there are several challenges to identifying
a causal relationship between agricultural extension and development outcomes. Measuring
the outcome variables of interest in such studies (e.g., adoption, production and returns) is
notoriously difficult, thereby introducing measurement error in the dependent variable.
While this will not introduce attenuation bias (the bias toward zero), it can reduce precision,
thereby making it more difficult to detect a statistically significant effect. Furthermore,
observable and unobservable characteristics that are simultaneously correlated with
extension programs and the outcomes of interest will very likely differ across extension and
non-extension communities, as well as across users and non-users, which makes the
participation status of extension programs endogenous. And finally, given the different types
of agricultural extension models (T&V, fee for service, FFW) and the wide range of
information provided via these models, cross-country comparisons of agricultural extensions
programs are meaningless.
Beyond problems of measurement error and endogeneity, another potential reason for the
seemingly weak impacts of these programs could simply be the quality of the agricultural
systems themselves. A worldwide review of public extension systems by Rivera, Qamar and
Crowder (2001) found that many agricultural extension systems were barely functioning,
related to the following factors:
 Limited scale and sustainability: In countries where the farm sector is
comprised of small-scale farmers, extension clients often live in geographically
dispersed areas. This can result in high costs, limited geographic coverage and
unsustainable services (Anderson and Feder 2007).
 Policy environments that reduce the value of information provided
via extension services, mainly due to terms of trade that are tilted against
agriculture, poor infrastructure and inadequate input supplies.
11

For example, earlier studies on the impact of agricultural extension (T&V) in India found that T&V had no

significant impact on rice production but increased economic returns in wheat by 15 percent (Feder and Slade
1986, Feder, Lau and Slade 1987). Yet similar studies of T&V in Pakistan found only small impacts on wheat
(Hussein, Bylerlee and Heisey 1994).

5

 Weak linkages between research centers, universities and agricultural
extension systems. While extension services in the US and Europe are often
linked with the university system, this may not be the case in developing
countries. Consequently, the incentives of these institutes are not aligned with
agricultural priorities in the country (Purcell and Anderson 1997) and
technologies are not always locally adapted.
 Low motivation and accountability of extension field staff. As is the
case with all public servants, monitoring the presence and motivation of
extension staff is difficult. This is particularly problematic in the case of
agriculture, where field agents work in different geographic regions and
performance indicators are based upon inputs that are difficult to verify (ie,
number of trainings, number of attendees). Lack of monitoring can result in
absent or poor-quality field staff, further reducing the utility of agricultural
extension services.
 Little rigorous evidence of the impacts of such extension on farmers’
welfare. The lack of reliable evidence on the impact of agricultural extension
exacerbates problems related to funding, motivation and the availability of
appropriate technologies.
In this environment, it is not only unclear whether agricultural extension systems are
functioning, but whether these systems are overcoming information asymmetries for smallholder farmers related to agricultural technology.

3.
How ICTs Could Affect Agricultural Adoption and Extension in
Developing Countries12
3.1. Mobile phone coverage and adoption in the developing world
Agricultural extension systems were conceived of and developed in response to information
asymmetries for poor farmers, particularly those with limited access to other sources of
information (landlines, newspapers and radios). While infrastructure investments still remain
low in many developing countries, one of the most dramatic changes over the past decade
has been an increase in mobile phone coverage and adoption. In sub-Saharan Africa, for
example, less than 10 percent of the population had mobile phone coverage in 1999,
increasing to over 60 percent of the population in 2008 (Aker and Mbiti 2010).

12

ICT is an umbrella term that includes any communication device or application, such as radio, television,

mobile phones, computers and network hardware and software. We will primarily focus on mobile phone
technology in the context of this paper, given its role in developing countries. Internet penetration is still
relatively limited in Africa.

6

Coinciding with this growth in coverage has been an increase mobile phone adoption and
usage, even in some of the world’s poorest countries. There were 16 million subscribers in
sub-Saharan Africa 2000, growing to 376 million in 2008. Similar rates of mobile phone
adoption have been observed in Latin America and Asia (Figure 3).13 The number of mobile
phones per 100 people in developing countries often exceeds access to other information
technologies, such as landlines (Jensen 2010), newspapers and radios (Aker and Mbiti 2010).
3.2. The Impact of ICTs on Agricultural Information, Extension and Adoption
The rapid growth of mobile telephony in developing countries has introduced a new search
technology that offers several advantages over other alternatives in terms of cost, geographic
coverage and ease of use (Aker and Mbiti 2010). While radios can be used across all
segments of the population (over 55 percent of sub-Saharan African households listen to the
radio weekly), they generally provide a limited range of information and offer only one-way
communication (Demographic and Health Surveys, various countries). Newspapers are
primarily concentrated in urban areas, are expensive and are inaccessible to illiterate
populations. Less than 19 percent of individuals in sub-Saharan Africa read a newspaper at
least once per week, with a much smaller share in rural areas (DHS surveys, various
countries). Landline coverage has been limited, with less than one landline subscriber per
100 people in 2008 (ITU 2009). Access to other search mechanisms, such as fax machines, email, and internet, is similarly low. And finally, personal travel to different locations to obtain
information not only requires the cost of transport, but also the opportunity cost of an
individual’s time.
Aker and Mbiti (2010) provide an overview of the mechanisms through which mobile phone
telephony can affect economic development in sub-Saharan Africa, including improved
access to market information and coordination among agents; increased job creation;
improved communication among social networks; and the development of new services,
such as mobile banking. In that vein, this paper identifies six potential mechanisms through
which mobile phones could potentially improve farmers’ access to information about
agricultural technologies and adoption in general, as well as access to and use of agricultural
extension services in particular.
How Mobile Phones can Improve Access to (Private) Information
Mobile phones can improve access to and use of information about agricultural
technologies, potentially improving farmers’ learning. As Figure 2 shows, farmers require
information on a variety of topics at each stage of the agricultural production process. In
many developing countries, such information has traditionally been provided via personal
exchanges, radio and perhaps landlines and newspapers. Compared with these mechanisms,
13The

number of subscribers represents the number of active SIM cards in a country. This could either

overestimate the number of subscribers (as one individual could have multiple SIM cards) or underestimate the
number (as multiple people can use one phone and SIM).

7

mobile phones can significantly reduce the costs of obtaining agricultural information.
Figure 4 shows the per-search cost of price information for different types of search
mechanisms. Mobile phones are significantly less expensive than the equivalent per-search
cost of personal travel or a newspaper, yet more expensive than landlines or radio.
Nevertheless, landlines are not readily available in most regions of the country, and radio
only provides price information for specific products and markets on a weekly basis.
The reduction in search costs associated with mobile phones could increase farmers’ access
to information via their private sources, such as members of their social network (Baye,
Morgan and Scholten 2007, Aker 2010, Aker and Mbiti 2010). This could speed up or
increase farmers’ contact with other adopters in a social network, thereby allowing farmers
to learn from more “neighbors’” trials of a new technology or observe those trials more
frequently.14 While this could potentially increase the rate of technology adoption, it could
also reduce the rate of adoption in the presence of learning externalities (Foster and
Rosenzweig 1995, Foster and Rosenzweig 2010).15
How Mobile Phones can Increase Access to Information via Agricultural Extension
Services
Reduced communication costs could not only increase farmers’ access to (private)
information, but also to public information such as those provided via agricultural extension
services. Figure 5 shows the marginal cost (borne by the extension system) of providing
agricultural price information, either via extension agent’s visits, short message service (SMS)
or a call-in hotline, based upon data from a SMS-based market information service in Niger.
The marginal cost of providing market information via SMS is cheaper than providing the
same information via an additional extension visit, and is equivalent to providing the same
information via radio.16 Reducing the costs of disseminating information could increase the
extension system’s geographic scope and scale, as well as facilitate more frequent and timely
communications between extension agents and farmers. This could, in turn, improve the
14In

addition to the impact of mobile phones on obtaining information on a technology, mobile phones could

speed up information flows within a social network, thereby increasing access to informal credit, savings and
insurance and thereby affecting a farmer’s adoption decision (Aker and Mbiti 2010).
15Increased

access to information – either via learning by doing or learning from others – will not necessarily lead

to higher rates of adoption, as learning that a new technology is not efficacious will reduce adoption in the next
period (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010). There are also two potential opposing effects of social networks on the
adoption decision: an individual farmer’s incentive to adopt increases as the number of members in his or her
social network using the new technology increases; yet this also creates an incentive to delay adoption due to freeriding behavior and information spillovers (Foster and Rosenzweig 1996).
16While

the fixed costs for constructing radio towers and mobile phone base stations differ by location and

country, within a given country or location, the fixed costs of constructing a radio tower are similar to those of a
mobile phone base station. In many cases, however, the costs of constructing the radio tower are borne by the
public sector. If these infrastructure costs are included, then radio is relatively more expensive as compared with
mobile phone technology, whose infrastructure costs are usually borne by the private sector.

8

quality (or value) of the information services provided. Yet the impact of these reduced costs
on farmers’ adoption decisions will depend upon the ability of such information to serve as
substitute for in-person mechanisms.
How Mobile Phones can Improve Farmers’ Management of Input and Output
Supply Chains
Several studies have highlighted the importance of risk and supply-side constraints as
barriers to agricultural technology adoption (e.g., Suri forthcoming). By reducing
communication costs, mobile phones could assist risk-averse farmers in identifying potential
buyers for their products over larger geographic areas and at crucial moments, thereby
reducing price risk and potentially increasing the net benefits of the technology. Similarly,
improved communication between farmers and traders could also facilitate the provision of
inputs to rural areas, potentially reducing their cost.
Mobile Phones can facilitate the Delivery of Other Services
Over the past few years, mobile phone operators have developed a variety of mobile services
and applications in developing countries. The most prominent of these is mobile money
transfers (known as m-money), a system whereby money can be transferred to different
users via a mobile phone. M-money applications can facilitate the delivery of complementary
services to farmers (such as access to credit or savings, or agriculture and health insurance),
thereby helping to address some of the “missing markets” that can constrain technology
adoption (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010).
How Mobile Phones can Increase Accountability of Extension Services
Simple mobile phones can be used as a means of collecting both farmer and agent-level data,
thereby improving the accountability of extension services (Dillon 2011). Voice and SMS can
be used to collect data on farmers’ adoption, costs and yields on a more frequent basis,
rather than waiting for annual agricultural surveys, when recall data on costs and production
are often subject to measurement error. In addition, mobile phones can be used to verify
agents’ visits, similar to what has been done with cameras in Indian schools (Duflo, Hanna
and Ryan 2007). Both of these applications could improve the monitoring of extension
systems, an oft-noted constraint.
How Mobile Phones can Increase Communication Linkages with Research Systems
By improving the communication flows, mobile phones could potentially strengthen the link
between farmers, extension agents and research centers, and vice versa – thereby
overcoming criticism of the “disconnect” between the two in many developing countries.

9

4.

Using ICTs in Agricultural Extension

For decades, “traditional” forms of ICTs have been used in advisory service provision.
Radio and TV programs regularly feature weather and agricultural information in developing
countries, and rural telecenters have provided information on price and quality (Goyal 2010).
In some countries, national ministries of agriculture have attempted to integrate ICTs into
information delivery services, specifically by establishing district information centers (FARA
2009). With the growth of mobile phone coverage, many of these initiatives have moved
away from “traditional” ICTs to mobile telephony, including voice, SMS and internet-based
services. Table 3 provides a survey of these projects, categorized by the mechanism of
dissemination (voice, radio, SMS and internet) and their primary purpose (FARA 2009).

Voice-based information delivery services primarily include telephone‐
based information delivery services that provide advice on farming methods and
market access. Some of these services use call‐in centers or hotlines for agricultural
extension support. The mechanisms range from the use of a simple telephone –
such as landlines or mobile phones – to more complicated technology and
computing applications (FARA 2009).

Radio dial-up and broadcasts include regular radio broadcasts that
provide market prices or other agricultural information, as well as dial‐up radio that
feature a series of short segment audio programs (FARA 2009). The radio system
often features a regularly updated menu of pre‐recorded agricultural content. In
some cases, the systems allow farmers to ask questions via SMS and the responses
are disseminated via the radio (FARA 2009).

SMS-based extension services essentially use message-based platforms to
collect and disseminate information. This includes data collection via a simple SMSbased questionnaire; sending an SMS-based code to request information (on market
prices or agricultural production) and receiving the response via SMS; and receiving
mass SMS on agricultural topics (FARA 2009).

E-learning programs typically include telecenters and internet kiosks that
allow farmers to access computers and the internet for agriculture-related
information.
The information provided via these different mechanisms includes market prices, weather,
technical advice and suppliers and buyers in local markets. A majority of these services focus
on market prices, weather and transport costs, most likely because this information is easy to
collect and disseminate, objective and less prone to measurement error (albeit quickly
outdated and constantly changing). Projects that provide information on agricultural
practices and inputs are relatively rare, possibly because such information is more nuanced
and difficult to convey.

10

While all of these mechanisms offer potential alternatives to traditional means of
disseminating information, there are challenges to using ICT in agricultural extension
systems. First, the use of ICT-based agricultural extension is highly dependent upon the type
of information provided. For example, while information on market prices and weather
might be easily disseminated via mobile phones and therefore replace traditional extension
mechanisms, more nuanced information on agricultural practices and inputs might be
complements. Second, SMS-based platforms – which are often the easiest to establish – can
only hold limited information and require that users have some literacy skills and
technological knowledge. Such services can be useful in providing simple or standardized
information but are as easily adaptable for more complex information exchanges. Third,
while voice-based Q&A services overcome the limitations of text‐based platforms and can
provide more nuanced information, they can be complicated to develop or require machines
to produce natural speech. Some early initiatives have made audio files accessible to farmers
through the use of mobile phones (Kenya, Uganda and Zimbabwe). Finally, since many of
these applications and services have been developed and managed by the private sector, the
use of these initiatives for agricultural extension will most likely require some sort of publicprivate partnership. All of these factors suggest that ICT-based extension services could
fundamentally change the way in which agricultural information is provided in developing
countries, and highlights the need for evaluating whether such approaches are more effective
and efficient in providing information to farmers in developing countries.

5.

Measuring the Impact of ICT-Based Agricultural Extension Programs
5.1. Identifying the Impact of ICT-Based Agricultural Extension

Mobile phones are one tool among many for disseminating and collecting information on
agricultural technologies, yields and prices in developing countries. Before scaling up such
interventions, it is necessary to evaluate the impact of existing ICT-based approaches. Such
evaluations should seek to address the following questions:
1.
What is the impact of ICT-based agricultural programs on farmers’
knowledge, agricultural adoption and welfare? In other words, are changes in
outcomes observed before and after the intervention due to the ICT-based
intervention or other factors? This requires identifying a causal effect of the program,
either the average treatment effect (ATE), the average treatment effect on the
treated (ATT) or the intention to treat (ITT).
2.
Are the observed changes in outcomes due to the ICT project or
access to the mobile phone? In some cases, ICT-based projects provide
participants with access to mobile phones. Since mobile phones can affect farmers’
access to information and services through different channels, it is necessary to
disentangle the impact of the ICT-based service from the impact of mobile phone
usage.

11

3.
What are the mechanisms behind the treatment effect? In other words,
how (or through what pathway) does the ICT-based agricultural extension service
change farmers’ access to information, learning and adoption?
4.
How does the estimate of the treatment effect differ by farmer type
and the type of information provided? Beyond the average effect of the program,
assessing the heterogeneity of the treatment effects among different groups can
provide important information for scale-up.
5.
What are the potential spillovers of the ICT-based program, both on
other project participants and non-participants? An advantage of mobile phone
technology is that it can be shared among many users, thereby allowing non-users to
potentially benefit from the service. While such spillovers can complicate the
identification of the treatment effect, incorporating their impact into the treatment
effect is necessary in order to understand the dynamics of the technology and
technology adoption.
6.
Is the ICT-based approach cost effective as compared with
traditional mechanisms? Is it a substitute or complement for traditional
approaches?
7.
Are the results externally valid? In other words, are they applicable to
other regions within the same country, other populations or other countries? If so,
under what conditions?
These questions provide a potential framework for designing impact evaluations of ICTbased agriculture and agricultural extension programs. The next sections will discuss some of
the specific challenges to identifying the impact of these programs and offer some
recommendations for conducting such evaluations
5.2. Threats to Identifying Impact of an ICT-Based Agricultural Program
A simple two-period econometric model of the impact of the ICT-based program might take
the following form:
Yit = δ + αdit + X’itγ + Z’vπ + θt + θv + θi +uit + εvt

(1)

where Yit is outcome variable of interest, such as farmers’ agricultural knowledge, technology
adoption, yields, farm-gate prices or welfare; dit is an indicator variable for assignment of
individual i into the ICT-based agricultural extension program at time t; Xit is vector of
farmer-level characteristics; Zv is a vector of village-level baseline characteristics; and θt, θv ,
and θi are time-, village- and individual-level fixed effects, respectively.17 uit is unobserved
17Time-varying

farmer-level characteristics (X’it) may be preferred to baseline characteristics, which would be

removed by fixed effects or first-differences estimators.

12

farmer ability or idiosyncratic shocks and εvt is a common village-level error component.
Equation (1) is a difference-in-differences (DD) specification, comparing the group means
of the treatment and control group between the pre- and post period. The model could be
modified in a variety of ways, including controlling for θit (an interaction between farmer
fixed effects and season fixed effects) or learning (by including the number of adopters in a
farmer’s social network) (Foster and Rosenzweig 2010).
There are numerous challenges to identifying the treatment effect, α.18 While some of these
threats are common to all impact evaluations, some are specific to ICT-based agricultural
extension programs. These include:

Identifying the appropriate counterfactual for the treatment group.
Assuming that the potential outcomes are (conditionally) independent of the
treatment status (dit), then α will measure the treatment effect of dit on Yit.
Nevertheless, this requires controlling for potential differences in observable or
unobservable characteristics by establishing a proper counterfactual group (de
Janvry, Dustan and Sadoulet 2010).

Ensuring common types of information across treatment groups.
Most impact evaluations represent the program by a binary indicator variable (dit ).
In the case of ICT-based agricultural extension programs, however, there can be
multiple treatments, depending upon the mechanism used for disseminating the
information (e.g., SMS, voice, in-person visits, SMS and in-person visits). While this
is easily resolved econometrically by including different indicator variables, the
primary challenge is in the interpretation of the treatment effect; each treatment may
not only differ in the mechanism of dissemination but also the type (or quality) of information
provided. For example, voice-based services permit farmers to ask questions and
receive more detailed information, whereas in-person visits can allow extension
agents to demonstrate a new technique. This implies that the treatment effect will
capture the impact of both the mechanism and the information conveyed.19

Disentangling the effects of the mobile phone from impact of the
ICT-based extension. If the ICT-based agriculture program facilitates participants’
access to a mobile phone, mobile phone ownership or usage might have a wealth
effect, thereby decreasing the relative costs of an agricultural technology or
18The

interpretation of α will depend upon the design of the program. For example, in programs where the ICT-

based extension service is randomly assigned at the community-level, there may not be a one-to-one relationship
between assignment to the extension service and a household or farmer’s decision to use the service. In this case
there is imperfect compliance, and standard average treatment effects may not be estimated. Rather, an Intention
to Treat (ITT) or Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) will be estimated for compliers (Imbens and Angrist
1994, Angrist and Imbens 1995).
19

Using an indicator variable for impact evaluations also does not take into account the intensity of treatment,

which is potentially endogenous.

13

increasing the benefits associated with that technology. This can therefore make it
difficult to disentangle the benefit of the mobile phone from the benefit of the ICTbased agricultural extension program.

Separating out the mobile phone adoption decision from the
agricultural adoption decision. In most traditional agricultural extension
programs, accessing information only requires the opportunity costs of the farmer’s
time. In the case of ICT-based agricultural extension, obtaining that same
information also requires how to use the new mobile phone technology. This dual
adoption decision can affect a participant’s decision to use the ICT-based agriculture
system.

Controlling for spillover effects. Spillover effects within villages are
common for traditional agricultural extension programs. Yet such programs usually
have minimal spillover effects between villages, unless extension agents or farmers in
treated villages share information with those in control villages. With access to
mobile phones, farmers are able to contact members of their social networks more
easily, thereby increasing the likelihood of inter-village spillovers. This can also lead
to broader general equilibrium effects, especially if farmers change production
patterns or marketing behavior and are concentrated within a specific geographic
location.
5.3. Potential Field Experiments in ICT-Based Agricultural Extension
A variety of econometric methodologies can be used to estimate equation (1) and address
the potential threats to validity identified in Section 5.2. These include natural experiments
or randomized controlled trials (RCTs); regression discontinuity design (RDD); matching;
difference-in-differences; and instrumental variables. Each approach has relative strengths
and weaknesses in terms of internal and external validity (de Janvry, Dustan and Sadoulet
2010) and practical implementation. This section proposes some general principles for
conducting evaluations of ICT-based extension programs, and provides two examples of
setting up field experiments to estimate the impact of ICT-based agriculture programs.
There are some general principles that can be used to estimate the effect of ICT-based
agricultural extension programs. These include focusing on microeconometric impact analysis,
which allows for a more careful identification of the appropriate counterfactual (de Janvry,
Dustan and Sadoulet, 2010); collecting pre- and post data for treatment and comparison groups, so that
DD can be used to control for time-varying unobservables on the basis of the common
trend assumption; assigning treatments at the village level (rather than the individual, household or
plot level) to minimize potential spillovers on the comparison group20; collecting data on social
20

Nevertheless, in some cases, observing the social dynamics of learning could be of interest. In this case, while

treatment could be at the village or cooperative level, different strategies could be used to target opinion leaders
or decision-makers to better understand how this affects information-sharing and adoption.

14

networks within villages, in order to identify potential learning across individuals; assigning one
group to receive “placebo” phones (i.e., phones that are provided without access to the ICT-based
extension service), in order to identify the impact of the ICT-based service from mobile
phone usage; and using random assignment, randomized phase-in or clear-cut criteria to assign units
into the treatment and control groups, so that selection bias can be controlled for more
explicitly. More specific examples of potential experimental setups are provided below.
Example #1. A SMS-Based Market Information System (MIS) Experiment
Over 35 percent of the ICT-based programs in Table 3 provide market information to
farmers, either via radio, SMS or internet. Traditional evaluations of these programs compare
farmers’ outcomes (e.g., prices and sales) before and after the program, or compare the
outcomes of farmers with access to the program to those without access. Yet simple prepost or contemporaneous comparisons will not control for potential selection bias and do
not address some of the key questions and threats outlined in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
A potential experimental design for estimating the effect of an ICT-based MIS program
could include three treatments and one control:


T1: Regular market information system offered

 T2: Regular market information system offered and “placebo” phones
distributed
 T3: SMS-based market information system offered and mobile phones
distributed


Comparison: No market information or mobile phones

If these treatments are randomly assigned across different groups, then this would ensure
independence between the treatment status and the potential outcomes, thereby allowing us
to have a causal interpretation of the treatment effect.21 Furthermore, since individuals in T2
would receive mobile phones but not access to the SMS-based MIS, we would be able to
disentangle the wealth effect of the mobile phone from the impact of the ICT-based
information system (e.g., comparing T2 with T3). We could further estimate the demand for
such services by varying the price of the service in T3, potentially by offering the service at
full cost, a subsidized cost or free. And finally, by assigning treatment at the village level, this
would minimize the potential spillover effects across villages.22
21

Since there may be imperfect take-up of the MIS system – in other words, farmers may be assigned to

treatment but not choose to use the service – then we could measure either the ITT or the LATE. For a
discussion of the assumptions required for LATE in infrastructure programs, see Bernard and Torero (2011).
22We

could also modify the field experiment to estimate the treatment effect for specific sub-groups (e.g., women

or men, different educational levels), or by targeting particular individuals or opinion leaders within the group.

15

Despite the improvements of this approach as compared with a simple first difference
analysis, there are several weaknesses to this experimental design. First, even a “basic” field
experiment with three treatment groups and one control group would require a sample size
of between 200-300 villages, depending upon the power calculations. This problem could be
exacerbated if there is weak compliance among those assigned to the program, especially if
information via the extension service is shared between users and non-users.23 Second, the
design does not address the potential general equilibrium effects of the program. If farmers
start buying and selling in new markets due to the MIS, then this will affect local demand
(supply) on those markets and potentially affect producers and consumers from comparison
villages. For this reason, this design will only estimate the partial equilibrium effect. And
finally, random assignment might not be feasible in every context, implying that an
alternative method of assigning units to treatment and control groups might be required.24
Example #2. An Agricultural Hotline Experiment
An alternative type of ICT-based agricultural program is the call-in hotline, whereby farmers
can call a technical expert and ask specific questions. While these programs are more flexible
than SMS-based services, the type of information provided – and hence the impact
evaluation -- is more complex. A key challenge to estimating the impact of this program is
harmonizing the type of information provided and the type of extension program offered
(T&V, FFS, fee for service), so that it is possible to disentangle the impact of the
information provided from the extension model. In addition, it is important to determine
whether the hotline is a complement or substitute for in-person extension services.
A potential experimental design for estimating the effect of an ICT-based hotline might
include four treatments and one control:


T1: Caller hotline + phones



T2: Caller hotline + in-person extension visit + phones

The intervention could also be modified to remove the provision of mobile phones, thereby reducing the number
of treatment groups.
23

Such within-village spillovers would also violate the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA),

thereby biasing the treatment effect downward (in the case of positive spillovers) or upward (in the case of
negative spillovers).
24An

alternative to randomization could be RDD, whereby villages that meet certain criteria (such as those

located more than X km from a market) would be assigned to treatment, and those less than X km would be in
the control group. However, this approach would raise additional challenges, as it might be difficult to find
villages that are “arbitrarily close: to the cutoff point, which is necessary for a RDD design. Alternatively, a DD
approach could be used, whereby villages are assigned to treatment or control group based upon some specific
and observable criteria that could be included as control variables in the regression.

16



T3: In-person extension visit + placebo phones



T4: In-person extension visit only



Comparison group: No phones, no visits, no hotline

If units are randomly assigned to different treatments, then this would ensure independence
between the treatment indicator and the potential outcomes, and therefore allow us to
identify the treatment effect. Since individuals in T3 would receive mobile phones but would
not have access to the hotline, we would be able to disentangle with wealth effect of the
phone from the mechanism for providing information (e.g., comparing T3 with T4, and T1
with T3). We could further estimate the demand for such services by varying the price of the
hotline in T1 and T2. And finally, by including T2 (a group with access to the hotline, visits
and phones), this would enable us to determine the extent to which the hotline is a
complement or substitute for in-person extension visits.25
Despite the improvements of this approach as compared with traditional approaches, the
key challenge with this impact evaluation is the (unobserved) differences in information
provided via each mechanism. For example, in-person visits might allow extension agents to
show farmers how to use a new technology or technique, and different types of information
will be provided during visits and discussions. Controlling for these differences is difficult if
not impossible, unless the technical information and technology is very narrowly defined.
And while hotlines might be more useful for time-sensitive and technically simple inputs or
techniques, they would be less useful for technologies that are more difficult to learn or use.

6.

Directions for Future Research

The growth of ICT in developing countries offers a new technology and new opportunities
for accessing information in poor countries. One of the mechanisms is sharing information
via agricultural extension, which has long been plagued with problems related to scale,
sustainability, relevance and responsiveness. There are various pilot programs in India,
Bangladesh and sub-Saharan trying these new approaches. But like traditional agricultural
extension, ICT-based agricultural extension risks becoming unsustainable, a “fad” and with
limited impact on knowledge, adoption and welfare of poor households. For this reason,
pilot programs need to be assessed using rigorous impact evaluations, which not only assess
the causal impact, but also its mechanisms; determine whether such approaches are
complements or substitutes for traditional extension; identify the types of information which
are bested suited for these programs; calculate the demand for such services and hence their
potential sustainability; and calculate their cost effectiveness.

25

The evaluation design could be further modified by varying the intensity of treatment; e.g., varying the

frequency of visits or calls.

17

Bibliography
Aker, Jenny C. 2010. "Information from Markets near and Far: Mobile Phones and
Agricultural Markets in Niger." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 2 (July 2010):
46-59.
Aker, Jenny C. and Isaac Mbiti. Summer 2010. "Mobile Phones and Economic Development
in Africa." Journal of Economic Perspectives. 24(3): 207-232.
Alenea, Arega D. and V. M. Manyong. 2006. “Farmer-to-farmer technology diffusion and
yield variation among adopters: The case of improved cowpea in northern Nigeria.”
Agricultural Economics. 35: 203-211.
Anderson, Jock R. and Gershon Feder. 2007. “Handbook of Agricultural Economics.”
Agricultural Extension. 3: 2343-2378.
Anderson, Jock R., Gershon Feder and Sushma Ganguly. 2006. “The rise and fall of training
and visit extension: an Asian mini-drama with an African epilogue.” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 3928.
Angrist, Joshua and Guido Imbens. 1995. “Two-Stage Least-Square Estimation of Average
Causal Effects in Models with Variety Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association. 91: 431-442.
Baye, Michael, J. Morgan and P. Scholten. 2007. “Information, Search and Price
Dispersion.” Handbook on Economics and Information Systems. Elsevier, T. Hendershott, ed.
Bernard, Tanguy and Maximo Torero. 2011. “Randomizing the Last Mile: A Methodological
Note on Using a Voucher-Based Approach to Assess the Impact of Infrastructure
Projects.” Unpublished mimeo, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI):
Washington, D.C.
Bindlish, Vishva and Robert E. Evenson. 1997. “The Impact of T&V Extension in Africa:
The Experience of Kenya and Burkina Faso.” The World Bank Research Observer. 2(2): 183201.
Birkhaeuser, Dean, Robert E. Evenson and Gershon Feder. 1991. “The Economic Impact
of Agricultural Extension: A Review.” Economic Development and Cultural Change. 39(3):
607-650.
Braun, Arnoud, Janice Jiggins, Niels Röling, Henk van den Berg and Paul Snijders. 2006. “A
Global Survey and Review of Farmer Field School Experiences.” International Livestock
Research Institute (ILRI) Final Report.
Bravo-Ortega C and D. Lederman. 2005. “Agriculture and national welfare around the
world: Causality and international heterogeneity since 1960.” Policy Res. Work. Paper 3499.
World Bank: Washington, D.C.
Byerlee, Derek, Alain de Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2009. “Agriculture for
Development: Towards a New Paradigm.” Annual Review of Resource Economics. 1:15–31.
Cerdán-Infantes, Pedro, Alessandro Maffioli and Diego Ubfal. 2008. “The Impact of
Agricultural Extension Services: The Case of Grape Production in Argentina.” Working
Paper prepared by the Inter-American Development Bank.
Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Udry. 2010. "Learning about a New Technology:
Pineapple in Ghana." American Economic Review. 100(1), 35-69.

18

Davis, K. 2008. “Extension in Sub-Saharan Africa: Overview and Assessment of Past and
Current Models and Future Prospects.” Journal of International Agricultural and Extension
Education. 15(3): 15—28.
De Janvry, Alain, Andrew Dustan and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2010. “Recent Advances in
Impact Analysis Methods for Ex-post Impact Assessments of Agricultural Technology:
Options for the CGIAR.” Unpublished working paper, University of CaliforniaBerkeley.
Dercon, Stefan and Luc Christianson. 2008. “Consumption Risk, Technology Adoption and
Poverty Traps: Evidence from Ethiopia.” WEF Working Paper 0035, ESRC. World
Economy and Finance Research Programme, University of London.
De Silva, Harsha and Dimuthu Ratnadiwakara. 2008. “Using ICT to reduce transaction costs
in agriculture through better communication: A case-study from Sri Lanka.” Colombo,
Sri Lanka: LIRNEasia.
Dillon, Brian. 2011. “Using mobile phones to collect panel data in developing countries.”
Journal of International Development.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathon Robinson. Forthcoming. “Nudging Farmers
to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic
Review.
Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna and Stephen Ryan. 2007. “Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers
to Come to School.” BREAD Working Paper No. 103.
Evenson, R.E. 2001. “Economic impacts of agricultural research and extension.” In
Gardner, B. and G. Rausser (Eds.), Handbook of Agricultural Economics, vol, 1A: 574-616.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science.
Evenson, R.E. and D. Gollin, 2003. Crop Variety Improvement and its Effect on Productivity.
Cambridge, MA: CABI.
Evenson, R.E. and G. Mwabu. 2001. “The Effect of Agricultural Extension on Farm Yields
in Kenya.” African Development Review. 13: 1-23.
Evenson, R.E. and Michele Siegel. 1999. “Gender and Agricultural Extension in Burkina
Faso.” Africa Today. 46(1): 75-92.
Feder, Gershon & Richard E. Just & David Zilberman. 1985. "Adoption of Agricultural
Innovations in Developing Countries: A Survey," Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 33(2): 255-98.
Feder, Gershon, Rinku Murgai, and Jamie B. Quizon. 2004. “Sending Farmers Back to
School: The Impact of Farmer Field Schools in Indonesia.” Review of Agricultural
Economics. 26(1): 45-62.
Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA). 2009. Inventory of Innovative Farmer Advisory
Services using ICTs.
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig. 1995. “Learning by Doing and Learning from
Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy.
103 (6): 1176-1209.
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig. 2010. “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption.”
Annual Review of Economics. 2: 395-424.
Gakuru, Mucemi, Kristen Winters and Francois Stepman. 2009. “Inventory of

19

Innovative Farmer Advisory Services using ICTs.” Prepared for The Forum for Agricultural
Research in Africa.
Gautam, Madhur. 2000. “Agricultural Extension: The Kenya Experience, An Impact
Evaluation.” The World Bank.
Godtland, Erin M., Elisabeth Sadoulet, Alain de Janvry, Rinku Murgai and Oscar Ortiz.
2004. “The Impact of Farmer Field Schools on Knowledge and Productivity: A Study of
Potato Farmers in the Peruvian Andes.” Economic Development and Cultural Change.
53(1): 63-92.
Goyal, Aparajita. 2010. “Information, Direct Access to Farmers, and Rural Market
Performance in Central India.” American Economic Journal : Applied Economics, 2(3) :
22-45.
Hayami Y and V. Ruttan V. 1971. Agricultural Development: An International Perspective.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press
Herberich, David H., Steven D. Levittt and John A. List. 2009. “Can Field Experiments
Return Agricultural Economics to the Glory Days?” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics. 91(5): 1259-1265.
Holloway, Garth John and Simeon K. Ehui. 2001. “Demand, Supply and Willingness-to-Pay
for Extension Services in an Emerging-Market Setting.” American Journal of
Agricultural Economics. 83(3): 764-768.
Imbens, Guido and Joshua Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects.” Econometrica. 62: 467-476.
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2009. Measuring the Information Society:
The ICT Development Index. Geneva, Switzerland: ITU.
Jensen, Robert T. November 2010. “Information, Efficiency and Welfare in Agricultural
Markets.” Agricultural Economics. 1: 203-216.
Ligon, Ethan and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2007. “Estimating the effects of aggregate agricultural
growth on the distribution of expenditures.” In Background Note for the World
Development Report 2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mancini, Francesca, Aad J. Termorshuizen, Janice L.S. Jiggins and Ariena H.C. van Bruggen.
2008. “Increasing the environmental and social sustainability of cotton farming through
farmer education in Andhra Pradesh, India.” Agricultural Systems. 96(1-3): 16-25.
Martin, Michael J. and Timothy G. Taylor. 1995. “Evaluation of a Multimedia Extension
Program in Honduras.” Economic Development and Cultural Change. 43(4): 821-834.
Masters, William A. 2009. “Africa’s Turn: From Crisis to Opportunity in African
Agriculture.” David Lee, editor. The Food and Financial Crisis in sub-Saharan Africa.
Mellor, J. W. 1998. “Agriculture on the road to industrialization.” In C. K. Eicher & J. M.
Staatz (Eds.), International agricultural development (3rd edn). Baltimore, MD, USA:
The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mittal, Surabhi, Sanjay Gandhi and Gaurav Tripathi. 2010. “Socio-Economic Impact of
Mobile Phones on Indian Agriculture.” Working Paper No. 246. Indian Council for
Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER). New Delhi, India.

20

Munshi, Kaivan. 2004. “Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population: Technology
Diffusion in the Indian Green Revolution.” Journal of Development Economics. 73(1):
185-215.
Owens, Trudy, John Hoddinott and Bill Kinsey. 2003. “The Impact of Agricultural
Extension on Farm Production in Resettlement Areas of Zimbabwe.” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 51(2): 337-357.
Purcell, D.L., Anderson, J.R. (1997). “Agricultural Extension and Research: Achievements
and Problems in National Systems.” World Bank Operations Evaluation Study. World
Bank: Washington, DC.
Ravallion M and S. Chen. 2007. “China’s (uneven) progress against poverty.” Journal of
Development Economics. 82(1):1–42.
Rivera, W.M, M.K. Qamar and L.V. Crowder. 2001. Agricultural and Rural Extension
Worldwide: Options for Institutional Reform in the Developing Countries. Rome: FAO.
Romani, Mattia. 2003. “The impact of extension services in times of crisis: Côte d'Ivoire
(1997-2000).” CSAE Working Paper.
Schultz, T.W. 1964. Transforming Traditional Agriculture. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ.
Press.
Suri, Tavneet. Forthcoming. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology
Adoption.” Econometrica, 79(1): 159-209.
Thirtle C, L. Lin and J. Piesse. 2003. “The impact of research-led agriculture productivity
growth on poverty reduction in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.” World Development.
31(12):1959–75.
Tripp, Robert, Mahinda Wijeratne and V. Hiroshini Piyadasa. 2005. “What Should We
Expect from Farmer Field Schools? A Sri Lanka Case Study.” World Development.
33(10): 1705–1720.
Van Den Berg, Henk and Janice Jiggins. 2007. “Investing in Farmers – The Impacts of
Farmer Field Schools in Relation to Integrated Pest Management.” World Development.
35(4): 663–686.
Weir, Sharada and John Knight. 2004. “Externality Effects of Education: Dynamics of the
Adoption and Diffusion of an Innovation in Rural Ethiopia.” Economic Development
and Cultural Change. 53(1): 93-113.
World Bank. 2005. “Impacts of extension services in rural Mozambique: Rural livelihoods
enhanced by extension activities in Mozambique.” ECON, Report no. 2005-015, Project
no.42860.

21

Figure 1. New Variety Adoption by Region, 1970-1998
90

New Variety Adoption by Region, 1970-1998
80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1970

1980
Sub-Saharan Africa

1990
Latin America

MENA

1998
Asia

Source: Calculated from data in R.E. Evenson and D. Gollin, 2003. Crop Variety Improvement and its Effect on
Productivity. Cambridge, MA: CABI. Figure adapted from Masters (2009).

22

Figure 2. Stages of the Agricultural Production Process and Information Needs

 Find best prices, identify

 Better information

transport or storage
problems

on higher yield
crops, seed varieties

 Compare traders to

find best market prices



Identify best
time to plant
Source
inputs e.g.
fertilizer

 Identify best time to
harvest, given
weather forecasts




Use better
fertilizer
Apply better
techniques

Notes: Figure reproduced from Mittal, Gandhi and Tripathi. 2010. The first stage is “deciding”, whereby
farmers decide on what crop to grow, how much land to allocate for each crop and also arrange working
capital financing. The second stage is “seeding”, whereby farmers either purchase seeds or prepare their own
seeds based on the crop they have earlier decided to grow. During the “preparing and planting” stage, farmers
prepare the land using own or hired labor or land preparation machinery and subsequently plant the seeds.
The fourth stage is “growing”, where the application of water, fertilizer and pesticides take place (depending
upon the crop). The “harvesting, packing and storage” stage requires that farmers find labor for harvesting
and storage. During the final stage, and depending upon the crop, farmers sell, thereby requiring some price
and market information to decide when and where to sell.
.

23

Figure 3. Area and Population with Mobile Phone Coverage in 2009, by Region
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Sub-Saharan Africa

East and Southeast
Asia

% of Area Covered

Central and South
America

% of Population Covered

Source: Authors’ calculations based upon mobile phone coverage data from the GSMA in 2010.

24

Figure 4. Marginal (per Search) Cost of Price Information in Niger, 2010
Per Search Cost by Mechanism, $USD (2005 USD)

$1.20
$1.00
$0.80
$0.60
$0.40
$0.20
$0.00
Landline

Radio

Mobile
Phone

Personal
Visit

Newspaper

Notes: Based upon the authors’ calculations from data collected in Niger between 2005 and 2010.

25

Figure 5. Marginal Cost of Information Delivery in Niger, 2010

Cost of information delivery in USD$ per person (2005
USD)
$2.00
$1.80
$1.60
$1.40

$1.20
$1.00
$0.80
$0.60
$0.40
$0.20
$0.00
Extension visits by
agent (2)

Extension visit plus 2
SMS

Extension visit plus
hotline (4-minute call)

Notes: Based upon the authors’ calculations from data collected in Niger between 2005 and 2010.

26

Table 1. Information Provided by Agricultural Extension Services and Types of Good
By types of goods

Access rules:

Use rules:

Rival

Non-rival

(disappears with use by one)

(use by one does not prevent
use by others)
Club Good

Private good

Excludable

Non-excludable

Information for private inputs or
client-specific information or
advice)

Time sensitive information

Common pool

Public good

Information for locally available
resources or inputs

Mass media, time-insensitive
information

Notes: The original version of this table was provided in Anderson and Feder (2007).

27

Table 2. Review of Economic Studies of Agricultural Extension Programs
Type of
Extension
Study
Outcome Variable
Country
Farmer Field
Schools
Feder, Murgai and Quizon, 2004

Productivity and yields

Indonesia

Weir and Knight, 2004
Tripp,
Wijeratne
and Piyadasa,
Mancini,
Termorshuizen,
Jiggins2005
and van
Bruggen, 2008
Godtland, Sadoulet, de Janvry, Murgai and
Ortiz, 2004
World Bank, 2005.

Adoption and diffusion
Adoption and diffusion
Adoption and diffusion
Knowledge,
Productivity
Livelihoods

Ethiopia
Sri Lanka
India

Van den Berg and Jiggins, 2007
Braun, Jiggins, Röling, van den Berg and

General
General

Evenson and Mwabu, 2001.
Cerdán-Infantes, Maffioli and Ubfal

Productivity
Productivity

Kenya
Argentina

Owens, Hoddinott and Kinsey, 2003
Feder and Slade 1986, Feder, Law and Slade
Hussain, Byerlee and Heisey (1994)
Gautam 2001.
Bindlish and Evenson, 1997.
Martin and Taylor, 1995.
Evenson and SiegelSource, 1999.

Productivity
Productivity
Productivity
Productivity
Productivity
Adoption and diffusion
Adoption and diffusion

Zimbabwe
Pakistan
Pakistan
Kenya
Kenya,
Honduras
Burkina

Alenea and Manyong, 2006

Productivity

Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995.
Bandiera and Rasul, 2006
Conley and Udry, 2009.

Adoption and diffusion
Adoption and diffusion
Adoption and diffusion

India
Mozambique
Ghana

Romani, 2003.

Productivity

Ivory Coast

Birkhaeuser, Evenson and Feder, 1991.
Anderson and Feder, 2007.
Davis, 2008.
Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985.
Evenson, 2001.

General
General
General
General
General

Peru
Mozambique

Training and
Visit

Farmer to
Farmer
Nigeria

Social
networks

General
extension

Notes: Research studies compiled from Anderson and Feder (2007) and other sources.

28

Table 3 Survey of ICT-Based Agricultural Extension Programs

Mechanism/Project

Type of Information (Prices,
Techniques, Inputs,
Buyers/Sellers, General)

Country

Mechanisms
(Voice, SMS,
Internet)

Website

Voice
Agricultural Commodity Trade Platform

Prices, buyers, sellers

Pakistan

Voice

Allo Ingenier

General

Cameroon

Voice

Bangalink

Techniques

Bangladesh

Voice

Banana Information Line

Techniques (bananas)

Kenya

Text-to-speech

China Mobile – 12582

Prices, techniques

China

Voice, SMS

Southern Africa Development Q&A Service

General

South Africa

Voice

National Farmer’s Information Service
(NAFIS)

General

Kenya

Voice

http://www.nafis.go.ke/termcond

T2M (Time to Market)

Prices, supply

Senegal

Voice, SMS, Internet

http://t2m.manobi.sn/

Millennium Information Centers and
Community Parliaments

General

Kenya

Voice, SMS

Question and Answer Service (QAS) Voucher
System

General

Uganda

Voice (ask question),
radio, internet

IKSL Agri Hotline

Techniques

India

Voice and SMS

KRIBHCO Reliance Kisan Limited

General

India

Voice, SMS, internet

Kenya Farmer's Helpline

Market prices, weather

Kenya

Voice

29

http://www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=78408

http://www.comminit.com

Mechanism/Project

Type of Information (Prices,
Techniques, Inputs,
Buyers/Sellers, General)

Country

Mechanisms (Voice,
SMS, Internet)

Website

Radio Dial-Up
African Farm Radio Research Initiative (AFRRI)

General

Ghana; Malawi; Mali;
Tanzania; Uganda

Radio

http://www.farmradio.org

Family Alliance for Development and Cooperation
(FADECO)

General

Tanzania

Radio, SMS

http://www.hedon.info/FADECOTanzania

Freedom Fone

General

Zimbabwe

Voice, SMS, Internet

http://www.kubatana.net

Infonet Biovision Farmer Information Platform

Techniques

Kenya

Radio

Information Network in Mande

Techniques

Mali

Radio

Jekafo Guelekan System for Farmers in Sikasso

General

Mali

Radio

The Organic Farmer

Techniques

Kenya

Radio, internet,
magazine

Strengthening the Agricultural Information Flow and
Dissemination System

General

Zambia

Radio

30

www.organicfarmermagazine.org

Mechanism/Project

Type of Information (Prices,
Techniques, Inputs,
Buyers/Sellers, General)

Country

Mechanisms
(Voice, SMS,
Internet)

Website

Internet
Agriculture Research and Rural Information
Network (ARRIN) Ndere Troupe

General

Uganda

Internet

http://www.iicd.org/projects/uganda‐arrin

Agrovision

Techniques

Nigeria

Internet

http://www.eagriculture.org

Agricultural Sector Development
Programme (ASDP)

General

Tanzania

Internet, SMS

http://www.ifad.org/operations/pipeline/pf/tan.htm

Collecting and Exchanging of Local
Agricultural Content (CELAC)

General

Uganda

Internet, radio,
email, SMS

http://celac.or.ug

CROMABU (Crops Marketing Bureau)
Project

Prices/Buyers/Sellers

Tanzania

Telecenter
(computers)

http://www.iicd.org/projects/tanzania‐abis‐cromabu

DrumNet (Solution)

Prices/Buyers/Sellers

Kenya, Uganda

Internet

http://www.drumnet.org/

Eastern Corridor Agro‐market Information
Centre (ECAMIC)

Prices

Ghana

Email, mobile
phones

http://www.sendfoundation.org

E‐commerce for Non‐traditional Exports

Buyers, sellers

Ghana

Internet

http://www.iicd.org/projects/ghana‐ecommerce/

E‐commerce for women
Enhancing Access to Agricultural
Information using ICT in Apac District
(EAAI)

Buyers, sellers

Ghana

Internet

Techniques

Uganda

Radio, mobile
phones

http://www.comminit.com

Farmers’ Internet Café

Buyers, sellers, general

Zambia

Internet

http://www.iicd.org/articles/iicdnews.2005‐09‐06.1315910878/

First Mile Project

Buyers, sellers

Tanzania

Internet

http://www.firstmiletanzania.net/

Fruiléma

Buyers, sellers

Mali

Internet, mobile
phones

http://www.fruilema.com/
http://www.iicd.org/projects/mali‐quality‐fruilema

Gyandoot

General

India

Internet

ICT for Shea Butter Producers

General

Mali

Computers

iKisan

General

India

Miproka

General

Burkina Faso

Internet (kiosks)
Internet
(computers)

31

Sene Kunafoni Bulon

Buyers, sellers

Mali

Sissili Vala Kori

General

Burkina Faso

Internet
(computers)
Internet
(computers)

TV Koodo: Market price information using
web and national TV

Market prices

Burkina Faso

Internet, TV

Virtual extension and research
communication network

General

Egypt

Internet

Warana

General

India

Internet (kiosks)

32

Mechanism/Project

Type of Information
(Prices, Techniques,
Inputs, Buyers/Sellers,
General)

Country

Mechanisms
(Voice, SMS,
Internet)

Website

Mobile Money Transfers (SMS)
Mobile Transactions Zambia

Cashless input voucher system

Zambia

Mobile scratchcards

Integrating ICT for Quality Assurance and
Marketing

Production quality, buyers

Zambia

Handheld computers

Research on Expectations about Agricultural
Production (REAP)

Weather, pests

Tanzania

Voice

Mobile Phone Data Collection

33

http://www.mtzl.net<http://www.mtzl.net/default.asp?id=18

Mechanism/Project

Type of Information
(Prices, Techniques,
Inputs, Buyers/Sellers,
General)

Country

Mechanisms
(Voice, SMS,
Internet)

Website

SMS-Based Extension and Price
Information Services
Agricultural Marketing and Information
System for Malawi (MIS-Malawi)

Prices, Buyers, Sellers

Malawi

SMS, internet, radio

Agricultural Market Information for Farmers

Prices

Bangladesh

SMS

Agricultural Marketing Systems
Development Programme (AMSDP)

Prices

Tanzania

SMS

http://www.ifad.org/english/operations/pf/tza/i575tz/index.htm

Agricultural Research Extension Network
(ARENET)

General

Uganda

Internet

http://www.arenet.or.ug

Apps for Africa

Techniques, weather, buyers,
sellers

Uganda

SMS

CELAC

Techniques, weather, buyers,
sellers

Uganda

SMS

Dialog

Prices, buyers, sellers

Sri Lanka

Esoko (formerly Tradenet)

Prices, buyers, sellers

Benin; Burkina Faso;
Côte d'Ivoire;
Ghana; Madagascar;
Mali; Mozambique;
Nigeria; Tanzania;
Uganda; Cameroon;
Afghanistan

SMS, internet

http://www.esoko.com

Farmers Information Communication
Management (FICOM)

Prices, buyers, sellers

Uganda

Voice, SMS,
internet, radio

http://www.syngentafoundation.org

Gyandoot

General

India

Internet

ICT Support for Agricultural Literacy

Market prices

Ghana

SMS

ICT for Improving Agriculture in Rwanda

General

Rwanda

SMS
34

http://www.ideaamis.com

http://www.spidercenter.org

Informations sur les Marches Agricoles par
Cellulaire (IMAC)

Prices

Niger

SMS

http://sites.tufts.edu/projectabc

InfoPrix Benin

Prices

Benin

SMS

http://www.onasa.org/

Infotrade Uganda

Prices

Uganda

SMS, internet

Kenya Agricultural Commodities Exchange
(KACE) MIS Project

Prices, buyers, sellers

Kenya

Voice, SMS,
internet

http://www.kacekenya.com/

Livestock Information Network and
Knowledge System (LINKS)

Prices, buyers, sellers

Kenya, Ethiopia, and
Tanzania

SMS, internet

Kenya (www.lmiske.net), Ethiopia (www.lmiset.net), and Tanzania
(www.lmistz.net)

Manobi

Prices

Senegal

SMS

http://www.manobi.net

Makuleke Project

Prices, buyers, sellers

South Africa

SMS

http://www1.alcatellucent.com

mKrishi

General

India

SMS, Voice

Network of Market Information Systems
and Traders’ Organizations of West Africa
(MISTOWA)

Prices, buyers, sellers

ECOWAS countries

Internet, radio,
email, SMS

Nokia Life Tools

Prices, weather, techniques

India, Indonesia

SMS and user
interface

Regional Agricultural Trade Information
Network (RATIN)

Buyers and Sellers

East Africa

Voice, internet

Reuters Market Light

Prices, weather, techniques

India

SMS

Vodacom Tanzania

Prices

Tanzania

SMS

SMS Information Service
Système d’Information des Marchés
Agricoles (SIMA)

Prices, buyers, sellers

Zambia; Democratic
Republic of Congo

SMS, internet

http://www.farmprices.co.zm/

Prices

Niger

SMS

http://ictupdate.cta.int

35

www.mistowa.org, www.wa‐agritrade.net

www.ratin.net

Trade at Hand

Prices

West African Agricultural Market
Information System Network
(RESIMAO/WAMIS‐Net)

Prices, buyers, sellers

Burkina Faso; Mali;
Senegal;
Mozambique;
Liberia
Benin; Burkina Faso;
Côte d'Ivoire;
Guinea; Niger; Mali;
Senegal;
Togo; Nigeria

Women of Uganda Network (WOUGNET)

Prices

Uganda

SMS

Xam Marsé

Prices, buyers, sellers

Senegal

SMS, internet

Source: FARA (2009) and authors’ data collection.

36

SMS

http://www.intracen.org/trade‐at‐hand/

Internet, radio,
email, SMS

http://www.resimao.org/html/en

http://www.manobi.sn

37

