JOURNAL

OF ENVIRONMENTAL.

Bidding

ECONOMICS

AND

MANAGEMENT

1, 132-149

(19%)

Games for Valuation
of Aesthetic
Environmental
Improvements1
ALAN RANDALL

Department

of Agricultural
Lexington,

Economics,
Kentucky

University
40506

of Kentucky,

AND
BERRY IVES AND CLYDE EASTMAN
Department
of Agricultural
Economics
and Agricultural
Business,
New Mexico
State University,
Las Cruces,
New Mexico:88003

Received March 19, 1974
An empirical case study of the benefits of abatement of aesthetic environmental damage
associated with the Four Corners power plant and Navajo mine using the bidding game
technique is presented. Bidding games were carefully designed to avoid the potential
problems inherent in that technique. The results indicate the existence of substantial benefits from abatement of this aesthetic environmental damage. Aggregate bid curves, marginal
bid curves, and estimates of the income elasticity of bid are presented. The effectiveness of
the bidding game technique is discussed.

It has proved a difficult and often forbidding task to ascribe economic values to
environmental improvements. Yet, rational and informed social decision making
requires, among other things, a consideration of the economic costs and benefits of
environmental improvements. The difficulties in economic evaluation are compounded
in the case of environmental improvements of an aesthetic nature. This article discusses
the problems inherent in the valuation of aesthetic environmental improvements and
presents a case study in which bidding games were used as the valuation technique.
THE THEORY
Aesthetic damage to an outdoor environment, to the extent that it diminishes the
utility of some individuals, is a discommodity and its abatement is a commodity.
Abatement of this kind of external diseconomy is both a nonmarket good, since it is
nonexclusive, and a public good in the sense of Davis and Whinston [S], since it is
inexhaustible at least over a very substantial range. That is, additional consumers of
this kind of aesthetic environmental improvement can be added without diminishing
the visibility or scenic beauty available to each (at least, until crowding occurs). Additional users can be added at near zero marginal cost, over a substantial range.
Bradford [2] has presented a theoretical framework for the valuation of public
goods. Traditional demand curves are inappropriate for the analysis of demand for
r Journal Article 506, New Mexico State University, Agricultural Experiment Station, Las Cruce 6.
The authors are grateful for helpful comments from Ralph d’Arge a nd tuo ancnyrrous reviewers.
132
Copyright
All rights

0 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.
of reproduction
in any form reserved.

BIDDING

133

GAMES

TOTAL

COSTS

3

MARGINAL COSTS

MARGINAL AGGREGATE BID

QUANTITY

FIG. 1. Collective optimization

OF PUBLIC GOOD

of the quantity of public good provided.

public goods, since the situation is not one of individuals responding to a parametric
price per unit by choosing an appropriate number of units. Rather, the individual
directly arrives at the total value to himself of various given packages. In the case of
a public good, the individual is unable to exercise any choice over the quantity provided him, except as a member of the collective which makes a collective choice.
Further, the nature of a public good such as aesthetic environmental improvements
is such that increases in the quantity provided are not purely quantitative increases,
but are more in the nature of improvements in quality. Thus, the individual values
alternative packages of a public good, which may differ in quantity and quality.
Bradford proposes the concept of an aggregate bid curve for public goods. Individual bid curves are simply indifference curves passing through a given initial state,
with the numeraire good (which can be dollars) on the vertical axis and the public
good on the horizontal axis.2 The aggregate bid curve is the algebraic (or vertical, in
diagrammatic analyses) summation of individual bids over the relevant population.
The aggregate bid curve is an aggregate benefit curve, as it measures precisely what
an accurate benefit-cost analysis of provision of a public good would measure as
benefits. Using the approach of methodological collectivism, efficiency in the provision of a public good can be achieved by maximizing the excess of aggregate bid
over total cost, or equating the first derivative of aggregate bid (i.e., marginal bid)
4 If different packages of a public good represented continuous quantitative increases, the individual bid curve would be smooth and would exhibit decreasing marginal utility of increasing quantities
of the public good. However, Bradford’s concept of different packages differing in quantity and
quality logically implies that individual bid curves need be neither smooth nor of continually decreasing slope. Bradford insists that, a priori, nothing can be said about the slope of the “demand,” or
marginal bid curve, for a public good of this nature.

134

RANDALL,

IVES AND

EASTMAN

with the marginal cost of provision. 3 Figure 1 shows the efficient level of provision
of a public good.4
THE BIDDING

GAME

TECHNIQUE

It is possible to conceive of a.number of techniques for estimating the aggregate bid
curve for environmental improvements. Two general classes of techniques, direct
costing techniques and revealed demand techniques, have been suggested in the literature and applied in empirical studies. Each of these has its difficulties, especially when
adapted for valuation of aesthetic environmental improvements. These techniques
will be briefly discussed below. Then, a third type of technique, bidding games, will
be proposed. Bidding game techniques are themselves not without difficulties, but
we will argue that there may be applications for which they are the preferable or even
the only feasible method for empirical studies. Methods of maximizing the reliability
of bidding games will be discussed and an empirical study using bidding games will
be presented.
Direct costing methods. Implicit in the concept of a “marginal value of damage
avoided by abatement” curve, as proposed by Kneese and Bower [12], is the idea of
estimating the benefits of abatement of environmental damage by directly estimating
the costs attributable to that damage. Several workers have made progress along these
lines. For example, Lave and Seskin [ 131 have had some success in relating the costs
of impairment of human health to levels of air pollution. If all relevant costs of a
particular incidence of environmental damage can be identified, evaluated and
summed, a curve relating the value of damage avoided to levels of environmental
improvements can be fitted. The first derivative of this curve is the “M.V.D.A.”
curve
of Kneese and Bower [12].
These costing techniques are theoretically sound and may often be feasible in
practice. However, difficulties may be introduced by the unavailability of information
and the pricing and accounting problems inherent in this type of analysis. These
techniques will have limited application in valuation of aesthetic environmental improvements, since the costs of aesthetic damages may seldom be directly reflected
in the market.
Revealed demand techniques. Revealed demand techniques have been widely used for
estimation of the demand for outdoor recreation, often a nomnarket good.5 A number
of applications to valuation of the benefits of air pollution abatement have been
made [ 1, 11, 14, 16, IS]. The principle is as follows. The benefits of provision of a
nonmarket good are inferred from the revealed demand for some suitable proxy. In
the case of air pollution abatement, the revealed demand for residential land is related
by regression analysis to air pollution concentrations. In metropolitan areas, it is
possible to obtain information on the concentration of specific air pollutants in different parts of the city. If all other variables relevant to the valuation of urban residential land can be identified6 and measured, it ought to be possible to determine by
3 In the approach of methodological individualism, Pareto-efficiency is still not achieved since the
price to the individual cannot equal the marginal cost to the individual (which is zero) and allow
collection of sufficient funds to cover the total cost of provision.
4 In Fig. 1, the aggregate and marginal bid curves are drawn as smooth curves consistent with
diminishing marginal utility. As pointed out in footnote 2, this need not be even the typical case.
5 See [4].
6Some appropriate variables are size and value of structures on the land, distance from places
where services and employment opportunities are concentrated, proportion of park land and open
space in the neighborhood, density of population, proportion of various racial and ethnic minorities
in the immediate vicinity, and the incidence of violent crimes.

BIDDING

GAMES

135

regression analysis the extent to which air pollution concentrations affect observed
land values. In this way, a proxy measure of the benefits of air pollution abatement is
obtained.
There are a number of difficulties with this type of analysis. Since the value ascribed
to air pollution control is derived directly from the regression coefficient of the pollution concentration variable, accurate results require perfect and complete specification
of the regression equation. In an interesting recent study, Wieand [17] claims that
when such regression models are completelyispecified, the regression coefficient of the
pollution concentration variable may not be-significantly different from zero. Another
difficulty, researchers in the field agree, lies in interpretation of the results. Are all of
the benefits of air pollution abatement captured in residential land values‘? Most
think not. For our purposes, the other side of that coin is of interest: Surely some
benefits in addition-to the aesthetic benefits are captured. Which additional benefits?
In the case study reported below, the geographical area affected by environmental
damage includes urban areas, but also rural and agricultural areas, and substantial
areas of Indian reservation and National Park, Monument, and Forest lands (which
are typically not exchanged in the market). Thus, those revealed demand techniques
currently available would seem to be inapplicable to the situation faced in our study.
Bidding games. In analysis of the demand for outdoor recreation, Davis [7]
pioneered in the use of bidding games. During personal interviews, the enumerator
follows on iterative questioning procedure to elicit responses which enable the fitting
of a demand curve for the services offered by a recreation area. Respondents are asked
to answer “yes” or “no” to the question: Would you continue to use this recreation
area if the cost to you was to increase by X dollars? The amount is varied up or down
in repetitive questions, and the highest positive response is recorded. Individual responses may then be aggregated to generate a demand curve for the recreation services
provided by the area.
It seems reasonable that bidding games may be adapted to the estimation of the
benefits from provision of an inexhaustible nonmarket good such as abatement 01
aesthetic environmental damage. Bidding games would seem to be the most direct
method of estimating Bradford’s aggregatelbenefit curve, which is derived from vertical
summation of individual bid curves. The difficulties of interpretation which are inherent in the revealed demand techniques developed thus far do not occur when the
bidding game technique is used. The data obtained with bidding games are not cost
observations but individuals’ perceptions of value. Thus, bidding games can be used
in situations where direct costing techniques are ineffective for lack of data. These
advantages of bidding games over revealed demand and direct costing techniques seem
sufficient to justify attempts to adapt the bidding game technique for use in valuation
of aesthetic environmental improvements.
Some General Considerations in the Design

of Bidding Games

Bidding games are designed to elicit information on the hypothetical behavior of
respondents when faced with hypothetical situations. In the case study presented
below, the purpose of bidding games is to provide a measure of the benefits of aesthetic
environmental improvements by measuring the willingness of a sample of respondents
to pay for such improvements. The ehicacy of bidding games used for this purpose
depends on the reliability with which stated hypothetical behavior is converted to
action, should the hypothetical situation posited in the game arise in actuality.

136

RANDALL,

IVES AND

EASTMAN

Willingness to pay is the behavioral dimension of an underlying attitude: concern
for environmental quality.’ Sociologists and public opinion researchers have built
up a substantial body of literature which considers ways in which survey techniques of
measuring attitudes and their behavioral component can be made as reliable as
possible. Some desirable characteristics of such surveys have been identified [S, 91.
The hypothetical situation presented should be realistic and credible to respondents.
Realism and credibility can be achieved by satisfying the following criteria for survey
instrument design: Test items must have properties similar to those in the actual situation; situations posited must be concrete rather than symbolic; and test items should
involve institutionalized or routinized behavior, where role expectations of respondents are well defined. Where the behavioral predisposition under study are affected
by attitudes about a number of different things, the test instrument must be designed
to focus upon those attitudes which are relevant. An example may be helpful. In the
case study reported here, willingness to pay additional taxes to achieve aesthetic
environmental improvement is affected by attitudes toward environmental quality,
but also by attitudes toward the current tax burden and attitudes toward the idea of
receptors of pollutants paying to obtain abatement of emissions. If the survey is
carried out for the purpose of measuring the benefits of abatement, the test instrument
must be designed to take cognizance of the various diverse attitudes which affect
willingness to pay and to allow isolation of the relevant attitudinal dimensions.
Since abatement of aesthetic environmental damage is an inexhaustible, public
good, bidding games intended to provide data for valuation of that good must be
designed to avoid the effects of the freeloader problem, which encourages nonrevelation of preferences. One method would be to design games in which each respondent
is told that all consumers of the good would pay for it on a similar basis, thus eliminating the possibility of freeloading.
With careful design of bidding games to ensure that the responses recorded are
predictive of behavior, it should be possible to use the bidding technique to estimate
the benefits of environmental improvements with reasonable accuracy.
AN EMPIRICAL

APPLICATION:

ESTIMATION
OF THE BENEFITS OF ABATEMENT
OF
AESTHETIC ENVIRONMENTAL
DAMAGES ASSOCIATED
WITH THE FOUR CORNERS STEAM ELECTRIC
GENERATING
PLANT
At New Mexico State University, research is under way to examine the socioeconomic impacts of development of the rapidly expanding coal strip-mining and
steam electric generation industry in the Four Corners Region (southwestern United
States), and to predict the impacts of alternative policies with respect to environmental
management and economic development, as such policies would affect the industry.
One facet of this research required estimation of the benefits of abatement of aesthetic
environmental damage associated with the Four Corners power plant at Fruitland,
NM, and the Navajo mine which provides its raw energy source-low energy, low
sulfur, high ash, sub-bituminous coa1.8
‘i Three dimensions of attitudes are recognized [S]: (1) a cognitive dimension, (2) an affectual
dimension, and (3) a behavioral dimension.
8 The following facts may provide some idea of the magnitude of this operation and its attendant
environmental problems. In 1970, the power plant had a capacity of 2,080 MW. The mine provides

BIDDING

GAMES

137

The mineepower plant complex causes several kinds of aesthetic environmental
damage. Particulates, sulfur oxides and nitrous oxides are emitted into the air. The
adverse effects of particulate pollutants on visibility is considered the most important
aesthetic impact of the complex. The strip-mining process will create some aesthetic
damage. Although the soil banks will be leveled, reclamation in the sense of reestablishing a viable plant and animal eco-system is uncertain. Transmission lines
radiate from the plant in several directions, passing through the Navajo Reservation
and bringing the paraphernalia of development to a landscape which is in some places
very beautiful and otherwise untouched.g
&It was decided t o use bidding games to measure the benefits of abatement of the
aesthetic environmental damage associated with the Four Corners power plant and the
Navajo mine.“’ Considerable attention was devoted to the design and development of
bidding games which provide a reliable estimator of these benefits.
Questiontzaire

Design

The bidding games were part of prepared schedules designed for use in a personal
interview survey of samples of users of the Four Corners Interstate Air Quality
Control Region environment (i.e., residents and recreational visitors to the region).
In preparation for the bidding games, respondents were asked a series of questions
about environmental matters, to focus their attention on that topic. Then, the subject
of the coal-electricity complex in the Four Corners area was explicitly raised. The
respondents were shown three sets of photographs depicting three levels of environmental damage around the Four Corners Power Plant, near Fruitland, NM.
Set A showed the plant circa 1969, prior to installation of some additional emissions control equipment, producing its historical maximum emissions of air pollutants. Another photograph depicted the spoil banks as they appear following stripmining, but prior to leveling. A third photograph showed electricity transmission lines
marring the landscape. Set A depicted the highest level of environmentaldamage,
and
accurately represented the actual situation in the early years of operation of the plant.
Set B showed an intermediate level of damage. One photograph showed the plant
circa 1972, after additional controls had reduced particulate emissions (i.e., the type of
emissions most destructive of visibility). Another showed the spoil banks leveled but
not revegetated; a third showed the transmission lines placed less obtrusively (i.e.,
at some distance from major roads).
Set C was intended to depict a situation where the industries continued to operate,
coal at a rate of 8.5 millions tons annually. Over the 40 year projected life span of the mine, 31.000
acres will be stripped. In 1970, approximately 550 people were employed in the mine and power
plant, total value of sales of electricity was $146 million, and 96,000 tons of particulates, 73,000 tons
of sulfur oxides and 66,000 tons of nitrous oxides were emitted annually.
J To place this aesthetic environmental damage in perspective, it may be useful to point out that
the Four Corners lnterstate Air Quality Control Region includes the greatest concentration of National
Parks and Monuments in the United States and a number of Indian reservations, the largest of which
are the Navajo and Hopi reservations. The value of the region for tourism and recreation depends
largely on its bizarre and unusual landscapes, the enjoyment of which requires excellent long distance
visibility and depth and color perception. There exists a substantial minority of “traditional”
Native
Americans who have strong religious and cultural attachments to nature, and who resent the air
pollution, strip-mining, and transmission lines; witness the prolonged litigation about location of the
‘Tucson Gas and Electric Company transmission line from the San Juan power plant, which is under
construction about 9 miles from the Four Corners plant.
lo In that part of the overall study which deals with nonaesthetic environmental damage, direct
costing techniques are used.

138

RANDALL,

IVES AND

EASTMAN

but with minimal environmental damage. One photograph showed the plant with
visible emissions reduced to zero .I1 A second photograph showed a section of arid
land in its natural state; it was intended to depict a situation where the transmission
lines were placed underground and the strip-mined land completely reclaimed.
The interviewers pointed out the salient features of each set of photographs to each
respondent. For most of the respondents (with the exception of many recreationists),
the situations were rooted in real experience: the residents of the region were familiar
with the plant and mine, and their operation for the previous eight years. Most
remembered situation A well, for that was exactly how it was only a few years earlier.
Situation B was a fairly good approximation of the real situation at the time of the
interviews. With the help of the photographs, situation C would be readily visualized.
Since the fitting of bid or benefit curves requires an expression of willingness to pay
for abatement of aesthetic damages, it was necessary to design games based upon
appropriate vehicles of payment. The vehicles for payment were chosen so as to maximize the realism and credibility of the hypothetical situation posited to respondents.
As will be discussed below, it was necessary to design and use a series of bidding games,
because no one vehicle of payment was appropriate for use with all of the subpopulations sampled. First, the general format applicable to all games is discussed. Then,
the particular games used for particular subpopulations are discussed.
For each bidding game played, respondents were asked to consider situation A, the
highest level of environmental damage, as the starting point. The bidding games were
designed to elicit the highest amount of money which the respondent, an adult speaking
for his or her household, was willing to pay in order to improve the aesthetic environment to situation C, and to situation B. Answers were elicited in terms of “yes” or
“no” to questions expressed in the form “would you pay amount X . , . ?” A “yes”
answer would lead the enumerator to raise the amount and repeat the question, maybe
several times, until a “no” answer was obtained. A “no” answer would lead the enumerator to reduce the amount until a “yes” answer was obtained. The amount which
elicited thelhighest i‘yes” answer was recorded as the amount the respondent was
willing to pay.
It was emphasized that the respondent was to assume that the vehicle for payment
used in a particular game was the only possible way in which environmental improvements could be obtained. This stipulation was designed to minimize the incidence of
zero bids as protests against either the zero liability rule implicit in “willingness to
pay” games or the particular method of payment used in a particular game. If a
respondent indicated that he was willing to pay nothing at all, he was asked a series
of questions to find out why. A respondent indicating that he did not consider his
household to be harmed in any way by the environmental damage and, therefore, saw
no reason to pay for environmental improvements was recorded as bidding zero. If a
respondent indicated that his zero bid was in protest against the game, his answer was
analyzed as a nonresponse to the bidding game, since he had refused to play the game
by the stated rules.12
I1 This feat was accomplished by photographing the plant on a day when all units were shut down.
I2 For the purpose of estimating the benefits of abatement, the treatment of “protest bids” as nonresponses is legitimate. By definition, a “protest bid” recognizes that positive benefits from abatement
exist, but registers a protest against a particular method of financing abatement. We recognize that
the elimination of “protest bids” from analyses aimed at estimating the benefits of abatement fails
to remove all downward bias from the responses to particular games: some respondents may bid low
(i.e., underestimate the benefits to themselves of abatement) in conscious or subconscious protest
against the method of financing assumed in a game.

BIDDING

GAMES

139

The selection of appropriate vehicles for payment provided a challenge. People are
not accustomed to paying for abatement of air pollution and strip-mining damage.
However, they are accustomed to paying for many other types of useful goods and
services, many of which, such as parks and highway beautification, have aesthetic or
“quality of life” components. So selection of realistic vehicles for payment was not
impossible. However, the heterogeneous nature of the affected population meant that
no single vehicle was suitable for data collection among all groups. In the Four
Corners Region, the affected population can be divided into three broad groups: (1)
the residents of Indian reservations, primarily Navajos, but also including members of
several other tribes; (2) the residents of the nonreservation sections of the region,
primarily Anglo-Americans,
but with a sprinkling of Spanish-Americans, Native
Americans living off the reservations, and other minorities; and (3) the tourists and
recreationists who visit the area to enjoy its unique natural, historical and cultural
attractions. Different versions of the questionnaire, using bidding games based on
different vehicles for payment, were constructed for use with the three different subpopulations of the affected population.
The particular bidding games used are described below.
The sales tax game. Members of all three subpopulations are familiar with the practice of paying sales taxes. For most, this is a frequent occurrence. It is also understood
by most that income collected in sales taxes is used to provide useful public services.
It does not require much imagination to conceive of a public agency collecting a sales
tax from residents of the affected region and using the income to finance environmental
improvements.
The sales tax bidding game was used for both the resident samples. It was not used
with the recreationist sample, since that group often purchased only a few items in the
region, bringing most of their equipment and supplies with them. This would make a
regional sales tax largely irrelevant for that group.
Respondents were asked to assume that a regional sales tax was collected on all
purchases in the Four Corners Interstate Air Quality Control Region for the purpose
of financing environmental improvements. I3 All revenue from the additional tax
would be used for abatement of aesthetic environmental damage associated with the
power plant and mine, and all citizens would be required to pay the tax. Recreational
visitors to the region would contribute to environmental improvement through payment of additional users fees for facilities.
The electricity bill game. The monthly electricity bill seemed to be a suitable vehicle
for measurement of willingness to pay. It is the production of electricity which causes
the environmental damage, and most people can readily comprehend that reduction
of the damage may raise the cost of operating the industry and that passing these
additional costs on to consumers of electricity is a not unlikely outcome. For the
residents of those sections of the region outside the Indian reservations, payment of
a monthly electricity bill is a routinized behavior. Therefore, a bidding game based upon
the monthly electricity bill was played with the nonreservation resident sample.
This game was unsuitable for use with the other two samples. Many residents of
“Protest bids” were recorded and used in some other types of analyses. For example, the incidence
of “protest bids” is an indicator of the relative political acceptability of various methods of financing
abatement.
IJ The regional sales tax would be additional to current state and local sales taxes and would he
charged on all commodities subject to existing state and local sales taxes.

140

RANDALL,

IVES AND

EASTMAN

Indian reservations do not have electricity available in their homes. Recreation&s do
not pay monthly electricity bills while vacationing away from home.
The respondent was first asked the amount of his monthly household electricity
bill. He was then asked to imagine that an additional charge was added to his electricity
bill, and the electricity bills of everyone who uses electricity produced in the Four
Corners Region, even people as far away as southern California. All of the additional
money collected would be used to repair the aesthetic environmental damage caused
as a result of electricity production and transmission in the Four Corners region.
The userfees game. Measuring recreationists’ willingness to pay for environmental
improvements raised problems which prevented use of the electricity bill and sales
tax games. For the recreationists, a satisfactory game would need to focus upon (1) the
activities associated with vacationing, and (2) the collection of payments while they
are in the region and using the regional environment. The payment of user fees for
recreation services (i.e., campsite, utilities hook-up, boat launching), seemed to be a
promising vehicle for a bidding game for the recreationists. If visitors were concerned
about environmental quality in the places where they vacation, the payment of an
additional sum along with their usual daily user fees would provide a suitable way to
express that concern.
A sample of recreationists in the national parks, monuments and forests and state
parks in the region played a bidding game based on user fees. Only recreationists who
were not residents of the region were included. They were first asked the total sum of
user fees they paid daily. They were then asked to suppose user fees in all the recreation
areas in the Four Corners area were increased. All the additional money collected
would be spent on environmental improvements. All recreators would pay and the
year-round residents would pay, too, through additional regional sales taxes.
The Conduct of the Survey

The bidding games, as described above, were included in prepared schedules which
also served as the instrument for collection of data for socioeconomic analysis of
citizen environmental concern. Personal interviews were conducted by enumerators
who were closely supervised and who had been carefully trained in formal sessions and
in two separate field pre-tests of the questionnaire. Interviews were conducted during
the summer of 1972.
Usable questionnaires were completed by 526 residents of nonreservation sections
of the Four Corners Interstate Air Quality Control Region, 71 residents of Indian
reservations and 150 recreators and tourists from outside the region who were using
recreation sites within the region. The ratio of reservation residents to nonreservation
residents sampled was proportional to their total numbers in the regional population;
the size of the recreationist sample was chosen arbitrarily. Respondents from each
subpopulation were selected by stratified random sampling. Stratification was based
on concentration of air pollutants above the respondent’s home or recreation site, as
estimated by an atmospheric diffusion model developed as part of the larger research
project. The population in higher pollution concentration zones waslsampled more
heavily.
Analysis and Results

For the determination of three points on the aggregate bid curve, corresponding to the
situations, A, B, and C, the bidding game results were aggregated by methods appro-

BlDDING
TABLE

GAMES

141

I

AGGREGATE
BIDS FOR ABATEMENT OF AESTHETIC ENVIRONMENTAL
DAMAGE
ASSOCIATED
WITH THE FOUR CORNERS POWER PLANT,
1972

-..

Item
-~__~~-

Situation
-..-. ---

Emissions(tons of particulates per year)
Level of abatement (tons of particulates per year)
Estimatedregional aggregatebid ($ millions per year)
Standard error ($ millions per year)
95”; Confidence limits ($ millions per year)
Estimatedconsumer aggregatebid ($ millions per year)
Standard error ($ millions per year)
95“; Confidencelimits ($ millions per year)

A
96,CKMI

0
0

0

B

C

26,000
70,oou

0
96:OOO

15.54
1.24
f 2.43

24.57
1.52
f2.97

11.25
0.68

19.51
0.98
f 1.92

+I.33

priate to the stratified random sampling technique used, to provide estimates of the
total bid for the relevant population. Two methods of aggregation were used, to
generate two different aggregate bid curves.
(1) The results of the sales tax game with area residents (reservation and nonreservation) were added to the results of user fee games played by recreators to estimate
a total regional willingness to pay for three levels of environmental improvement.
(2) The results of the electricity bill game were extrapolated over all consumers of
power from the Four Corners plant to estimate consumer willingness to pay. This latter
procedure involved the ethical premise that, since the production of electricity causes
environmental damage, all citizens who consume Four Corners power ought to be
willing to pay as much in additional electricity charges for environmental improvements as those who live in the region which suffers the damage. However appealing
this ethical premise may be, our survey did not include people outside the region. Thus
the consumer bid cannot be interpreted as an estimate of true “willingness to
pay.” It would be interesting to extend this research to include bidding games for
these consumers of Four Corners electricity who do not live or recreate in the affected
environment.
While both the regional and consumer aggregate bids are of interest, the authors
believe that more faith may be placed in the regional bid since that bid was derived
from samples of all segments of its relevant population.

Table I presents the estimated aggregate bids, standard errors, and 95% confidence
limits at points A, B, and C. Regional and consumer bids are presented.
Using the estimated aggregate bids (Table I), a regional aggregate hid curve and a
COIIS~~~I’
aggregate bid curve were fitted. To fit two-dimensional aggregate bid curves,
it was necessary to select a single independent variable to serve as a proxy for the total
package of aesthetic environmental improvements under consideration. Situations
A, B, and C were defined so that all three forms of aesthetic damage (air pollution,
strip-mining, and transmission lines) were successively reduced together from their
most obtrusive in situation A to virtual elimination in C. Of the three forms of damage,
reduced visibility due to particulate air pollution was considered by respondents to be
far and away the most serious. So, abatement of particulate air pollutant emissions
(measured as the difference, in tons per year, between the level at A and the levels at

142

RANDALL,

IVES
TABLE

TESTS OF HYFOTHESFS

AND

EASTMAN

II

THE SLOPES OF THE AGGREGATE

CONCERNING

Hypothesis

BID CURVES

Confidence of rejecting HO
Regional Consumer
aggregate aggregate
bid curve bid curve

1. The aggregate bid curve is of linear positive slopen
2. The aggregate bid for situation B is one half of that for Cb

(%I

70)

99.9
99.9

99.9
94.5

0 Rejection implies that the aggregate bid curve is of increasing positive slope.
b Rejection implies that the aggregate bid for B exceeds one half of that for C.

B and C, respectively) was arbitrarily chosen to serve as a single independent variable
for graphical analyses.14
The form of the curve requires some discussion. It has already been noted [footnote
21 that the usual restraints placed on the slope of demand curves are inappropriate for
the first derivatives of aggregate bid curves for public goods, due to the impossibility
of separating quantity and quality factors. Here we have a case in point. It seems
resonable that “consumers” of abatement of particulate emissions desire the attribute,
visibility. Given the reasonable assumption that marginal utility of additional
visibility is diminishing, one would expect the first derivative of the aggregate bid
curve for visibility to be of negative slope.
Meteorologists have established that an inverse relationship exists between visibility and concentration of particulate pollutants. Visibility increases at an increasing
rate as particulate pollution (measured in terms of weight) is abated [3, lo]. Therefore,
the slope of the marginal aggregate bid curve for abatement of emissions (in tons per
year) is a priori unpredictable, since the diminishing marginal utility of visibility and
the increasing marginal visibility resulting from additional abatement influence that
slope in opposite ways.
In terms of visibility, the aggregate bid curve form which provided the best fit of
the three data points was
B = c In (v),

where B = aggregate bid in dollars, c = a constant, and v = visibility.
In terms of abatement of particulate air pollutants (measured in tons per year), the
appropriate curve form was
B(q) = c In -

c If*

k

-+ Lt k - 4’

14In the case study at hand, we recognize the inelegance introduced by this procedure. We do not
believe it does serious violence to the truth, since most of the aesthetic environmental damage occurring is, in fact, due to particulate air pollutants. We emphasize, however, that this problem should
not typically occur in the use of aggregate bid methodology and bidding game techniques. Rather, its
occurrence here was a special case and is attributable to our need to value a package of different
aesthetic environmental improvements within the following constraints: (1) a limited research budget,
which confuted us to one personal interview survey, and (2) the need to limit the length of each interview, to avoid exhausting the patience of respondents.

BIDDING

GAMES

40

60

143

5

0
A3ATEMENT

20
(TONS

OF PARTICULATE

80
EMISSIONS/YEAR

96
X 1000)

FIG. 2. Estimated aggregate bid curves for abatement of aestheticenvironmental damage, Four
Corners power plant, 1972. BR, Regional aggregate bid; BC, Consumer aggregatebid.

where k = a parameter relating visibility to emissions, which is determined behaviorally, and 4 = tons of particulate emissions abated annually.
The aggregate bid curve fitted using this equation form passes through the origin,
as logically it must, given that rational citizens would bid zero for zero abatement. The
first derivative of the aggregate bid curve is of positive slope.‘” Statistical tests (Table
II) resulted in rejection of the hypotheses (1) that the aggregate bid curve was linear,
or of decreasing positive slope, and (2) that the aggregate bid at point B was simply
one-half of that at C. Regional and consumer aggregate bid curves are presented
(Fig. 2).
I5 It must be emphasizedthat the curve form used provided the best tit, given the three data points
It would have been desirableto have collectedinformation adequate to generate more data
points. The decision to collect data for only three points was made in recognition of limits to the
patience of respondents. The multipurpose schedule was already quite lengthy, given the need to
collect data relevant to the situation of the respondent, play the bidding games, and collect socio-

available.

economic, sociological and attitudinal data.
It is recognized that, if more data points had been available, a different curve form may have been
appropriate. The possibility of a sigmoid aggregate bid curve is logically appealing. Such a curve
would have a segment of increasing slope, where the increasing marginal visibility from particulate
abatement dominates the decreasing marginal utility of additional visibility then, as complete abatement is approached (i.e., somewhere to the right of our point B), the slope may become decreasing
as the diminishing marginal utility of visibility becomes dominant. Such a curve form would be consistent with theoretical considerations and with the three data points available.

RANDALL,

144

IVES AND

EASTMAN

The fitted aggregate bid curves were:
B, = $29,175,840 In

B, = $15,396,7OOln

168,890
168,890 - 4’

for the regional aggregate bid curve, and

134,490
134,490 - q’

for the consumer aggregate bid curve.

Marginal aggregate bid curves, or price curves, were generated by taking the first
derivatives of the aggregate bid curves (Fig. 3). The derived price curves were:

P, = $

29,175,840
168,890 - q’

derived from the regional aggregate bid curve, and

15,396,700
PO = $

134,490 - 4’

derived from the consumer aggregate bid curve.

These derived price curves are very useful for public policy analyses with respect
to optimal environmental management policies. In Fig. 4, a hypothetical derived price
curve is presented, along with a hypothetical marginal cost of abatement curve. In this
hypothetical example, the optimal level of abatement is S. A standard allowing maxi-

500

400

200

100

0

20

ABATEMENT

40

60

(TONS OF PARTICULATE

80
EMISSIONSIYEAR

96
X 1000)

FIG. 3. Derived price curves for abatement of aesthetic environmental damage, Four Corners
power plant, 1972. PR, price curve derived from regional aggregate bid; PC, price curve derived-from
consumer aggregate bid.

I

1
!I
-i

I

0
ABATEMENT

1
T

s
(TONS

OF PARTICULATE

EMISSIONS/YEAR

X

1000)

FIG. 4. Optimal standards, penalties and per unit taxes on emissions, given hypothetical
cost and price curves.

marginal

mum annual emissions of (T-S) tons of particulates would be appropriate, and the
penalty for violation of that standard should be set sufficiently high that the polluter’s
expected penalty per ton of emissions in excess of the standard would be at least P.
An alternative institutional framework would call for a fine or tax per ton of particulate emissions. The fine ought to be set at least as high as P per ton. At the level P,
the optimal level of abatement would be achieved. A fixed fine per ton of remaining
emissions would result in collection of the amount XMTS. However, since the derived
price curve is of positive slope, the sum of the fines collected would be insufficient to
compensate the receptors of the pollutants for their loss in welfare. The necessary
amount would be XNTS. This amount could be collected, if full compensation were
the accepted policy, I6 by using a sliding scale of fines, ranging from P’ for the first
ton of emissions down to P for all emissions in excess of T-S.
If the marginal costs of abatement of aesthetic environmental damage associated
with the Four Corners power plant were known, Ii the derived price curves presented
I6 Under a full compensation policy, a derived price curve generated from bidding games based on
the concept of willingness to pay (which implicitly places the liability with the receptor of damages)
would underestimate both the optimal level of abatement and the appropriate level of fines or taxes.
Randall [15] and others have demonstrated that the demand for abatement of an external diseconomy
is greater in the full liability situation than in the zero liability situation implicit in willingness to
pay games.
Ii We are not yet in a position to present a complete benefit/cost analysis of the abatement of the
aesthetic environmental damage associated with the Four Corners power plant and Navajo mine.
Preliminary and tentative calculations indicate that, (four urtrihufion
of most of the benrfir.s reported
IICW to abatemetzt
qfparriculate
air pollutum
is r~~asonubl~~, 99.7: ; abatement of particulate emissions
(the current New Mexico standard for 1975) is economically justified on the basis of aesthetic considerations alone. Some additional abatement beyond the 1975 standard may be justified. The economic benefits from that abatement which has already taken place appear to far exceed the costs.

146

RANDALL,

IVES AND
TABLE

EASTMAN

III

INCOME ELA.STICITY
OF BID FOR ABATEMENT
ASTOCIATED
WITH THE FOUR CORNERS

Subpopulation

DAMAGES

1972

Level of
abatement

Income
elasticity
of bid

Standard
error

Significantly
greater than
zero” ?

Sales tax

B
C

0.65
0.65

0.10
0.08

Yes
Yes

Reservation residents

Sales tax

B
C

0.23
0.24

Nonreservation

Electricity bill

B
C
B
C

0.54
0.39

0.18
0.18
0.09
0.06

No
No
Yes
Yes

0.09
0.16

0.15
0.11

No
No

Nonreservation

residents

residents

Recreators

Game

OF AESTHETIC
POWER PLANT,

Users fees

Q At the 95y0 level of confidence.

in Fig. 3 could be used to perform policy analyses similar to those in the hypothetical
example above.
The relationship between willingness to pay and household income is of interest.
However, the concept of income elasticity of demand is inappropriate to the public
good under study. The calculation of an income elasticity of quantity of abatement
demanded would require consideration of the relationship between income and quantity of homogeneous units of abatement demanded at a constant price per unit. However, in this study there were no explicit unit prices for abatement; neither were there
individual variations in quantity of abatement demanded, as the quantities were:fixed
as defined in situations A, B, and C. These conditions result from the inherent nonexclusive nature of abatement of aesthetic environmental damage: Everyone obtains
the same quantity and there is no explicit price. This situation is the inverse of the
market situation for private goods; dollar bids are the response to a quantity which
is given.
Since there existed no market price at which to calculate the income elasticity of
demand, an “income elasticity of bid” was estimated. The income elasticity of bid
was defined as:
dBY
Y
ey=--=bldYB
B’
where Y = household income, and B = the individual’s total annual bid. A linear
regression model was used to determine the statistic bl. The mean value of Y and B
were used, and the calculation was made at each level of abatement.
Calculated income elasticities of bid for the various subpopulations and bidding
games are presented in Table III. In all cases, income elasticity of bid was greater than
zero, indicating that higher income households were willing to pay a greater amount
than lower income households to achieve the same level of abatement of aesthetic
damages. For the non-reservation residents, calculated income elasticity of bid
This conclusion is extremely tentative and subject to revision. It is presented in this footnote (at
the request of an anonymous reviewer) to provide a “ball park” indication of the conclusions which
may arise from our research.

BIDDING

GAMES

147

ranged from 0.39 to 0.65, depending on the game and the level of abatement. Income
elasticity of bid was significantly greater than zero at the 95% level of confidence. For
the residents of Indian reservations and the recreational visitors to the region, lower
positive income elasticities were recorded. These were not significantly greater than
zero, at the 95% level of confidence.18
It was also found that willingness to pay an additional charge in the electricity bill
for a particular level of abatement increased as the size of the electricity bill increased.
Electric bill elasticity of bid, as defined as
dB Bill
eb=--.-dBil1 B ’

was calculated (for the nonreservation resident sample) to be 0.30 for situation B and
0.25 for situation C; at both points, it was significantly greater than zero at the 95%:
level of confidence. These estimates indicate that willingness to pay for a given level
of environmental improvements increased as the size of the electricity bill increased,
but at a lesser rate.
The Reliability of the Results

In the statistical sense, our estimates of the aggregate benefits from abatement of
aesthetic environmental damage would seem to be of a high order of reliability. The
95% confidence limits of the aggregate bids are quite narrow, compared with the size
of the estimated aggregate bids. Statistical estimates of the confidence which may be
placed in these estimated aggregate bids are based upon the variance of the responses
of the samples, and indicate the confidence with which sample results may be extrapolated to the whole population. These statistics, per se, are unable to give any indication
of the reliability with which predispositions to behave, as measured by the bidding
games, would be transmitted to actions should the hypothetical situation arise.
We argue, nevertheless, that our estimates of the benefits of abatement of aesthetic
environmental damages associated with the Four Corners power plant are of a reasonable order of magnitude and, if anything, conservative. (1) We believe the design of
the bidding games allows confidence in their efficacy. (2) The individual household
bid for abatement, on average, is of the same order of magnitude as the estimates of
the value of particulate pollution abatement obtained in revealed demand studies
[ 11, when the latter are converted to a comparable basis. Mean individual household
willingness to pay for abatement, measured by the sales tax game played with the
nonreservation resident sample, was about $50 annually to achieve situation B and
$85 annually to achieve situation C. (3) The estimated aggregate bids for abatement
are relatively small given the scale of the operation at Four Corners, as indicated by
its 1970 emissions rate and its total annual sales of $146 million [footnote 51. (4)
Theoretical analyses indicate that the demand for abatement of an externality will
lEThe estimates of income elasticity obtained with the nonreservation resident sample may be
more reliable, for two reasons. First, the nonreservation sample was considerably larger than either
of the other two samples. Second, the range of incomes encountered in the nonreservation resident
sample more nearly approached that of society as a whole. The reservation resident sample was
representative of its underlying population, in which incomes are concentrated at the extreme lower
end of the national range. The visiting recreators had a mean household income about fifty per cent
greater than the national average; very few recreators had incomes in the lower half of the national
range.

148

RANDALL,

IVES AND

EASTMAN

be lower under a zero liability rule than under intermediate or full liability rules [ 151.
The bidding games used were based on zero liability rules, and they should be expected
to yield conservative estimates of the benefits of abatement.
It is recognized that three data points provide an inadequate basis on which to draw
conclusions with respect to the shapes and slopes of the aggregate bid curves and their
first derivatives. However, it is consistent with theoretical considerations and with the
limited data available that the aggregate bid curves may have at least a segment with
increasing slope.
It would seem that the income elasticity of bid and the electric bill elasticity of bid
fall in the range from zero to - 1. This result was consistent with our prior expectations.
CONCLUDING

COMMENTS

In the case study reported, bidding games were used to estimate the benefits which
would accrue from abatement of the aesthetic environmental damages associated with
the Four Corners power plant and the Navajo mine. The problem situation was not
amenable to the use of direct costing nor revealed demand techniques.
This study has revealed that substantial benefits may be gained from abatement of
aesthetic environmental damage associated with the Four Corners power plant and
Navajo mine. These potential benefits have not been revealed or realized in the market
place. However, the process of political and institutional change has led to the imposition of increasingly rigorous control standards for particulate emissions from the
plant, indicating a recognition, in some broad sense, that benefits may be gained from
emissions controls. Our contribution has been to attempt a quantification of these
benefits.
We believe that the use of bidding game techniques was successful in meeting the
objective, valuation of these benefits. Bidding game techniques seem amenable to use
as a research tool for valuation of a wide variety of nonmarket goods. It must be
understood, however, that bidding games measure the hypothetical responses of
individuals faced with hypothetical situations. Thus, considerable care must be
exercised in the design of bidding games and the conduct of surveys for data collection,
to ensure that the results obtained are as reliable as possible.
REFERENCES
1. R. J. Anderson, Jr. and T. D. Cracker, Air pollution and housing: Some findings, Paper No. 264,
Institute for Research in the Behavioral, Economic and Management Sciences (January 1970).
2. D. F. Bradford, Benefit-cost analysis and demand curves for public goods, Kyklos 23, 775-91
(1970).
3. R. J. Charlson, N. C. Ahlquist, and H. Horvath, On the generality of correlation of atmospheric
aerosol mass concentration and light scatter, Amos. Ewiron.
2, 455464
(1968).
4. M. Clawson and J. L. Knetsch, “Economics of Outdoor Recreation,” Johns Hopkins Press,
Baltimore (1966).
5. I. Crespi, What kinds of attitude measures are predictive of behavior? Pub. Opin. Quart. 35,
327-34 (1971).
6. 0. A. Davis and A. B. Whinston, On the Distinction:Between Public and Private Goods. Amer.
Econ. Rev. 57, 360-373
(1967).
7. R. K. Davis, Recreation planning as a economic problem, Natural Rex J. 3, 239-249 (1963).
8. J. F. Engel, D. T. Kollat, and R. D. Blackwell, Attitude formation and structure, in “Consumer
Behavior,” Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York (1968).
9. H. Erskine, The polls: Pollution and its costs, Pub. Opin. Quart. 36, 120-135 (1972).
10. H. Ettinger and G. W. Roger, Particle size, visibility and mass concentration in a nonurban
environment, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, LA-DC-12197 (1971).

BIDDING

GAMES

149

11. J. A. Jaksch and H. H. Stoevener, Effects of air pollution on residential property values in Toledo, Oregon, Agricultural Experiment Station Special Report 304, Oregon State University,
Corvallis ( 1970).
12. A. V. Kneese and B. Bower, “Managing Water Quality: Economics. Technology and Institutions,” Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore (1972).
13. L. Lave and E. Seskin, Air Pollution and Human Health, Sciencr 169, 723.-732 (1970).
14 H. 0. Nourse, The effect of air pollution on house values, Lnrzd Emn. 43, 181-189 (1967).
! 5. A. Randall, On the theory of market solutions to externality pr.oblems, Agricultural Experiment
Station Special Report 351, Oregon State University, Corvallis (1972).
16. R. G. Ridker and J. A. Henning, The determination of residential property values with special
reference to air pollution (St. Louis, Missouri), Rev. Econ. Sfut. 49, 246-257 (1967).
17. K. F. Weiand, Air pollution and property values: A study of the St. Louis area, J. Rq. Sci. 13
91.-95 (1973).
18. R. 0. Zerbe, Jr., The economics of air pollution: A cost-benefit approach, Ontario Dept. of
Public Health, Toronto (1969).

