Agricultural Economics, 9 (1993) 279-296
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam

279

Measuring the sustainability and economic viability
of tropical farming systems:
a model from sub-Saharan Africa
Simeon K. Ehui
Livestock Economics Division, International Livestock Center for Africa,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

and Dunstan S.C. Spencer
Resource and Crop Management Division, International Institute of Tropical Agriculture,
Ibadan, Nigeria
(Accepted 22 December 1992)

ABSTRACT
New technologies must be developed in sub-Saharan Africa which are sustainable and
economically viable. This paper discusses a methodology for measuring the agricultural
sustainability and economic viability of tropical farming systems for new technology evaluation. The approach is based on the concept of interspatial and intertemporal total factor
productivity, paying particular attention to valuation of natural resource stock and flows.
Agriculture is a sector which utilizes natural resources (e.g. soil nutrients) and the stock and
flows of these resources affect the production environment. However, in many cases, the
stock of these resources is beyond the control of the farmer and must be accounted for in an
agricultural sustainability and economic viability measurement. For example, soil nutrients
are removed by crops, erosion or leaching beyond the crop root-zone, or other processes
such as volatilization of nitrogen. Agricultural production can also contribute to the stock of
some nutrients by leguminous plants such as agroforestry systems. Using a data set available
at the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, we compute the intertemporal and
interspatial total factor productivity indices for four cropping systems in southwestern
Nigeria using stock of major soil nutrients as the natural resource stock. Results show that
the sustainability and economic viability measures are sensitive to changes in the stock and
flow of soil nutrients as well as the material inputs and outputs. Where the contribution of
natural resource stock and flows are important (such as in the case of alley cropping), the

Correspondence to: Simeon K. Ehui, International Livestock Center for Africa, P.O. Box
5689, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
0169-5150 j93 j$06.00 © 1993 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

280

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

measures provide markedly different results from conventional TFP approaches. The
advantage of this approach is that interspatial and intertemporal total factor productivity
measures are computed using only price and quantity data, thus eliminating the need for
econometric estimation.

1. INTRODUCTION

Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is the only region of the world where percapita food production has steadily declined over the past two decades
(IBRD, 1989). Although unfavorable farm policy (e.g. inappropriate fiscal
and pricing policies, inadequate extension and marketing services) may be
responsible in part for the low agricultural output, the capability of the
natural resource base (especially soils) to sustain continued production
under current farming practices is being questioned (Lal, 1987). The
predominant farming systems in SSA are based on shifting cultivation
practices. Farmers fell and burn the fallow vegetation, cultivate the cleared
land (typically 1 to 3 years) and then abandon the site (from 4 to 20 years)
to forest or bush cover (Sanchez, 1976). This traditional agricultural production system, which is known to be stable and biologically efficient,
operates effectively only when there is sufficient land to allow a long fallow
period to restore soil productivity (Kang et al, 1989).
Today, however, due to rapid demographic and economic changes,
cultivated area has expanded onto marginal soil types and fallow periods
are being reduced, resulting in systematic degradation of major areas of
land in SSA and declining yields (Matlon and Spencer, 1984; Kang et al,
1989; Ehui and Hertel, 1992). This is compounded by the fact that most
soils of humid tropical Africa are sandy, highly weathered, low in organic
matter content and susceptible to soil erosion and compaction (Lal, 1987;
El-Ashry and Ram, 1987). Thus, the challenge faced by decision makers in
many nations in SSA is how to feed an increasing population without
irreparably damaging the natural resource base on which agricultural
production depends (Ehui and Hertel, 1989; Ehui et al, 1990).
Clearly, new technologies must be developed which not only enhance
food production but also maintain ecological stability and preserve the
natural resource base, i.e. technologies, which are both economically viable
and sustainable (BIFAD, 1988). For that reason, the Technical Advisory
Committee (TAC) of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research (CGIAR) has recommended that research at international centers which is designed to generate agricultural innovations should be
planned and conducted with a sustainability perspective (CGIAR, 1989a,b).
However, practical and quantifiable methods for measuring the sustainabil-

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

281

ity and economic viability of agricultural systems need to be developed
(CGIAR, 1991).
Dumanski (1987) critically examines the concept of sustainability as
applied to agricultural systems. He concludes that although measurements
can focus on soil qualities and on financial viability, current concepts are
too broad to be practical, and sustainability is difficult to measure using
them. Based on the concept of safe minimum standard of Ciriacy-Wantrup
(1968), Pearce et al. (1990) and Barbier et al. (1990) argue that to make the
concept of agricultural sustainability operational at the project appraisal
level, is to assume that it is dependent on the constancy or non-negative
rate of change of the natural capital stock. They recommend that within an
agricultural development program, projects should be accepted not on the
basis of their net present value (economic efficiency) but on whether their
streams of environment benefits compensate for any environmental damage imposed by other projects. However, their proposed methodology
requires defining the alternative compensatory projects as well as measuring the associated environmental effects. Lynam and Herdt (1989) suggested a framework by which the sustainability concept could be empirically incorporated into the research process. They developed a number of
propositions, one of which states that "the appropriate measure of output
by which to determine sustainability at the crop, cropping or farming
system level is total factor productivity, defined as the total value of all
output produced by the system over one cycle divided by the total value of
all inputs used by the system over one cycle of the system; a sustainable
system has a non-negative trend in total factor productivity over the period
of concern."
Building upon the above proposition, this paper uses recent advances in
productivity measurement and economic index numbers to develop a model
for measuring economic viability and agricultural sustainability. The method
used is based on Denny and Fuss' (1983) interspatial and intertemporal
total factor productivity measures, modified to accommodate changes in
resource stocks and flows. Agriculture is a sector which utilizes natural
resources (e.g. soil nutrients) and changes in the stock and flows of these
resources need to be accounted for in sustainability measures.
The paper is organized into six sections. Section 2 provides an overview
of the definition of sustainability and economic viability. Two propositions
related to the measurement of these two concepts are stated. Section 3
presents the conceptual framework. It introduces a generalized model for
measurement of total factor productivity (TFP). Section 4 develops concepts of intertemporal and interspatial TFP which are used as measures of
economic viability and agricultural sustainability, respectively. In Section 5

282

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

an empirical example is considered. Section 6 provides a summary and
some concluding qualifications and comments.
2. DEFINITIONS OF SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY

Various definitions have been proposed for sustainability. TAC for
example, defines a sustainable agricultural system as one in which there is
"the successful management of resources for agriculture to satisfy the
changing human needs while maintaining or enhancing the quality of the
environment and conserving natural resources" (CGIAR, 1989b). Along
the same lines, a Committee of the American Society of Agronomy provides the following definition: "A sustainable agriculture is one that, over
the long term, enhances environmental quality and the resource base on
which agriculture depends; provides for basic human food and fiber needs;
is economically viable and enhances the quality of life for farmers and
society as a whole" (Anonymous, 1989).
A third definition which is provided by Conway (1985) says: "Sustainability is the ability of a system to maintain productivity in spite of a major
disturbance, such as caused by intensive stress or a large perturbation."
Building upon Conway's definition, Lynam and Herdt (1989) define sustainability as "the capacity of a system to maintain output at a level
approximately equal to or greater than its historical average, with the
approximation determined by its historical level of variability", i.e. a
sustainable system is "one with a non-negative trend in measured output
and technology contributes to sustainability if it increases the slope of the
trend line." Finally, Young (1989, p. 10) defines a sustainable land use
system as that "which achieves production combined with conservation of
the resources on which that production depends, thereby permitting the
maintenance of productivity."
It is with these last two definitions in mind that a measure of sustainability is proposed. The approach is based on the intertemporal total factor
productivity (TFP) measure using the growth accounting framework as
developed by Denny and Fuss (1983). Intertemporal TFP is defined in
terms of the productive capacity of the system over time. However, this
productive capacity for a sustainable system includes the unpriced contributions from natural resources and their unpriced production flows. Given
that sustainability is characteristic of a system's productive performance
over time, it appears that intertemporal TFP is an appropriate measure of
sustainability as it addresses the question of intertemporal change in
productivity of a system between two or more periods. Therefore, a system
will be said to be sustainable if the associated intertemporal TFP index, which

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

283

incorporates and values changes in the resource stock and flow, does not
decrease (Proposition 1).
Unlike sustainability, economic viability is a static concept which refers
to the efficiency with which resources are employed in the production
process at a given period. A new production system can be said to be more
economically viable (or efficient) than an existing one if its total factor
productivity is greater at a given point in time. By higher TFP, we mean the
capacity of the new system to produce more output than the existing one
after accounting for differences in quantities of inputs and unpriced
natural resources used in each system during one crop season. On the dual
side it is interpreted as the capacity of the new production system to
produce outputs with lower total costs than the existing one, after accounting for differences in output levels, input prices and unpriced natural
resources and any other state of nature or exogenous variables.
Thus, to compare the economic viability of production systems, we
advocate the concept of interspatial TFP which is defined in terms of the
productive capacity of one system over another, at a given period (e.g. a
cropping season) including the unpriced contribution from natural resources to production. A system will be said to be economically more viable
than another one if the interspatial TFP index associated with the former
which incorporates and values spatial differences in the resource stock and
flow, is higher than the interspatial TFP index associated with the latter
(Proposition 2).
We restrict this analysis to the cropping of farming system level because
technologies that are generated in farming systems research in SSA are
applied at this level and are mainly for small scale farmers who produce
most of Africa's food and whose farming systems have low and declining
productivity (UTA, 1989). Also as noted by Lynam and Herdt (1989), above
the farming system level, so many external factors affect the sustainability
of farming systems that it is practically impossible to determine the source
of such impacts.
3. A GENERALIZED MODEL FOR MEASUREMENT OF TFP

The conventional approach to growth-accounting uses TFP indexes to
measure the residual growth in outputs not accounted for by the growth in
factor inputs. The rate of growth of TFP is conventionally defined as the
rate of growth of aggregate output minus the rate of growth of aggregate
inputs (Capalbo and Antle, 1989). However, the agricultural sector utilizes
common pool natural resources (e.g. air, water, soil nutrients, etc.). The
stock of these resources affects the production environment, but is, in many

284

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

cases, beyond the control of the farmer. For example, soil nutrients are
removed by crops, erosion or leaching beyond the crop root zone, or
through other processes such as volatilization of nitrogen. Agricultural
production can also contribute to the stock of some of the nutrients,
particularly of nitrogen, by leguminous plants. When the stock of resources
is reduced, the farmer faces an implicit cost in terms of forgone productivity. Conversely, when the stock of resources is increased during the production process (e.g. via nitrogen fixation), the farmer derives an implicit
benefit from the system.
If these implicit costs and benefits are not accounted for when TFP is
measured, results will be biased. Squires (1991) shows that when common
pool resource stocks are utilized, it is inappropriate for productivity measurement to treat the resource stock as a conventional input. Rather, the
resource stock is more appropriately specified as a technological constraint.
This is because for a given input bundle, increases (decreases) in resource
abundance shift the production function, increasing (decreasing) resource
flows and output. Our generalized model for TFP measurement differs
from that of Squires (1991) in that the contribution of crop outputs and
resource flows (both addition and depletion) are separately accounted for.
Assuming that current prices are known, the maximization problem
when changes in resource stock levels are positive is stated as:

(1)
where 71"1 is a measure of aggregate profit in period t, including all benefits
and costs of resource exploitation, and B 1 is a technology shift variable
representing the level of resource abundance in period t. Equation (1)
represents the case of 'open access' in which B 1 is not a choice variable.
The resource stock is beyond the control of farmers who thus ignore its
opportunity cost. Z 1 is an externality denoting the net resource flow (i.e.
Bt+l- B 1 ) in period t. When changes in resource abundance levels are
positive, we have a positive externality and the resulting net resource flow,
Z 1 is treated as an output, thus contributing positively to the aggregate
profit; Yr is an index of crop outputs; Pyt and Pzt are the product and
resource flow prices; G( ·) is the variable cost function for the optimal
combination of variable inputs, where aG( ·);as < 0 and aG( ·);az > 0;
and w; is a vector of variable input prices; t is the time trend representing
the state of technical knowledge.
When the production process is depleting the resource at a rate faster
than that required for sustainability, net changes in resource abundance
levels are negative (i.e. Bt+l -B1 = -Z1 ). Thus, we have a negative externality and Z 1 is treated as a cost, contributing negatively to the aggregate

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

285

profit. This requires modification of the objective function (1) by replacing
the ( +) sign before Pz 1 Z 1 with a (-)sign, and in this case, aG( ·);az < 0.
Using the first order conditions of (1), development of the continuous
time Divisia index by method of the growth accounting approach (see the
Appendix) gives:

-a Ln c;at= [PyY/C]Y+ [PzZ)!C]i- L:[(UJXj);c]xj-B

(2)

j

where C = Lj U]Xj = PYY + PzZ is the total revenue, assuming constant
returns to scale. Dots on variables imply the logarithm derivation of the
associated variable with time. When changes in the resource stock are
negative, the productivity index becomes:

-a Ln c;at= [Py/C]Y- [(PzZ)/C]i- L:[(UJXjC)]xj-B

(3)

j

where C = L:j U]Xj + PzZ = PYY, assuming constant returns to scale.
Equations (2) and (3) indicate that TFP is measured as the residual after
the growth rate of output has been allocated among changes in inputs and
resource abundance and flows. The basic difference between (2) and (3) is
that in the former case the change in resource stock is assumed positive
and the resulting flow is treated as a benefit. In the latter case, the change
in resource stock is assumed to be negative and the resulting flow is treated
as a cost.
It is clear from (2) and (3) that productivity measures are biased unless
variations in the resource stock abundance levels and resource flows are
accounted for. Note that although it is not a choice variable, B 1 is part of
the solution because it appears in the variable cost function, G.
4. INTERTEMPORAL AND INTERSPATIAL TFP MEASURES

Having specified a generalized model of TFP, we now proceed to
develop intertemporal and interspatial TFP measures. Assume that the
agricultural production process of cropping system i in period t can be
represented by the dual variable cost function:

(4)
where Git is the cost of production, w; 1 is a vector of input prices; ¥; 1 is
crop output; Zit is the change in resource stock levels; Bit is the resource
stock abundance level; and ~ and Di denote the intertemporal and
interspatial efficiency difference indicators. Derivation of the intertemporal
and interspatial TFP indices depends critically on the proper specification

286

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

of the total cost function cil' which in turn depends on the nature of zil'
i.e. whether the change in resource stock is positive or negative. We
therefore consider two cases:
Case 1: Net positive change in resource stock. Assuming constant returns to
scale and competitive factor markets, application of Diewert's (1976)
quadratic lemma to a logarithmic approximation of (4) gives:

Ll Ln C =

HRyis + Ryot][Ln Yis- Ln Yot] + H Rzis + Rzot]
X

t L [skis+ skot] [Ln wkis- Ln wkot]

[Ln zis- Ln zot] +

k

- [Ln Bis- Ln Bot] + E)io + f.Lst
(5)
where i and o represent two distinct farming (or land use) systems, and s
and t represent two distinct time periods. skis and skot are the kth input
factor cost shares; R yis and R yot are the revenue shares for product Y; and
Rzis and Rzot are (implicit) revenue shares for resource flow Z. E>io and f.Lst
denote the interspatial and intertemporal effect and are defined as:
1 [ a Ln G I
aD D~Di +

E>io =

2

f.Lst =

2

1 [ a Ln G
aT

I

T~T, +

a Ln

aD

a Ln

aT

G

G

I

l
l

D~Do [Di-Do]

(6)

T~T, [~- Tt]

(7)

I

Equation (5) states that the cost difference across cropping systems and
time periods can be broken into six terms including: (1) an output effect,
(2) a resource flow effect, (3) an input price effect, (4) a resource stock
effect, (5) an interspatial effect, and (6) an intertemporal effect.
Following Denny and Fuss (1983), to measure the intertemporal TFP
(thus sustainability) of a particular technology, we set Di = D0 = 0. Solving
for f.Lts in (5) yields the dual measure of intertemporal productivity for two
periods s and t:

HRys + Ryt][Ln ~- Ln ~] - H Rzs + Rzt]
X [Ln zs- Ln Zt]- t L [Sks + skt] [Ln wks- Ln wks]

f.Lts = [Ln Gs- Ln Gt] -

k

(8)
Similarly, the dual measure of interspatial productivity between system
and reference System o at a particular point in time (Ts = Tt = 0) is:
f)io = [Ln Gi- Ln G 0 ]
X

-

HRyi + Ryo][Ln Yi- Ln Y

[Ln zi- Ln Zo] -

0 ]-

HRzi + Rzo]

t L [ski+ sko] [Ln wki- Ln wko]
k

(9)

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

287

Now turn to the primal space. Totally differentiating the log of the cost
equations G = L; W;X;, with respect to time yields:
(10)

The Tornqvist approximation to (10) for periods sand t and systems i and o
gives:
,i

Ln G = [Ln Gis- Ln Got]

=

t L [skis+ skot] [Ln

xkis- Ln xkot]

k

+

t L [skis+ skot] [Ln wkis- Ln wkotl
k

(11)
Equating (5) and (11) and solving for (- 1-Lst) and (- E>io) gives measures of
intertemporal and interspatial productivity in the primal space.

Tst = - 1-Lst =

t[ Rys + Ry

1

)[Ln ~- Ln YJ + H Rzs + R 21 ][Ln Zs- Ln Z 1 ]

- t L [sks + skt][Ln xks- Ln xkt] -

[Ln Bs- Ln Bt],

k

(12)
'Yio = -eio =

HRyi +Ryo][Ln ¥;- Ln Ya] + HRzi +Rzo][Ln zi- Ln Zo]
- t L [Ski+ sko] [Ln xki- Ln xko]- [Ln Bi- Ln Bo]
k

(13)
Note that under our assumptions equations (12) and (13) are equal to the
negative of the intertemporal and interspatial productivity measures that
are obtained in the dual space (Ohta, 1974).

Case 2: Net negative change in resource stock. Following the same procedure as in case 1, intertemporal and interspatial productivity measures in
the primal space are, respectively, given by:

<t = [Ln ~- Ln ¥;]- Hszs + sztl [Ln zs- Ln Zt]
- t L [sks + skt] [Ln

xks- Ln xkt] - [Ln Bs- Ln Btl

(14)

k

Y{o = [Ln ¥;- Ln Yo] - H szi + szol [Ln zi- Ln Zo]

- t L [ski+ sko][Ln xki- Ln xko][Ln Bi- Ln Bo]

(15)

k

where szs and szt in equation (14) and szi and szo in equation (15) denote
the (implicit) cost shares for depleted resource Z. The basic difference

288

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

between Tst and 'Yio on one hand, and T;P y(0 , on the other hand, is that in
the former case the net increase in resource stock is treated as an output
(benefit) while in the latter case the decrease in the resource stock index is
treated as a cost. Note that equations (12)-(15), which specify the DennyFuss first order accounting equation, are easily computed using only price
and quantity data, thus eliminating the need for estimating an underlying
cost or production structure.
5. AN EMPIRICAL EXAMPLE

This section demonstrates how the intertemporal and interspatial total
factor productivity measures developed in equations (12)-(15) can be used
to measure the sustainability and economic viability of tropical farming
systems. The data set was generated during a four-year study by the United
Nations University (UNU) and IITA on the effect of deforestation and
land use on soil, hydrology, microclimate and productivity in the humid
coastal belt of Nigeria (Lal and Ghuman, 1989). Four cropping systems
denoted A, B, C, D are evaluated over a two-year period (1986-1988) for
which there is a complete and balanced data set. In system A, land was
cleared manually and cropped by a local farmer. Yam, melon and plantains
were grown in 1986. In 1988, plantain, melon and cassava were grown. In
all other systems, the land was cleared by a tractor equipped with a shear
blade and cropped by the researchers. In system B, cassava, maize and
cowpea were planted in 1986; only cassava was planted in 1988. In system
C, maize and cassava were planted in 1986 and rice in 1988. All crops in
system C were grown in alleys formed by hedgerows of nitrogen fixing trees
or shrubs. In this system, known as alley cropping, the hedgerows were
periodically pruned during the cropping season to prevent shading and
reduce competition with food crops (Kang et al., 1989). In system D,
plantain was grown during the 1986-1988 period. No fertilizer was used in
any of the cropping systems.
Since the cropping systems have multiple crop outputs, an implicit
output index is calculated by dividing the total value of all output by a price
index obtained by weighing the individual output prices by the revenue
share of each crop. A corresponding implicit input quantity index is
computed as the ratio of total expenditures on inputs to the weighted
material input price. The latter is measured by an index of all material
input prices, weighted by the cost share of each input. A quantity index for
implements used is computed as the ratio of total annual expenditure on
capital input and the implicit capital service price. To create an aggregate
capital service price we share-weight the price of each category of implement in the same manner as the aggregate material price index. Capital

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

289

TABLE 1
Intertemporal total factor productivity (sustainability) indices for four cropping systems
under experimental conditions, in southwestern Nigeria, 1986-1988
System
System
System
System
System

a

A
B
C
D

No correction
Ib

Resource stock

Resource stock and flows

II

III

0.20
6.38
0.02
3.27

0.19
6.14
0.01
4.23

*
*
*
**

0.22
6.25
12.23
0.88

*
*
*
**

Numbers with one star ( *) indicate the case of a net positive change in resource abundance,
while those with two starts ( * *) indicate the case of a net negative change in resource
abundance levels.
a In system A land was cleared manually and farmed traditionally. Crop grown include yam,
melon and plantain in 1986, and cassava in 1988. In systems B, C, and D land was cleared
mechanically. Crops grown include cassava, maize and cowpea in 1986 and cassava only in
1988. System C is an agroforestry system where crops are grown in alleys formed by trees
and shrubs. Maize and cassava were grown in 1986 while only rice was grown in 1988. In
system D, plantain was the only crop grown.
b In column I there is no correction in soil resource stock and flows in Column II only
resource stock use is corrected for. Column III allows for both the resource stock and flows.

input expenditures are defined as the sum of the annual user costs of the
implements. These are calculated using the capital recovery factor formula,
A= PV[r j{1- (1 + r )- 1}], where A is the annualized cost of capital item;
PV is the present value of the capital item defined as the purchase price
less the present worth of its future salvage value; t is the estimated lifespan
of the capital item; and r is the discount rate.
To construct the Divisia index for the soil nutrient stock, we share-weight
the total quantities of main soil nutrients; nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P),
and potassium (K) (in metric tons per hectare) available in the top soil
(0-10 em). In determining the cost share for the resource stock, we
approximated the opportunity cost of each soil nutrient with its replacement cost, i.e. market price from chemical fertilizer. Resource flows are
derived as the difference between nutrient abundance levels for a given
cropping system between 1986 and 1988 (intertemporal productivity) or
between two competing cropping systems in a given year (interspatial
productivity). Quantities of available soil N, P, and K per hectare were
computed using a standard bulk density level of 1.21 gjcm 3 (Lal and
Ghuman, 1989).
Intertemporal and interspatial productivity indices for the four cropping
systems were calculated and are reported in Tables 1 and 2. In column I,
there is no adjustment for changes in resource stock abundance levels and

290

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

TABLE 2
Interspatial total factor productivity (economic viability) indices for four cropping systems
under experimental conditions in southern Nigeria, during 1986 and 1988
Systems

System A
System B
System C
System D

1988

1986
No
correction

Resource
stock only

Resource
stock and
flows

No
correction

Resource
stock only

Resource
stock and
flows

I

II

III

I

II

III

1
1.73
5.37
0.06

1
2.02 **
6.68 **
0.18 *

1
0.73 * *
0.76 * *
2.40 *

1
68.50
0.37
1.04

1
81.34 * *
0.36 *
1.31 * *

1
9.26 * *
1.12 *
0.14 **

Refer to footnotes in Table 1 for details on the various systems, the interpretation meaning
of the columns as well as the stars (* and * * ).

flows. Column II provides productivity measures allowing for variations in
the resource stock only. In column III, full correction is made by accounting for both changes in the resource stock level and the flows.
From column III in Table 1, total factor productivity increased for
systems B and C and declined for systems A and D. Systems B and C
produced 6.25 and 11.58 times as much output in 1988 as in 1986 using the
1986 input bundle. Therefore, systems B and C can therefore be said to be
sustainable over the two year interval since after properly accounting for
temporal differences in input quality and quantity and resource flows and
stocks, they produced more than in the reference year (1986). Systems A
and D produced only 0.22 and 0.88 as much output in 1988 as in 1986 using
the 1986 input bundle. Thus, A and D can be said to be non-sustainable.
Note from Table 1 that completely accounting for changes in resource
abundance levels and flows substantially alters the productivity measures.
This is particularly true for system C, where the hedgerows trees fix
atmospheric nitrogen and recycle nutrients, and system D, where the
plantains heavily depleted the soil of its nutrients. Note that in system C, if
we do not account for the nitrogen contribution of the trees, the intertemporal productivity index is lower than unity (column 1), leading to the
erroneous conclusion that the system is not sustainable. Soil nutrients
increased by 31%, representing nearly 30% of the net revenue in 1988.
This is important to the value of output which explains the high intertemporal productivity index number in system C.
Similarly, if we do not account for the depleted resources in system D,
the erroneous conclusion would be reached that the system is sustainable.
Similar erroneous conclusions are reached when only changes in resource
abundance levels are accounted for and flows are ignored (column II). The

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

291

stock of soil nutrients in this system decreased by 23%, representing about
8% of the total cost of production. Systems A and B are relatively stable
because although soil nutrients increased, they represent only 0.7 and 0.1%
of the total revenue in each system. Results in Table 1 confirm that unless
variations in the resource flows and stock are fully accounted for, TFP
results will be biased. The bias depends on the magnitude of resource flow
and stock. While an increased (reduced) resource stock level serves to
reduce (increase) the productivity growth rate (column II), the associated
change in the resource flow has the opposite effect (column III). A positive
change in the resource stock level is a benefit to the farmer and thus
contributes to improving the sustainability of the system. When the change
in the resource stock is negative, the farmer faces a cost (though it is
hidden) which negatively affects the system's sustainability.
In Table 2, we compare the economic viability of cropping systems B, C,
and D relative to A. In 1986 after accounting for changes in resource
abundance and flows, systems B and C are shown to be relatively less
productive than the reference base system. The interspatial TFP indices
are estimated to be 0.73 and 0.76 for systems B and C, respectively,
indicating that these systems use relatively more resources and produce a
comparatively lower output than system A. Only system D (in which only
plantain was grown) is more productive. In 1988, productivity indices for all
the systems show a different pattern. With interspatial TFP indices of 9.26
and 1.12, systems B and C are now found to be more economically viable
than system A. Similarly, with a TFP index of 0.14, system Dis found to be
less economically viable than the reference base system. The changes in
productivity measures in 1988 compared to 1986 are attributable to the
changes in soil nutrient status over the two-year period. For example, in
system C (where crops are grown in association with leguminous trees), soil
nutrients increased by 2.3% in 1988 compared to system A, with a revenue
share of about 6 percent. In system D, where only plantain is grown,
chemical fertility was depleted over time. This is reflected in the lower 1988
productivity measure. In system D, soil nutrients decreased by 21% in this
system compared to system A representing about 7% of the full cost faced
by the farmer in 1988. Soil nutrients decreased by 16% for system Bin 1988
representing about 10 percent of the total cost. As shown in Table 1, when
variations in resource stock levels and the flows are not accounted for,
productivity measures are biased. The biases depend on the magnitude of
changes in resource stock levels.
6. CONCLUDING COMMENTS

New technologies must be developed in SSA which are sustainable and
economically viable. However, there is little guidance in the literature as to

292

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

what methods are to be used for measuring the sustainability and economic
viability of a production system. In this paper, a model for measuring
economic viability and agricultural sustainability is developed. The approach is based on the concept of total factor productivity and the growth
accounting procedure which accounts for the unpriced contribution on
natural resource stock and flows. To measure 'economic viability' and
'sustainability', we advocate the interspatial and intertemporal TFP measures of Denny and Fuss (1983).
Interspatial TFP measures the economic viability of one system relative
to another at a given period (e.g. crop season), and it is technically defined
as the logarithm difference in the indices of the value of outputs of the two
production systems minus the logarithm difference in the indices of the
value of their inputs, including both conventional inputs and outputs and
the unpriced contribution of natural resource stock and flows. Thus, system
X is said to be economically more viable than system Y if, after fully
accounting for spatial differences in inputs as well as natural resource stocks
and flow, X produces more output than Y.
Similarly, intertemporal TFP, which measures the sustainability of a
given farming system, is defined as the rate of change of an index of
outputs divided by an index of inputs, including both conventional inputs
and outputs and the unpriced contribution of natural resource stock and
flows. A production system will be said to be sustainable over time, if after
fully accounting for temporal differences in factor inputs and natural resource
stocks and flows, it produces, at least the same amount of output as
previously. Intertemporal and interspatial TFP measures can be computed
using the growth accounting method and economic index numbers, thus
eliminating the need for econometric estimations.
In order to account for the unpriced contribution of resource stock and
flows, a generalized model for measurement of TFP was developed. The
resource stock was specified as a technological constraint rather than as a
conventional input as in the neoclassical sense. In addition, the contribution of crop outputs and resource flows (both addition and depletion) were
separately accounted for. We show that TFP is measured as the residual
growth after the rate of growth of output has been allocated among
changes in inputs, resource abundance and flows. We show in particular
that when resource stock and flows are utilized (as is always the case in
agriculture) productivity measures using conventional approaches are biased unless changes in resource abundance levels and flows are accounted
for.
Using a data set available at the International Institute of Tropical
Agriculture, the intertemporal and interspatial total factor productivity
indices for four cropping systems in south-western Nigeria were computed.

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

293

Results showed that the sustainability and economic viability measures are
sensitive to changes in the stock and flows of soil nutrients as well as to
changes in material input uses and outputs. Where the contribution of
natural resource stock and flows are important, such as in the case of
alley-cropping system, the measures provide markedly different results
from conventional TFP approaches.
The example used in this study illustrates the effect of changes in soil
nutrient status. However, the relevant time frame for sustainability measurement must be longer than the two years used in this study. The
appropriate time frame must be determined by experimentation and depends on the attributes of the system being evaluated. It is a strength of the
generalized TFP measures proposed here that they can handle short-term
as well as long-term changes on natural resource stocks.
Furthermore, only changes in soil nutrient status have been considered.
However, other environmental factors e.g. soil compaction, pest infestation,
water quality, erosion etc. can also be evaluated. To incorporate these
factors in the sustainability measures requires that the relationship between their stocks and flows and the yield of crops or livestock be
determined. With these relationships, prices can be inputed to the inputs
and outputs and the necessary intertemporal and interspatial TFP computed. The challenge facing researchers is to establish the coefficients for
the biological, physical and chemical processes that affect the long-term
performance of agricultural systems and to determine the necessary minimum data set for monitoring these changes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors wish to thank D. Squires, B.T. Kang, J. Pleysier, and S.
Hauser for their invaluable technical contributions to the paper. They are
also grateful to R. Lal and B. Ghuman for the data used in the empirical
example. Tom Hertel, Phil Abbott, A-M. Izac, J. Smith, R. Polson and K.
Dvorak and two anonymous reviewers have helped improve the exposition
of this paper considerably.
APPENDIX

Constant returns to scale assumption implies that:

[a

Ln G ;a Ln Y] +

[a Ln G ;a Ln

Z]

=

1

(Al)

Using result of the first order conditions of (1), (Al) can be re-expressed
as:

PY+PZ=G=C
y
z

(A2)

294

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

Totally differentiating the log of total cost C with respect to

t

yields:

c = [ac;at + Gy(dYjdt) + G (dZ/dt)
2

+ 7Gwj(dUjjdt) + GB(dBjdt)];c

(A3)

The divisia index of productivity is obtained by deriving
total cost, C = Lj UJXj, i.e.

C=

[

C directly from

7UJXlif + 7UJXjXj ];c

(A4)

Equating (A3) and (A4) and solving for - [aG ;at ]/C gives (after rearranging):

-[ac;at]/C= [GyY/C]Y+ [GzZ/C]Z- E(UJXj/C)Xj+ [GBBIC]B
j

(AS)
Using the first order conditions result of (1), (AS) can be reexpressed as:

-a Ln c;at= [PyY/C]Y+ [PzZ/C]i- E(UJXjjC)Xj-B

(A6)

j

where for the open access situation, CB = GB and GiB/C) = 1 for a
Schaefer type of technology (see Squires, 1991).
In the case that changes in resource abundance levels are negative,
constant returns to scale assumption implies that:

(A7)
Following the same procedure as above, the Divisia index of total factor
productivity is given by:

-a Ln c;at = [ PyY/C]Y- [PzZ!C]i-

E (UJXjC)Xj- B

(AS)

j

REFERENCES
Anonymous, 1989. Decision reached on sustainable agriculture. Agronomy News, January,
p. 15.
Barbier, E., Markandya, A. and Pearce, D., 1990. Sustainable agricultural development and
project appraisal. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ., 17: 181-196.
BIFAD (Board for International Food and Agricultural Development), 1988. Environment
and natural resources: Strategies for sustainable agriculture. Task force report, U.S.
Agency for International Development, Washington, DC.
Capalbo, S.M. and Antle, J.M., (Editors), 1988. Agricultural Productivity Measurement and
Explanation. Resource for the Future, Washington, DC.

SUSTAINABILITY AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF TROPICAL FARMING SYSTEMS

295

CGIAR (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research), 1989a. Sustainability
research in the CGIAR- its status and future. Doc. MT /85-114. Agenda Item 5, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
CGIAR (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, 1989b. Sustainable
agricultural production: implications for international agricultural research. FAO Res.
Techno!. Paper 4, Rome.
CGIAR (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research), 1991. CGIAR Annu.
Rep. 1990, CGIAR Secretariat, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ciriacy-Wantrup, S.V., 1968. Resource Conservations Economics and Policies, 3rd edition
(1952, 1st edition). Division of Agricultural Sciences, University of California, Berkeley,
CA.
Conway, G.R., 1985. Agroecosystem analysis. Agric. Admin., 20: 31-55.
Denny, M. and Fuss, M., 1983. A general approach for intertemporal and interspatial
productivity comparisons. J. Econometrics, 23: 315-330.
Diewert, W.E., 1976. Exact and superlative index numbers. J. Econometrics, 4: 115-145.
Dumanski, J., 1987. Evaluating the sustainability of agricultural systems In: Africaland Land Development and Management of Acid soils in Africa, II. IBSRAM Proc. 7,
International Board for Soil Research and Management, Bangkok, Thailand.
Ehui, S.K. and Hertel, T.W., 1989. Deforestation and agricultural productivity in the Cote
d'Ivoire. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 71: 703-711.
Ehui, S.K. and Hertel, T.W., 1992. Testing the impact of deforestation on aggregate
agricultural productivity. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ., 38: 205-218.
Ehui, S.K., Hertel, T.W. and Preckel, P.V., 1990. Forest resource depletion, soil dynamics
and agricultural productivity in the tropics. J. Environ. Econ. Manage., 18: 136-154.
El-Ashry, M.T. and Ram, B., 1987. Sustaining Africa's natural resources. J. Soil Water
Conserv., 42: 224-227.
IBRD (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development), 1989. Sub-Saharan Africa:
from crisis to sustainable growth, a long-term perspective study. World Bank, Washington, DC.
IITA (International Institute of Tropical Agriculture), 1989. IITA Annu. Rep. 1988/89,
Ibadan, Nigeria.
Kang, B.T., Van der Kruijs, A.C.B.M. and Couper, D.C., 1989. Alley cropping for food
production in the humid and subhumid tropics. In: B.T. Kang and L. Reynolds (Editors),
Alley Farming in the Humid and Subhumid Tropics. Proc. International Workshop,
10-14 March 1986, IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria. IDRC, Ottawa, Ont., Canada.
La!, R., 1987. Managing the soils of sub-Saharan Africa, Science, 236: 1069-1076.
La!, R. and Ghuman, B.S., 1989. Effects of deforestation and land use on soil, hydrology,
microclimate and productivity in the humid tropics. Final report (January 1984-June
1989) of a Joint IITAjUNU /Ohio State University Project on Climatic, Biotic and
Human interactions in the Humid Tropics. IITA, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Lynam, J.K., and Herdt, R.W., 1989. Sense and sustainability: sustainability as an objective
in international agricultural research. Agric. Econ., 3: 381-398.
Matlon, P.J. and Spencer, D.S.C., 1984. Increasing food production in sub-Saharan Africa:
environmental problems and inadequate problems and inadequate technological solutions. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 66: 671-676.
Ohta, N., 1974. A note on the duality between production and cost functions: rate of return
to scale and rate of technical progress. Econ. Stud. Q., 25: 63-65.
Pearce, D., Barbier, E. and Markandya, A., 1990. Sustainable Development. Elgar, Aldershot, UK.

296

S.K. EHUI AND D.S.C. SPENCER

Sanchez, P.A., 1976. Properties and Management of Soil in the Tropics. Wiley, New York.
Squires, D.E., 1991. Productivity measurement in common property resource industries: an
application to the pacific coast trawal fisheries. National Marine Fisheries Service,
Southwest Fisheries Service Center, La Jolla, CA.
Young, A., 1989. Agroforestry for soil conservation. International Council for Research in a
Groforestry, CAB International, Wallingford, Oxon, UK.

