Agricultural Economics, 4 (1990) 117-143
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam - Printed in The Netherlands

117

Building African Scientific Capacity for
Agricultural Development
Carl K. Eicher
Department of Agricultural Economics, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Ml 48824-1039 (U.S.A.)
(Accepted 16 May 1989)

Abstract
Eicher, C.K., 1990. Building African scientific capacity for agricultural development. Agric. Econ.,
4: 117-143.
During Africa's first two decades of independence from 1960 to 1980, priority was given to increasing the size of national extension services because it was assumed that technology could be
imported from industrial countries and the International Agricultural Research Centers. Over the
past decade, donors have turned their attention to assisting national agricultural research
systems (NARS). But many NARS are performing poorly and are faced with a high turnover of
scientific staff and inadequate operating budgets. Moreover, the present donor-financed project by
project and country by country approach to building African scientific capacity is seriously flawed.
This paper examines Africa's agricultural research history over the past six decades and draws
lessons for strengthening national and regional agricultural research systems over the coming 30
years.

"The true measure of the success of a program of international and technical collaboration is not in its accomplishments during the period it is in force but rather in
what happens after foreign aid has been withdrawn."
-George HARRAR, 1967, p. 20.

Introduction
The biggest challenge facing the international agricultural research community in the 1990s is sub-Saharan Africa, a continent of 45 diverse economies
and 500 million people. The development of improved technology through
agricultural research is central in addressing Africa's dual problems of lagging food production and rural poverty. From independence in 1960-1980,
donors assisted in expanding national extension services in Africa because it
was assumed that improved technology could be borrowed from industrial
countries and international agricultural research centers. Starting around

0169-5150/90/$03.50

© 1990 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.

118

1980, donors offered short-term project support to strengthen national
agricultural research systems (NARS) in Africa. But Africa has one-fifth the
number of R&D scientists and engineers per million people as Asia. Moreover,
about one-fourth of the total number of agricultural researchers in NARS and
academic staff in Faculties of Agriculture in Africa are expatriate. In short,
after three decades of independence, Africa has a low level of scientific capacity.
This paper presents some thoughts on building African scientific capacity
and strengthening national and regional agricultural research systems
(NARS) in sub-Saharan Africa (Africa) over the next 30 years. The thesis of
this paper is that since many African countries are generations behind Asian
and Latin American countries in terms of their stage of scientific capability
and institutional maturity, the short-term project approach currently used by
donors to build African scientific capacity should be replaced by long-term
institution-building approaches that were effective in Asia in the 1960s and
1970s. But because of Africa's cultural and institutional diversity, no single
model of institution-building should be imposed on Africa. Moreover, because
of the differential stage of development among African countries, institutionbuilding approaches that are effective in middle-income countries such as Zimbabwe and the Cameroon, will have to be modified for countries at an earlier
stage of development, such as Guinea, Chad, Burundi, Somalia and Uganda.
The performance and sustainability of NARS will be examined over two 30year periods: the colonial period from 1930 to 1959 and post-independence from
1960 to 1989. This historical assessment raises some longer-term issues to
ponder in strengthening NARS over the coming 30 years, 1990-2020. Finally,
some of the implications are explored for African states, and donors.

African development context
In 1957, Ghana, formerly the Gold Coast, attained its independence amid an
outpouring of joy and high expectations. Three years later, 17 additional countries won their independence, thus explaining why 1960 is often referred to as
the date of Africa's independence. Today, 45 countries totaling around 500
million people make up sub-Saharan Africa. But despite the euphoria accompanying independence in the late 1950s and early 1960s, there has been a fundamental mismatch between the enormous physical production potential of
Africa and the capacity of African governments to achieve their economic
aspirations. Africa's poverty is captured in a single statistic: the total GNP of
the 45 countries in sub-Saharan Africa in 1985 was slightly less than the total
GNP of Spain, a nation of 40 million (World Bank, 1987a).
African states are generally small in terms of population. Half of the 45
countries have fewer than 5 million people, pointing up the need to examine

119

how NARS in these countries can pursue what Emil JAVIER calls "intelligent
borrowing" as the primary strategy for acquiring new technology. Intelligent
and systematic borrowing of technology is the hallmark of the dynamic
economic growth of Japan, Singapore, South Korea and other countries, including The Netherlands, where currently about half of the technology used
by farmers is imported. Nevertheless, there is a view in some scientific circles
in Africa that borrowing is an inferior technological path.
The stage of institutional development of African states relative to Asia and
Latin America is a sensitive topic that was shunned in the early years of
Africa's independence in the 1960s and 1970s and is slowly starting to be
discussed openly. For example, the respected Africanist, Colin Legum, recently observed that as colonial powers withdrew from the continent in 1960, they
"left behind them a series of national states, but very few nation-states. The
level of development of the continent's nation-state was still roughly
equivalent to that of Europe or China in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
- and certainly no later than the seventeenth century" (Legum, 1985, p. 24).
The early stage of Africa's development is limiting the amount offoreign aid
that can be currently absorbed with integrity. Most donors are ignoring the
differing stage of institutional maturity of individual Mrican states as they
prepare standard 5-7-year projects to strengthen NARS and national extension services. Moreover, these short-term projects are invariably 'front-loaded'
with quick-disbursing activities such as buildings, vehicles, and equipment.
A few studies are starting to document the scientific and institutional gap
between Africa, and Latin America and Asia (Lele and Goldsmith, 1989). For
example, Shapiro (1985) has shown that Africa has about one-fourth the
number of scientists, engineers and managers per million people as Asia. Twothirds of the villages in India were electrified in 1987 as compared with a small
fraction in most African countries. Sri Lanka and Sierra Leone both had percapita incomes of $330 in 1983, but the life expectancy was 69 years in Sri
Lanka as compared with 38 years in Sierra Leone (Behrman et al., 1988).
There are written records of farmer irrigation associations in Thailand dating
back 600 years (Surareks, 1986). By contrast, farmer irrigation associations
are in their infancy in Africa because only 3-5% of the cropped land is under
cultivation as compared with 30-50% in Asia. A recent study of 25 World
Bank-financed agricultural development projects in East Asia, Latin America
and Africa points to substantial differences in the sustainability of
agricultural projects by continent. The study reveals that all of the ten projects
in Latin America and Asia were considered economically sustainable, compared with only two of the 15 projects in Africa (Cernea, 1987, p. 4). These findings suggest that donor-financed agricultural projects, including support to
NARS in Africa, should be designed differently than those in Asia and Latin
America. But, Africa's scientific and institutional gap should be expected

120

because it is partially the inexorable outcome of a century of colonial
underinvestment in developing Africa's scientific and managerial capacity.
Also, it should be kept in mind that most African countries have been independent for barely 30 years relative to 150 years in Latin America.

Institutions, sustainability and African development
In this paper, I have used a broad definition of institutions to include institutions and organizations and the rules and conventions that govern them. Over
the past two decades, there has been a lack of hard analytical and empirical
research on the economics, financing and sustainability of strategic national
agricultural institutions, such as NARS and extension services. For example,
to date there is not a single published study of the economics of investment in
agricultural research for any NARS in sub-Saharan Africa. As a result,
feasibility teams are forced to use rate of return estimates from studies in Asia
and Latin America to justify donor investments in commodity research, FSR
projects ~nd NARS in Mrica. But this should not come as a surprise. The late
Gunnar Myrdal reports that when he was carrying out research for Asian
Drama in the 1960s, the most difficult issue was learning how "to deal with
the political issues of changing institutions, which were then, as now, avoided
by most ordinary economists in their writings on development" (Myrdal, 1984,
p. 154).
Nevertheless, the study of institutions is growing in popularity among
economists. In a 20-year investigation of the economic development process in
23 countries over the 1850-1914 period, two scholars recently concluded that
"institutions mattered most in distinguishing between country groups experiencing more successful and less successful economic development" (Morris
and Adelman, 1988, p. 209). The authors concluded that "diversity in growth,
diversity in institutions and diversity in applicable theories were the
hallmarks of the process of nineteenth century development." Glenn L.
Johnson contends that "institutional limitations are presently the most
serious constraining factor" on agriculture in the developed, newly industrialized and developing countries (Johnson, 1989, p. 177).
Sustainability came of age with the publication of Our Common Future, commonly known as the Brundtland report (World Commission on Environment
and Development, 1987). But to date, there has been little debate on the determinants of sustainable agricultural institutions in Mrica. A sustainable
NARS must meet three basic requirements. First, a sustainable NARS must
be able to meet a performance test: the ability to plan and implement national
research programs and develop improved technology in an efficient manner.
Second, a sustainable NARS must have the capacity to change and adapt in
order to meet the evolving research needs of its clients and stakeholders over

121

time. Third, a sustainable NARS must institutionalize the capacity to
generate domestic financial support and develop a stable cadre of national
scientists to carry out its research mission in line with evolving priorities.
The hard core knowledge base on how to strengthen institutions such as
NARS, extension services and faculties of agriculture in Africa is woefully inadequate. Research is urgently needed on the causes of the widespread failure
of parastatals and the poor performance of national research and extension
services (Eicher, 1982; Lipton, 1988). But research should also examine why
some agricultural institutions are strikingly effective such as the Kenya Tea
Development Authority that serves 150 000 smallholders, the Zimbabwe
Smallholder Cotton Marketing Board, the Botswana Meat Commission, West
Cameroon Coffee Cooperative Union, and the Mali Sud Cotton Project that
serves 70 000 smallholders. These success stories should be carefully studied
to draw lessons for institution building in the 1990s.
Three decades of independence have produced a large knowledge base on
why many foreign aid-financed agricultural and rural development projects
are not performing well at this early stage of Africa's economic history and institutional fragility (Cernea, 1987; World Bank, 1987b, 1988d; Eicher, 1989).
There is consistent evidence that human capability and institutional barriers
to development have been skirted in the drive to increase foreign aid flows to
African agriculture - especially during the rapid build-up of aid for direct action projects over the 1973-83 period. Starting around 1983, the foreign aid
pendulum swung from project to policy-based lending. But regardless of
whether the focus was on project or policies, the end result has been the same:
the long-run human capability, scientific and institutional and social organizational issues - the prime movers of agricultural development - are being
seriously neglected by both African policy makers and donors. There is a need
for a fundamental reexamination of the assumptions about Africa's stage of
economic history, the differential levels of development of various African
states, absorptive capacity, recurrent costs and strategies for building African
capacity in research, extension, and training.
The longer one works in Africa, the more one is forced to conclude that a
human capability/institution building model of development should replace
the long term technical assistance and overseas training model. The shortcomings of the technical assistance model are painfully apparent in Somalia. A recent joint UNDP/IBRD technical mission dug deeply into the mode of delivering foreign aid to Somalia, a country riven with clan wars and a century or
two behind most Asian countries in terms of its level of scientific, institutional,
and administrative maturity. The mission reported that donors were collectively pumping US$100 million into Somalia each year to support 1200 expatriates on technical assistance contracts to various government agencies

122

and ove\seas training for Somali nationals (UNDP and IBRD, 1985).1 Nevertheless, this revolving door model of foreign advisors and overseas training is
not achieving the ultimate objective, "the development of national capacity
through the permanent transfer of skills and know-how to Somali nationals
and national institutions" (UNDP and IBRD, 1985, p. 2). Without question,
the model is not addressing the long-term problem of developing sustainable
Somali institutions.
We shall now examine Africa's colonial agricultural research history from
1930 to the eve of independence in 1959.

Agricultural research during the colonial period: 1930- 1959
National agricultural research services

A skeletal agricultural research infrastructure was established in most
countries in Africa during the first two to three decades of this century. 2 A
few countries such as the Sudan launched research programs immediately
following World War I (Idris, 1969). By 1930, small groups of researchers were
at work on export commodities, but food crop research included sorghum in
Uganda, maize in Zimbabwe and Kenya, rice and cassava in Zaire, and rice
in anglophone and francophone West Africa. In most countries, a few scientists
worked on specific crops in a loose organization which was more modest than
present-day national agricultural research systems. The exception was the
massive Belgian research operation in Zaire (formerly the Belgian Congo).
The creativity and productivity of NARS during the colonial period can be
illustrated through historical sketches of research in Zaire, Zimbabwe and
Kenya over the 1930-59 period. In Zaire, about two-thirds of the budget ofthe
Belgian-financed national agricultural research service (INEAC) was focused
on export crops and one-third on food crops. 3 Research on oil palm was launched in 1933 with the goal of developing a high-yielding palm to replace the tall,
low-yielding wild palm that grew in the bush in West and Central Africa. In
1939, after only 6 years of research at the INEAC station at Yangambi in northern Zaire, a team of five colonial researchers unlocked the genetics of the oil
palm that led to the development of hybrid varieties that out-yielded wild

1 About US$90 million was spent on the 1200 long-term advisors and about $10
million on overseas training in 1985.
2 Colonial research in anglophone countries is chronicled by Jeffries (1964), McKelvey
(1965) and Masefield (1972).
3 Professor Eric Tollens, Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium is carrying out a
study of the return to Belgian investment in research on eight commodities in Zaire
from 1933 to 1959.

123

palms by several hundred percent under farm conditions (Beirnaert, 1940;
Tollens, personal communication, 23 July 1988). The oil palm research at INEAC had large regional and international spillover effects which laid the foundation for the modern oil palm industry in Cote d'Ivoire (formerly the Ivory
Coast), 4 Nigeria (Eicher, 1967), Malaysia (Hartley, 1970), and Indonesia.
Research "spillovers" refer to the benefits from research which accrue to
farmers and consumers in countries that import technology without paying for
the cost of its development.
INEAC's rice research also demonstrates the regional spillover effects of a
technology-producing national agricultural research system (TP/NARS). In
1958, INEAC released an upland rice variety, O.S.6, after 6 years of breeding.
Although O.S.6 is not grown in Zaire, it remains one of the dominant upland
rice varieties in West Africa 30 years after its release. O.S.6. is grown under
different local names in West Africa and it accounts for about 90% of the
upland rice currently grown in Nigeria. In summary, the INEAC research program in Zaire illustrates the vast potential of national research services in
Africa to produce new food and export crop technology for local needs as well
as the needs of surrounding technology borrowing (TB) NARS.
The NARS of Zimbabwe is the second example of the creativity of a national
research system in Africa. Hybrid maize development in Zimbabwe from 1932
to 1960 represents a textbook example of a NARS in Africa producing new
technology without relying on imported germplasm. In 1932, H.C. Arnold
launched a maize improvement program in Zimbabwe (then Southern
Rhodesia) followed by A.G.R. Rattray in 1938. In 1949, 17 years after research
was initiated, the first hybrid, SR-1, was developed by crossing two locally bred
open-pollinated varieties, Southern Cross and Salisbury White. But SR-1 was
not released to farmers because yields were low and research continued from
1949 to 1960 in a search for higher-yielding hybrids. In 1960, SR-52 (Southern
Rhodesia-52), a single-cross hybrid, was released to commercial farmers after
28 years of research on hybrids (1932-1960). Looking back over the past six
decades of research on food crops in Africa, the SR-52 white maize hybrid is
undoubtedly the Green Revolution food crop success story in Africa (Eicher,
1984). Although the size of the maize research program in Zimbabwe has been
small (two to four researchers), the program is known for its continuity, its
scientific and administrative leadership and its productivity. 5 Zimbabwe's exIn 1947, the French established the Institut de recherche pour les huiles et
oleangineaux (IRHO) to carry out research on oil palm. Cooperation between INEAC
and IRHO scientists played a critical role in developing the modern oil palm industry
in Cote d'Ivoire (Drachoussoff, 1965).
5 A.G. Rattray served as director of maize research from 1938 to 1968. Zimbabwe's
maize research program has been directed by four scientists over the past six decades
(1932 -1989).
4

124

perience also illustrates the extensive spillover effects of a technology producing NARS (TP/NARS). SR-52 maize seed has been sold as far north as Ethiopia,
as far west as the Cameroon, and as far south as the Republic of South Africa.
In Kenya's national agricultural research system, it took Michael Harrison
and his maize team only 9 years (1955-1964) to develop a high-yielding hybrid
maize variety by crossing a local variety with a variety imported from
Ecuador. Kenya's experience illustrates the potential of importing germplasm
and underscores the need for N ARS in Africa to develop the high level of
technical capacity required to pursue a strategy of "intelligent borrowing" of
technology from neighboring countries and the global system.
Regional research institutes

Regional research institutions were introduced during the colonial period to
deal with the small country problem and stimulate the production of export
commodities for European markets (Kyomo, 1988). In 1930, Ghana was the
world's largest cocoa producer, but the industry was plagued by insect and
disease problems. To deal with these problems, in 1938 the British colonial service established a Cocoa Research Institute at Tafo to serve Ghana. The Institute carried out highly successful studies of controlling several cocoa
diseases, including swollen shoot virus, capsid and black pod. Spraying programs based on these research findings were instrumental in boosting
Ghana's cocoa production to a peak output of 520 000 metric tonnes in 1965
(Martinson et al., 1987).
In 1944, the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana was renamed the West
African Cocoa Research Institute (W ACRI) and given a mandate to serve the
British colonies of Ghana and Nigeria. The WACRI staff in 1944 was composed
of 15 British scientists. W ACRI had a productive life span of 18 years but in
1962, 5 years after independence, the government of Ghana dissolved W ACRI
and set up the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG). In the shift from a
regional to a national mandate, twelve expatriate staff resigned, leaving seven
local professional staff and 25 vacancies at (CRIG). The number of Ghanaian
scientific staff increased slowly to eleven (of 17 total) in 1970 and to 25 by 1985.
The mandate of CRIG was expanded in 1975 to include coffee, kola, and shea
nuts.
But the Cocoa Research Institute of Chana (CRIG) has been buffeted by
changing government decisions on its administrative home. For example,
CRIG has been administered by the following six organizations from 1962 to
1989:
National Research Council
Ghana Academy of Sciences,
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)

125

- Ministry of Cocoa Affairs
- Ghana Cocoa Marketing Board, and
- Ghana Cocoa Board.
CGIG has been reshuffied on the average of once every 4.5 years. No scientific
organization can flourish in an environment of such organizational turmoil.
We now turn to oil palm research in West Africa. Nigeria was the world's
leading producer of oil palm during the colonial period and in 1939, the British
colonial government established the Nigerian Oil Palm Research Station in
Benin in order to meet the growing challenge of oil palm production on plantations in the Far East. In 1951, the British converted Nigeria's oil palm station
into the West African Institute for Oil Palm Research (WAIFOR), with a mandate to serve the British West African territories of Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra
Leone and the Cameroon. In the 1950s, WAIFOR was a highly productive
regional research organization with a scientific staff of 16 senior officers
(WAIFOR, 1955-56).
Soon after Nigeria became independent in 1960, the new government decided to nationalize WAIFOR and rename it the Nigerian Institute for Oil Palm
Research (NIFOR). During the 1962-64 transition period, ten of the 15
research officers left the Institute. When NIFOR was formally established in
1964, it had a staff of ten senior officers and the number increased slowly to
15 in 1970. Nigeria's oil boom of the 1970s provided funding for a quantum
jump in NIFOR's staff from 15 senior officers in 1970-71 to 283 in 1985
(NIFOR, 1965-66, 1970-71, 1985).
But today, NIFOR is not performing well. Most of NIFOR's budget is used
to pay the salaries of its vast administrative, scientific and support staff. Only
about 1/3 of its 283 senior staff are directly engaged in research while the other
2/3 are in administration, support services, social services and revenue
generating activities. NIFOR's research mandate has been broadened beyond
oil palm to include date palm, raphia, coconut and other palms. But in 1985,
only 48 scientists were working on the key crop - oil palm - while 64 out of
the 283 senior officers were administering the Institute. NIFOR is also starved
for foreign exchange to purchase equipment and supplies. In summary, NIFOR
is top heavy with administrative staff and it has a mandate resembling a
government development corporation. Many specialists believe that oil palm
research in Nigeria is less productive today with 283 senior officers than when
it had 15 from 1955 to 1970.
The stagnation of cocoa and oil palm research in Ghana and Nigeria stands
in sharp contrast to the experience of Malaysia and Indonesia. In 1925,
Malaysia established the Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia (RRIM) and
concentrated its national research effort on rubber for four decades. Malaysia
became independent in 1957, the same year as Ghana, but Malaysia chose the
agricultural road to development while, under Nkrumah, Ghana opted for the

126

industrial path. In the late 1960s, Malaysia embarked on a massive
agricultural diversification program away from rubber by establishing the
Malaysian Agricultural Research and Development Institute (MARDI) in
1971. Malaysia drew on Zaire's pioneering research on hybrid palms (Beirnaert, 1940) and over time developed hybrids suitable for Malaysian conditions. In 1978, oil palm research was spun off from MARDI into a new institute, the Palm Oil Research Institute of Malaysia (PORIM, 1985). Malaysia
is also planning to spin off cocoa research from MARDI and set up a separate
cocoa research institute with the goal of around 100 scientists and technicians.
Malaysia increased its agricultural research staff from 100 officers at independence in 1957 to 1000 today. Malaysia's highly productive research
system has helped diversify its export base, and Malaysia is now routinely selling palm oil to Nigeria. Ghana's per-capita GDP of $390 in 1986 stands in
sharp contrast to $1830 in Malaysia.
Nigeria and Ghana have dissipated their research base for oil palm and
cocoa and lost world market shares to Malaysia and Indonesia. Restoring the
competitive position of oil palm and cocoa research will require more than increased financial assistance from donors. Many basic political, managerial and
scientific problems are plaguing export crop research in West Africa. These
problems must be addressed by Africans at both the political and scientific
levels.
But in francophone Africa several regional research programs are still performing well. One of the most successful is the CFDT/ffiCT network that supports cotton production and marketing in ten countries in francophone
Africa.6 Cotton research is carried out by a cadre of about 100 IRCT researchers in France and in francophone Africa. 7 In nine of the ten francophone
countries where data are available, average cotton yields increased four-fold
over the 20-year period, 1963-1982 (Dequecker, 1983). The CFDT is a private
cotton management and extension organization with four decades of experience in Africa. The World Bank recently evaluated the CFDTIIRCT model
in Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, and Togo- and concluded that it is a "striking
success" when compared with other agricultural development projects in
Africa (World Bank, 1988b, p. 29). Lele et al. (1989) reports that phasing out
regional cotton research and extension programs in anglophone Mrica in the
1970s is partially responsible for the slow growth in cotton production m
anglophone relative to francophone Africa over the past 15 years.

6

Institut de Recherches de Coton et des Textiles Exotiques (IRCT). Compagnie Francaise pour le developpement de fibres textiles (CFDT).
7 In 1986, the IRCT network of 105 scientists was composed of the following: 26 researchers in France, and 40 expatriates and 39 national cotton researchers in the ten main
Francophone cotton growing countries in Africa.

127

Five lessons from the colonial research experience
Colonial research included many failures such as the inability to achieve
breakthroughs in sorghum and millet after six decades of research,
underinvestment in training African scientists and the pursuit of inappropriate research strategies in many land abundant countries (Carr, 1982;
Binswanger, 1986). But despite these shortcomings, there were some stunning
successes in organizing, financing and executing colonial research that have
relevance for contemporary agricultural research policy in Africa:

1. Small commodity research teams. In most cases, three to four scientists,
and in a few cases, no more than half a dozen scientists, formed the commodity
teams ofTP/NARS that produced hybrid maize in Zimbabwe and Kenya, rustresistant wheat in Kenya, improved tea clones in East Africa, cotton in U ganda, and improved soybean and cotton varieties in Zimbabwe.
2. Creativity of technology producing NARS (TPINARS). During the colonial
period, numerous countries demonstrated the creativity of national
agricultural research systems in producing new technology. 8
3. Borrowing technology. Borrowing technology is a proven colonial research
strategy. The tea industry in Eastern Africa drew heavily on imported clones
from Sri Lanka and India. Zimbabwe's SR52 maize seed was borrowed by a
dozen African countries.
4. Research spillovers: Regional, Pan African, and international. Research
spillovers from TP/NARS and regional institutes are illustrated by hybrid oil
palm, hybrid maize, cotton and other commodities. For example, Cote d'Ivoire,
Nigeria, Malaysia, and Indonesia borrowed the basic breeding strategy for
hybrid oil palm from Zaire and used it to develop hybrids for local conditions.
The spillover issue should be explicitly incorporated in feasibility studies to
strengthen NARS in the 1990s. 9
5. Regional research: Efficient but dependent upon external financing. Regional research was pursued to serve the large number of small colonies. It was highly efficient because of its concentration on a few commodities,
assured overseas funding, and its continuity of administrative and scientific
leadership. Examples of successful regional research include the East African
8
9

For a summary of 48 years of cocoa research in Ghana, see (Martinson et al., 1987).
Most feasibility studies ofNARS devote little attention to research spillovers and the
interaction of NARS in a subregion. For example, see Mali (1988) and Niger (1988).

128

Agricultural and Forestry Research Organization (EAAFRO), the Federation
of Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) and
Nyasaland (now Malawi), and the West African commodity research institutes
(cocoa, oil palm, rubber, rice).

Agricultural research since independence: 1960- 1989
The collective experience ofNARS in the first three decades of independence
can be analyzed under five topics:

Political turmoil, destruction of institutions, and the brain drain. At independence, the institutional base of African agriculture was geared to
supporting large farms, plantations, ranches and export agriculture. The
1960s and 1970s were marked by the destruction of many of the inherited
regional and national research institutions. Soon after independence, for example, Guinea and Madagascar terminated the services of French research
assistance. 'ln 1962, Nkrumah abolished Ghana's national extension service.
Tanzania abolished local government and farm cooperatives in the mid-1970s.
Numerous training institutions, such as Makerere University in Uganda,
were devastated during internal political upheavals.
The localization and basic restructuring of agrarian institutions to serve the
majority of rural people is now underway throughout Africa. Anglophone
countries such as Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, and Tanzania have achieved
substantially greater progress in the nationalization of their NARS and
Faculties of Agriculture than francophone countries. For example, after 29
years of independence, Cote d'Ivoire has 73% of its agricultural research and
teaching posts filled by expatriates as compared with 6% in Ghana and none
in Nigeria (Pardey and Roseboom, 1989). This is a puzzle that warrants further
analysis and debate at the political and technical levels.
Without question, one of the underreported events limiting African
agriculture today is the agricultural brain drain that has been fueled by coups,
civil wars and political unrest. For example, Ghana, Ethiopia, Uganda,
Somalia, Tanzania, and Zambia have been stripped of agricultural scientists
and teachers through the brain drain.
Unbridled growth ofthe state bureaucracy. Thirty years of independence have
been marked by an increase in the state machinery serving agriculture:
Sub-Saharan Africa started independence in 1960 with a profound extension bias of 21 200 extension agents and 1329 researchers. This bias was intensified as African states hired an additional 36 000 extension agents over
the next 20 years (Judd et al., 1987, pp. 11-13).

129

- The Congo increased the size of its extension staff ten-fold from 1960 to
1972 (Young, 1988, p. 26).
- In Ghana, the Cocoa Marketing Board employed 105 000 in the early 1980s
to handle a crop half as large as that which 50 000 employees had managed
in 1965 (Young, 1988).
In Nigeria, the national agricultural research service expanded from 100
researchers in 1960 to around 1000 today (Pardey and Roseboom, 1989).
In many cases, the expansion of the state institutions has been accompanied
by an erosion in the performance of the institutions, with the bulk of the
budget used to pay salaries (Abernethy, 1987).

The Green Revolution footprint. The Green Revolution has achieved the impact of a small footprint on Africa's rural landscape. Dalrymple (1986a, b)
reports that the total area of modern wheat and rice varieties under cultivation in sub-Saharan Africa in 1983 was about 800 000 ha (wheat 556 000 and
rice 242 000 ha) which is roughly equivalent to one-quarter of the annual cropped area in Zimbabwe, one of the 45 countries in Mrica. Since the Green
Revolution has barely touched Africa, African leaders and the donor community must face up to the reality that the CGIAR and French research networks
have not delivered the volume of new food crop technology that many experts
had implicitly promised when the first CGIAR center IITA, was established in
Ibadan some 20 years ago. Three lessons flow from the limited impact of Green
Revolution in Africa to date. The first is the need to strengthen the capacity
ofNARS to develop new technology and supplement the efforts of the CGIAR,
CIRAD and the global research system. The second is to strengthen the capacity ofNARS to become more efficient borrowers of technology from neighboring
countries and the global research system. The third is the need for the CGIAR
to reexamine its strategy of strengthening the capacity of the NARS of Africa.
Foreign aid buildup for NARS. In the 1960s and 1970s, donors invested
heavily in developing the CGIAR global system, including four IARCs with
their headquarters based in Africa. In 1980, the CG system launched a new
institute, ISNAR, to help strengthen national agricultural research systems.
During the 1980s, donors channeled investments to the NARS of Mrica. The
World Bank took the lead in co-financing a large loan for the NARS of Sudan
in 1979 followed by loans to Senegal, Rwanda, Malawi and other countries in
the early 1980s. The loans by the Bank and other donors to African NARS in
the 1980s are noted for their conservative time frame (typically 5-7 years),
support for a large number of commodities (e.g. 17 in the World Bank Project
for Rwanda), quick disbursing activities such as buildings, equipment and
vehicles, farming systems research (e.g. Senegal, Rwanda and Sudanese proj-

130

ects) and insufficient attention to the crucial issues of human and financial
sustainability (Eicher, 1982b; 1989).
What flows from the record of donor-financed projects for African NARS during the 1980s is the inescapable conclusion that the interrelated issues of the
size, performance and sustainability of NARS are not being addressed by
African policy makers, NARS and donors. Today, most NARS do not have the
institutional, managerial and financial capacity to absorb current levels of
project aid "with integrity" and to sustain the project activities after foreign
aid is phased out. But this problem is not restricted to NARS. In some
subregions such as the Sahel, foreign aid officials are reluctant to discuss the
financing of recurrent (operating) costs of institutions because it is assumed
that donors will be paying some of these costs for the indefinite future perhaps for another generation or longer.l 0
Sustainability: the Achilles heel of NARS and regional institutes. Soon after
independence in the late 1950s and early 1960s, virtually all regional research
institutes in anglophone Africa were phased out with the exception of the Tea
Research Foundation of Central Africa, a private research institute based in
Malawi that was originally set up to serve tea estates in the region. But the
Foundation has received some donor support for several decades (R.T. Ellis,
personal communication, 8 August 1988). In francophone Africa, several impressive regional research networks are still in operation such as the ten country CFDT/IRCT cotton research, extension and international marketing network.
Today, after three decades of independence, many NARS and regional
research systems are performing poorly, and are heavily dependent upon
foreign aid. In fact, Zimbabwe has one of the few NARS in Mrica that is
basically financed from national sources and staffed by local scientists. The
issues surrounding the human and financial sustainability of national and
regional research systems call for in depth research and critical debate in the
1990s.

10 The recurrent cost problem is basically the inability of an African government to
pay for the operating costs of an institution or service such as a NARS (Howell, 1986).
Most feasibility studies of NARS ignore the recurrent cost problem or assume it away
by unrealistic assumptions about the ability of an institution to gain special budget
support from the Ministry of Finance. For example, a recent feasibility study of the
N ARS in Niger, assumed that the Ministry of Finance would increase the real budget
for INRAN, the NARS of Niger, by an average of 7% per annum in the 1990s (Niger,
1988).

131

Scientific capacity building: 1990-2020
Drawing on Africa's research experience over the past 60 years, the following issues emerge for debate on strengthening national and regional
agricultural research systems over the next 30 years:

Geopolitics of science and technology for agricultural development. The central question to be addressed by African states, scientists and the international
community in the 1990s is the following: How can African nations of varying
sizes organize themselves to become more technologically proficient? The present donor-financed project by project and country by country approach to
building African scientific capacity is seriously flawed. The road ahead requires a vision of the evolving role of science and technology in Mrica's rural
transformation over the next 25-50 years. There is an urgent need for the
NARS, the Special Program for African Agricultural Research (SPAAR) and
the major donors to develop a long term geopolitical and coordinated approach
to scientific capacity-building in Africa. But the foundation for this new vision
of the role of science and technology in Africa development must be rooted in
Africa and must flow from Africa's historical, cultural, technical, and political
experience. For example, Professor Thomas Odhiambo of Kenya contends that
African "agricultural research leadership, in concert with the geopolitical
leadership, must create and nurture an environment that encourages research
entrepreneurship and invigorates technological innovation" (Odhiambo, 1988,
p. 48). African scientific capacity-building should also include long-term international financial support for regional research and MSc training institutions
(because of the small country problem) for at least the next 20-30 years.
Payoff to coordinated investments in research, extension and training. Most
studies reporting high rates of returns to investment in agricultural research
in Asia and Latin America and industrial countries are, in fact, joint returns
to investments in research, extension and training. The payoff to a coordinated
set of investments to strengthen the institutional base (research, extension,
and training) for agriculture is captured in a pioneering study of U.S.
agricultural research by Evenson, Waggoner and Ruttan (1979). The authors
found that the highest payoffs to research came from a coordinated set of interactive investments to further the decentralization of research and the promotion of research-extension linkages. The conclusion that flows from this
study is the need to shift the debate from strengthening research to the coordination of investments in research, extension and training (Bonnen, 1987).
The issue for donors to ponder in the 1990s is the following: what national and
regional mechanisms need to be developed to strengthen the coordination of
research, extension and training institutions in support of African
agriculture?

132

Strength in diversity of institutional approaches. Africa's experience since
1960 has illustrated the diversity of institutions, the strength in this diversity
and the need to foster diversity in the future. For example, despite the failure
of regional research systems in anglophone Africa since 1960, the French
directed CFDT/IRCT multi-country cotton model is performing well in francophone Africa. On the other hand, Zimbabwe's vertically integrated cotton
research, production and extension model is thriving without scientific
assistance from an industrial country such as France. The spectre on the
horizon that should be confronted is the World Bank's drive to promote one extension model - T&V -throughout Africa, a model promoted by the World
Bank in 32 of Africa's 45 countries.
Agricultural research investment norms and priorities. How much should
African states spend on agricultural research? Presently, most donors follow
the guideline that a desirable agricultural research investment target would
be in the range of 0.5-2.0% of the total national value of agricultural GDP.
The World Bank has argued that a desirable investment target for research
for many countries would be an annual expenditure (recurrent, plus capital)
"equivalent to about 2 percent of agricultural gross domestic product" (World
Bank, 1981, p. 8). But this norm is derived from industrial countries with a
century or more of experience in mobilizing political and financial support
from farm organizations, commodity groups, private firms and state and
federal organizations. There is little empirical information from Africa on the
pay off to investing 0.5-2.0% of agricultural GDP in research. There is,
however, enough historical and anecdotal evidence to conclude that some of
the recent pronouncements on the level of investment in NARS should be
taken with a grain of salt. For example, Dayanatha Jha recently concluded
that there is "substantial underinvestment" in agricultural research in Africa
because 14 countries were spending less than 0.5% of their agricultural GDP
on research (Jha, 1987, p. 267). But the ready availability of foreign aid in the
1980s has led to an overinvestment in some NARS relative to their current
stage of institutional maturity, absorptive capacity, scientific leadership, projected government revenues, and political support to maintain the NARS after
foreign aid is phased out. For example, it is usually easier for the administrator of a NARS to mobilize an additional million dollars of research
support from donors than from domestic sources. Although Vernon Ruttan
(1987) has repeatedly stressed the need to tie incremental donor funding for
NARS to matching funds from the recipient government, in practice, donors
are reluctant to enforce this common sense approach.
The agricultural research investment norms derived from the experience of
advanced countries, either capitalist or socialist, can be used as rough guides
but not as decision rules for donors and African states. If foreign aid is

133

allocated to NARS in Mrica according to the 1-2% investment norm, it may
inflate the size of the NARS (staff, buildings, and equipment) beyond the
capacity to mobilize domestic political and economic support to sustain it over
time. The question of how much to spend on agricultural research in Africa in
the 1990s should be pursued through empirical research on African NARS.

Size, priorities and performance of NARS. The size of many NARS has increased dramatically since independence in 1960. Four factors help explain the
growth of NARS and why this growth has often been at the expense of the
quality of the research program. First, since independence, as part of the normal expansion of the state bureaucracy, many NARS have increased the
number of scientists, technicians, buildings, equipment, research stations,
research projects, and operating budgets beyond the ability to sustain these activities from national budgets. In many cases, this expansion has outstripped
the capacity oflocal research administrators to restrict the number of research
problems addressed, manage the national research enterprise, pay staff on
time, plant experiments on schedule, and mobilize political and bureaucratic
support from the Ministry of Finance to finance and sustain the system after
foreign aid is phased out. For example, Nigeria's petroleum boom has fueled
the expansion of its NARS from around 100 scientists at independence in 1960
to 1000 in 1989, but the research system is starved for operating funds. Professor Francis Idachaba, Vice Chancellor of the University of Agriculture,
Makurdi recently reported that "Research management probably constitutes
the most important constraint on Nigeria's National Agricultural Research
System" (Idachaba, 1987, p. 351).
Second, many NARS have been under intense political pressure to absorb
new university graduates. In Kenya, for example the NARs has been under
pressure to go beyond the normal practice of hiring agricultural graduates to
accepting some of the burgeoning number of science graduates from the
university system, a system that has grown from one university in 1970 to five
in 1989.
Third, donors have directly and indirectly contributed to the increase in the
size of NARS. For example, donors are currently paying a substantial share
of the recurrent budget of the national agricultural research systems in Mali,
Ghana, Senegal, Niger, Zambia, Rwanda, and many other countries. It is
almost impossible to cite a donor feasibility study that recommends reducing
the size of a N ARS and concentrating on upgrading the quality of the present
research staff and the relevancy of its research program. The fourth factor contributing to the growth of NARS is the lack of institutional mechanisms to
finance regional research institutes. 11 As a result, there is duplication of
research programs in neighboring NARS.
11 For a discussion of federal/state financing of research in the U.S. federal system of
government, see Schweikhardt (1989).

134

These examples illustrate how national scientific, political and bureaucratic
interests have interacted to inflate the size of many NARS and enabled the
directors of NARS to postpone some of the tough decisions on priorities in
terms of the number of scientists, number of research stations and number of
research projects. The ready availability of foreign aid has served an "escape
valve" for local administrators who are often inexperienced and unwilling to
take the hard scientific and financial decisions on size and priorities. In summary, many African countries are making some of the same mistakes that
Asian and Latin American countries made in the 1960s and 1970s when the
emphasis was placed on expanding the size of NARS to the point where there
were many research facilities and researchers "without programs" (Ruttan,
1987, p. 78).
Strategies for scientific capacity building. The preparation of an Mrica-wide
strategy to strengthen African scientific capacity would be a paper exercise
because the continent is too big, complex and hobbled with colonial legacies
to be captured in a single strategy. For example, the political forces and colonial legacies at play in a subregion such as southern Africa are much different
from those in the Sahel. For these reasons, there is an urgent need for African
scientists to take the initiative in preparing a subregional strategy to
strengthen the core national agricultural services - research, training, and
extension - in each of the five major agroecologies: the Sahel, Coastal West
Africa, Central Africa, Northeast Africa and Southern Mrica. Each
subregional strategy should incorporate technology producing CTP) NARS,
technology borrowing (TB) NARS, projected research spillovers, research networks and post graduate training. The pioneering work of SACCAR in
Southern Africa serves as a model for developing an African scientific perspective on subregional research and post graduate training priorities in
agriculture. The need to foster research in African faculties of agriculture is
necessary because local post graduate training must be research-based. If the
cycle of overseas training is to be broken, there is a need for coordinated investments in developing both national and regional capacity in research and
post graduate training.
Restoring the primacy of commodity-based research. During the colonial
period, long-term, highly focused research on a single crop such as cotton,
groundnuts, cocoa, oil palm, or maize, was successful in producing new
technology that was relevant to African conditions. But many NARS and
donors have ignored this experience and have spread their support for research
over a large number of commodities and promoted a diffuse research effort. For
example, until 1985, USAID was supporting research on 28 commodities in
Africa but it subsequently reduced the number to eight (USAID, 1985). A

135

World Bank -financed project in Rwanda endorsed research on 17 commodities.
In Malawi donors supported the national research system in the 1980s but instead of concentrating on maize, the staple food, "donors were mainly concerned with institution building, training and methodology (increased on farm
trials, farming systems research etc.) ... this dominant "process orientation"
allowed, by default, the continuation of a diffuse research effort" (Kydd, 1989,
p. 140). Over the past decade, research networks have been aggressively promoted by donors and farming systems research (FSR) was often given priority
over commodity research. Africa is now saturated with research networks and
FSR is now in decline. African research administrators are seeking to find a
better balance between commodity and farming systems research. The key
issues in the FSR debate are striking the proper balance between the number
of commodity and FSR scientists, budget allocation to commodity research,
FSR and research networks and strengthening the linkages between these activities. A strategic priority in the 1990s is strengthening national commodity
research teams of four to twelve scientists per team to carry out research on
a few priority commodities. In some countries, one commodity team should be
strengthened while in others three to four commodity teams will be required.
Both on-station and on-farm research should be carried out by the commodity
teams. Both are hallmarks of a modern national research system.

Strengthening technology generating NARS. Each subregional strategy to
strengthen agricultural research in the 1990s should start with the premise
that the 45 NARS of Africa should be divided into technology producing (TP)
and technology borrowing (TB)NARS. 12 Eight to ten of the larger TP/NARS
in Africa (one to two per subregion) should receive long term (20 years) coordinated donor assistance to enhance their capacity to produce new technology
to meet national needs and the needs of the surrounding (TB)NARS. In practice, however, most technology producing countries will also borrow
technology. For example, Zimbabwe is a TP/NARS but it carries out no tea
research because it is cheaper to help finance the Tea Research Foundation in
neighboring Malawi and import tea clones from the Foundation.
Improving the capacity to borrow technology. Borrowing technology is a way
of life in Asia but it is viewed as an inferior technological option by some

12 USAID's strategy to strengthen Africa's NARS is based on the implicit assumption
that countries are at different stages of institutional maturity and that foreign assistance must be tailored to the stage of development, the size of a country and to a
nation's absorptive capacity (USAID, 1985). USAID's strategy breaks new ground by
dividing the 45 NARS in Africa into eight to ten technology producing (TP/NARS) and
the balance into technology borrowing N ARS (TB/N ARS).

136
African scientists and politicians. For example, General Obasanjo recently
reported,
"The transfer of technology is an illusion, a catchy phrase conjuring up images of high-level scientific and technical expertise willingly and altruistically handed over in gift-wrapping from the
owner in the developed world to us in Africa and the rest of the Third World" (Obasanjo, 1987,
p. 31).

But for most countries in Africa, especially the 22 countries with less than 5
million people, the most efficient strategy for acquiring new agricultural
technology will be intelligent borrowing from neighboring countries, regional
institutes and the global research system. Borrowing technology requires a
high level of technical competence to borrow, screen, test and adapt technology
to micro environments. A strong case can be made for donors to offer modest
support ($300 000 to $500 000 per year) to a large number ofTB/NARS for the
next 15-20 years to help them enhance their capacity to borrow and adapt
technology.

Human resource sustainability of NARS. Many African states, donors and
members of the university community maintain that more training is needed
to replace expatriates and expand the size of NARS. But this standard
prescription was overtaken by events in many countries in the 1980s as
agricultural graduates at the certificate, diploma and higher levels found it increasingly difficult to find jobs. In addition, many NARS and universities in
Africa are hemorrhaging and losing scientists and teachers as fast as they are
trained. For example, the average loss of NARS research officers with a
university degree is estimated to be about 7% per year (World Bank, 1988c,
p. 18), a rate that would require a NARS to replace its entire cadre of researchers roughly every 14 years. But in some NARS the turnover of scientists is
substantially higher than 7%. In a recent study of the NARS of Senegal, ISRA,
a total of 18.1% of Senegalese scientists left ISRA in 1987 (Wessen, 1989).
Another serious problem is the loss of productive scientists and teachers over
40 years of age. There is an urgent need for a reexamination of the human
resource sustainability of NARS. On the one hand, more training is needed to
replace the expatriates. But on the other hand, unless the incentive structure
is dramatically improved for national scientists and teachers, the agricultural
brain drain will continue. And unless selected universities develop strong
subregional MSc programs, overseas training at the MSc level will continue
indefinitely. Overseas PhD training in most fields of agriculture will be required for another 25-40 years.
Financial sustainability of NARS and regional research systems. The financial sustainability of NARS is a serious problem that is not being addressed
by the administrators ofNARS, donors or social science researchers. Research

137
by social scientists is urgently needed on what drives Mrican NARS to stake
out a national research program (in terms of the number of scientists, research
stations, commodities, problems and geographical coverage) that far exceeds
the national financial capacity to support it. Research is also needed on alternative strategies to finance national and regional research systems. Although
many regional organizations in Africa have failed, regional research institutions are needed to assist the small countries in Africa improve their capacity
to borrow technology from TP/NARS and the global system. SPAAR should
carry out a special study of the establishment of an international foundation
for strengthening Mrican scientific capacity, including the financing of
regional research and MSc training institutions for the coming 20-30 years.
The dual objectives of the regional research organizations would be to generate
new technology and assist the NARS in small countries increase their scientific capacity.

Guidelines for SPAAR and donors: 1990 to 2020
The agricultural research history of Africa over the past 60 years has shown
that building research capacity is an incremental process that extends over a
period of decades. This analysis has documented the creativity of numerous national research services and suggests that Mrican governments and donors
should progressively strengthen the capacity of NARS to enable them to play
the lead role in generating technology in Mrica in the future. The CGIAR,
CIRAD and other international research organizations should continue to
reinforce NARS while, at the same time, moving further upstream to link up
with biotechnology centers throughout the world.
The challenge for donors in the 1990s is to move beyond the resource transfer
model of financing the construction of buildings and purchasing equipment
and vehicles for NARS, and pursue a human capability-institutional building
model that is geared to the specific needs of African nations at this early stage
of their development. The three hallmarks of the human capability model are:
- the slow, step by step process of improving the scientific and financial
management of a NARS;
- upgrading the quality and relevancy of research programs to improve the
performance of the institution; and
developing support from clientele groups to finance, staff and sustain the
research system from domestic sources.
Many donors assume that African countries are at a fairly similar stage of
political and institutional maturity and that NARS require financial
assistance for buildings, equipment, vehicles, and operating costs. But Africa's
diversity requires institution-building strategies to be tailored to the specific

138

stage of a nation's institutional, scientific, and political maturity. The World
Bank's proposed Africa-wide strategy for strengthening NARS does not
highlight the wide variability in the stage of development among African
countries (World Bank, 1988c). But this should come at no surprise because
"The World Bank is providing financial but not intellectual leadership in
strengthening the institutional base of African agriculture" (Eicher, 1989, p.
26).13

The mission of the CGIAR system and the approach that it uses in dealing
with NARS in Africa should also be reexamined. When George Harrar, F.F.
Hill, and others were laying out the CGIAR system in the early 1960s, they
had a limited time horizon of 15 to 20 years in mind for the system. Hill was
of the opinion that these new (International Agricultural Research Centers
(IARCs) should have continuity of funding from public and private sources for
a "sufficiently long period of time to enable them to carry out their assigned
missions ... usually fifteen to twenty years, sometimes longer" (Hill, 1964, p.
152). In the early 1960s, there was a general perception that the early IARCs
could be turned over to the host countries in several decades (Ruttan, 1987).
But one CGIAR center has celebrated its 25th anniversary, one its 20th, and
both are planning programs for the year 2000. In short, the CGIAR system is
firmly entrenched and a few scholars such as Vernon Ruttan have argued that
the CGIAR system should be given permanent status in the global research
system.
But after 20 years ofCGIAR activities in Mrica, the CGIAR system does not
have a feasible plan of action to strengthen Mrica's NARS. This is especially
troubling because the CG system is spending about 45% of its budget on
Africa, a region of 500 million people compared with 800 million in India and
a billion in China. Four hard questions about the CGIAR's role in Africa in
the 1990s should be addressed:
(1) What constitutes a successful international effort in agricultural research
in a subregion of Mrica such as the Sahel? Should donor assistance to the
CGIAR system be evaluated on the basis of the volume of new technology
produced, or on the dual objectives of producing technology and
strengthening N ARS?
(2) Is the CGIAR prepared to modify its technology generating focus in Africa
and develop a dual strategy of generating new technology and strengthening NARS?
(3) Is the CGIAR prepared to rebudget human and financial resources to help
improve the capacity and increase the sustainability of NARS?

13

For a critique of the World Bank strategy, see Eicher (1989).

139

(4) What is the mechanism for bringing France and the CGIAR together to
develop a joint action plan to strengthen the NARS in francophone West
Africa? (Eicher, 1989).
The Special Program for African Agricultural Research (SPAAR) that was
established by donors in 1985 is charged with improving donor cooperation
and coordination to strengthen NARS and regional research systems in Africa.
Four guidelines for SPAAR and the international donor community flow from
this analysis:
(1) The minimum time frame to include in a strategy to strengthen African
scientific capacity is one generation, about 25-30 years.
(2) Five subregional plans should be developed to strengthen NARS in Africa.
(3) Feasibility teams preparing donor projects to assist NARS should discontinue using the guideline of investing 1-2% of agriculture GDP in NARS
because it is not based on African experience and conditions. The uncritical use of this guideline allows donors to sidestep thorny issues such
as recurrent costs, and human and financial sustainability.
(4) Foreign aid should be rationed to TB/NARS in small amounts over the
next two to three decades. Donors should agree on making long term coordinated investments in eight to ten TP/NARS over the next 30 years.
The following research topics should be pursued by agricultural economists:
(1) Expost and exante rate of return studies on investment in agricultural
research in Africa, including the institutional determinants of these
returns (Bonnen, 1987).
(2) Methodologies for setting agricultural research priorities under African
conditions.
(3) Financial sustainability of NARS and regional and multi-country
research systems such as the CFDT/IRCT cotton research network.
(4) Economics of training and human capital formation.
(5) Institutional performance. There is need to develop new measures of the
performance of research institutions over time (Horton, 1986).

Acknowledgements
An earlier version of this paper was prepared while I was on sabbatical
leave at ISNAR and released as a Working Paper by ISNAR (Eicher, 1989). I
would like to thank The Twentieth Century Fund, the Rockefeller Foundation,
and the International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR) for
their generous support during my 1987-88 sabbatical leave from Michigan
State University. The preparation of this manuscript was supported by the
Food Security in Africa Cooperative Agreement DAN-1190-A-00-4092-00 be-

140

tween the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and Michigan
State University's Department of Agricultural Economics.

References
Abernethy, D., 1988. Bureaucratic growth and economic stagnation in Sub-Saharan
Africa. In: S.K. Commins (Editor), Africa's Development Challenges and The World
Bank. Lynne Rienner, Boulder CO, pp. 179-214.
Behrman, J., Deolalikar, A.B. and Wolfe, B.L., 1988. Nutrients: impacts and determinants. World Bank Econ. Rev., 2: 299-320.
Beirnaert, A., 1940. La probleme de la sterilite chez le palmier a huile. Bull. Agric.
Congo Belge Leopoldville, 21: 95.
Binswanger, H., 1986. Evaluating research system performance and targetting
research in land-abundant areas of Sub-Saharan Africa. World Dev., 14: 469-475.
Bonnen, J.T. 1987. Agricultural development: transforming human capital, technology
and institutions. In: B.F. Johnston, C. Luiselli, C. Contreras and R. Norton (Editors),
U.S. -Mexico Relations: Agriculture and Rural Development. Stanford University
Press, Stanford, CA, pp. 267-300.
Carr, S., 1982. The impact of government intervention on smallholder development in
North East Uganda. Wye College, University of London, 88 pp.
Cernea, M., 1987. Farmer organizations and institution building for sustainable
development. Reg. Dev. Dialogue, 8(2): 1-19.
Dalrymple, D., 1986a. Development and spread of high yielding wheat varieties in
developing countries. U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, DC,
99 pp.
Dalrymple, D., 1986b. Development and spread of high yielding rice varieties in
developing countries. U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, DC,
117 pp.
Dequecker, J., 1983. Cotton: the organization of research in West Africa. Courrier, 82
(Nov/Dec.): 76-79.
Drachoussoff, V., 1965. Agricultural change in the Belgian Congo: 1945-1960. Food
Res. Inst. Stud., 5: 137-201.
Eicher, C.K. 1976. The dynamics of long-term agricultural development in Nigeria. J.
Farm Econ., 49: 1158-1170.
Eicher, C.K., 1982. Reflections on the design and implementation of the Senegal
agricultural research project. Department of Agricultural Economics, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, 17 pp.
Eicher, C.K., 1984. International technology transfer and the African farmer: theory
and practice. Work. Pap. 3/84, Department of Land Management, University of Zimbabwe, Harare, 34 pp.
Eicher, C.K., 1989. Sustainable institutions for African agricultural development
Work. Pap. 19, International Service for National Agricultural Research, The
Hague, The Netherlands, 38 pp.
Evenson, R.E., Waggoner, P. and Ruttan, V.W., 1979. Economic benefits from research:
an example from agriculture. Science, 205: 1101-1107.
Harrar, J.G., 1967. A pattern for international collaboration in agriculture. In:
Strategy Toward the Conquest of Hunger. Rockefeller Foundation, New York, pp.
16-39.

141
Hartley, C.W.S., 1970. Oil palm research and development in Africa and Malaysia. In:
H. Bunting (Editor), Change in Agriculture. Praeger, New York, pp. 97-104.
Hill, F.F., 1964. Developing agricultural institutions in underdeveloped countries. In:
A.H. Moseman (Editor), Agricultural Sciences for the Developing Nations. American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, DC, pp. 141-153.
Horton, D., 1986. Assessing the impact of international agricultural research and
development programs World Dev., 14: 453-468.
Howell, J. (Editor), 1986. Recurrent costs and agricultural development. Overseas
Development Institute, London, 223 pp.
ldachaba, F., 1987. Agricultural research in Nigeria: organization and policy. In: V.
Ruttan and C. Pray (Editors), Policy for Agricultural Research. Westview, Boulder,
CO, pp. 333-362.
ldris, H., 1969. The evolution of government agricultural research in the Sudan: the
golden jubilee of Gezira Research Station, Wad Medani, 1918-1968. Sudan Agric.
J., 4: 1-12.
Jeffries, Sir Charles (Editor), 1964. A review of colonial research, 1940-1960. HMSO,
London, 238 pp.
Jha, D., 1987. Strengthening agricultural research in Africa: some neglected issues. Q.
J. Int. Agric., 26: 265-275.
Johnson, G.L., 1989. The urgency of institutional changes for agriculture in lessdeveloped countries, newly industrialized, and developed countries. In: D. Clubb and
P. Ligon (Editors), Food, Hunger and Agricultural Issues. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, AR, pp. 177-196.
Judd, M.A., Boyce, J.K. and Evenson, R.E., 1987. Investment in agricultural research
and extension. In: V. Ruttan and C. Pray (Editors), Policy for Agricultural Research.
Westview, Boulder, CO, pp. 7-38.
Kydd, J., 1989. Maize research in Malawi, Lessons from failure. J. Int. Dev., 1:
112-144.
Kyomo, M.L., 1988. Some issues in regional cooperation in agricultural research:
lessons from the southern Mrica region. In: D. Pickering (Editor), African
Agricultural Research and Technological Development. World Bank, Washington,
DC, pp. 116-121.
Legum, C., 1985. Africa's search for nationhood and stability. J. Contemp. Mr. Stud.,
October: 21-45.
Lele, U. and Goldsmith, A., 1989. The development of national agricultural research
capacity: India's experience with the Rockefeller Foundation and its significance for
Africa. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change, 37: 305-343.
Lele, U., Von de Walle, N. and Gbetibouo, M., 1989. Cotton in Africa: an analysis of
differences in performance. MADIA Project, World Bank, Washington, DC, 36 pp.
Lipton, M., 1988. The place of agricultural research in the development of Sub-Saharan
Africa. World Dev., 16: 1231-1257.
Mali Repub.IISNAR, 1988. Programme de developpement de la recherche agronomique
au Mali: analyse du systeme national de recherche agronomique. Bamako/International Service for National Agricultural Research, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Martinson, V., Adomako, D. and Manu, M., 1987. Forty eight years of cocoa research
at the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana. Cocoa Grow. Bull., 38: 39-55.
Masefield, G.B., 1972. A history of the colonial agricultural service. Clarendon, Oxford,
184 pp.
McKelvey, J.J., Jr., 1965. Agricultural research. In: R.A. Lystad (Editor), The African
World. Praeger, New York, pp. 317-351.

142
Morris, C.T. and Adelman, I., 1988. Comparative patterns of economic development,
1850-1914. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 575 pp.
Myrdal, G., 1984. International inequality and foreign aid in retrospect. In: G. Meier
and D. Seers (Editors), Pioneers in Development. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD, pp. 149-172.
NIFOR (Nigerian Institute for Oil Palm Research) Annual Report, 1965-66, 1970-71,
1985. Benin City, Nigeria.
Niger Repub./ISNAR, 1988. Programme de developpement de la recherche agronomique au Niger. Tome 1, Analyse du systeme national de recherche agronomique. Tome
2, Proposition d'un plan national a long terme. Niamey/International Service for N ational Agricultural Research, The Hague, 48 pp.
Obasanjo, 0., 1987. Africa in perspective: myths and realities. Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 51 pp.
Odhiambo, T.R., 1988. The innovative environment for increased food production in
Africa. In: B.W.J. LeMay (Editor), Science, Ethics and Food. Pap. Proc. Colloq.
organized by the Smithsonian Institution. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, DC, pp. 38-51.
Pardey, P. and Roseboom, J., 1989. Agricultural Research Indicator Series: A Global
Database of National Agricultural Research Systems. University of Cambridge
Press, Cambridge, 54 7 pp.
PORIM (Palm Oil Research Institute of Malaysia), 1985. Annual Resport 1985.
Selangor, Malaysia.
Ruttan, V.W., 1987. Toward a Global Agricultural Research System. In: V. Ruttan and
C. Pray (Editors), Policy for Agricultural Research. Westview, Boulder, CO, pp.
65-97.
Schweikhard, D., 1989. Financing agricultural. research in a federal system of government: Optimal cost-sharing for state and national investments. Department of
Agricultural Economics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 341 pp.
Shapiro, K., 1985. Strengthening agricultural research and educational institutions in
Africa. Hearings, the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, the Senate Committee
on Appropriations, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
Surareks, V., 1986. Historical development and management of irrigation systems in
northern Thailand. Chaing Mai Univ., Thailand, 285 pp.
UNDP and IBRD, 1985. Somalia: report of a joint technical cooperation assessment
mission. Rep. P588-SO, New York and Washington.
USAID, 1985. Plan for supporting agricultural research and faculties of agriculture in
Africa. Bureau for Africa, U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington,
DC, 30 pp.
WAIFOR (West African Institute for Oil Palm Research), 1955-56. Fourth Annual
Report. Benin City, Nigeria.
Wessen, P., 1989. Causes and impacts of turnover of research scientists within the
Senegalese agricultural research institute: 1981-1987. Department of Agricultural
Economics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 158 pp.
World Bank, 1981. Agricultural research: Sector policy paper. Washington, DC, 110 pp.
World Bank, 1987a. The World Bank Atlas. Washington, DC.
World Bank, 1987b. The twelfth annual review of project performance results.
Washington, DC, 178 pp.
World Bank, 1988a. World development report, 1988. Washington, DC, 307 pp.
World Bank, 1988b. Cotton development programs in Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire and
Togo. Washington, DC, 147 pp.

143
World Bank. 1988c. Strengthening agricultural research in Sub-Saharan Africa: a proposed strategy. Washington, DC, 28 pp.
World Bank. 1988d. Rural development: World Bank experience, 1965-86.
Washington, DC, 132 pp.
World Bank. 1988e. The challenge of hunger in Africa: a call to action. Washington,
DC, 18 pp.
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987. Our Common Future. Oxford University Press, Oxford/New York, 383 pp.
Young, C., 1988. The African colonial state and its political legacy. In: D. Rothchild and
N. Chazan (Editors), The Precarious Balance: State and Society in Africa. Westview,
Boulder, CO, pp. 25-66.

