AGRICULTURAL

ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Land use dynamics in the central highlands of Vietnam:
a spatial model combining village survey data with
satellite imagery interpretation
Daniel Muller*, Manfred Zeller
Institute of Rural Development, Georg-August University of Gottingen,
Waldweg 26, 37073 Gottingen, Germany

Abstract
The paper investigates geo-physical, agro-ecological, and socio-economic determinants of past land use change in two
districts of Dak Lak province in the Central Highlands of Vietnam and assesses the influence of rural development policies
on land cover change. Landsat satellite images from the years 1975, 1992 and 2000 are interpreted to detect land cover in two
time periods. A survey in randomly selected villages provides primary recall data on socio-economic and policy variables
hypothesised to influence land use change. Secondary data on rainfall, soil suitability, and topography was obtained from
meteorological stations and from a digital soil map and digital elevation model. All data were spatially referenced using
geographic information systems (GIS) software. A reduced-form, multinomiallogit model is used to estimate the influence
of hypothesised determinants on land use and the probabilities that a certain pixel has one of five land classes during either
of the two periods.
Results suggest that the first period from 1975 to 1992 was characterised by land-intensive agricultural expansion and
the conversion of forest into grass and agricultural land. During the second period, since 1992, the rapid, more labour- and
capital-intensive growth in the agricultural sector was enabled by the introduction of fertiliser, improved access to rural roads
and markets, and expansion of the irrigated area. These policies, combined with the introduction of protected forest areas
and policies discouraging shifting cultivation during the second period reduced the pressure on forests while at the same time
increasing agricultural productivity and incomes for a growing population. Forest cover during the second period mainly
increased due to the regeneration of areas formerly used for shifting cultivation.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: C 25; 0 13; R 14; R 22
Keywords: Land use change; Deforestation; Geographic information systems (GIS); Spatial modelling; Multinomiallogit; Vietnam

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-551-393901;
fax: +49-551-393076.
E-mail address: danielix@gmx.net (D. Miiller).
URL: http://www.gwdg.de/~uare

Land use change, the physical change in land cover
caused by human activities such as agriculture and silviculture, is a common phenomenon associated with
population growth, market development, technical
and institutional innovation, and related rural development policy. Changes in land use can have various

0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0169-5150(02)00073-7

334

D. Muller; M. Zeller! Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

consequences on economic growth, the level and distribution of income, and on natural resources such
as biodiversity, ecosystems, water, and soils. Land
use change leads to change in-and is influenced
by-socio-economic indicators such as agricultural
productivity, wealth, and human capital. A better understanding of the complex interactions of
these changes over time can enable decision makers at various policy levels to design and implement regionally adapted policy interventions which
stimulate benefits and counteract negative consequences of land use change by considering the
trade-offs among economic, environmental, and social objectives in the process of sustainable rural
development.
The paper emanated from a larger research program
that attempts to assess the impact of policy, technology, socio-economic, and geo-physical conditions on
land use change and its related outcomes on economic
growth, welfare, and the protection of forests. The research program is taking place in two districts of Dak
Lak province in the Central Highlands of Vietnam.
Dak Lak exhibits an interesting case in the study of
land use dynamics with its abundant forest resources,
ethnic diversity, high immigration rates, and dynamic
agricultural and socio-economic development, particularly during the last decade.
Spatial data analysis gives valuable insights into
processes of land use change and their underlying
causes. The paper employs recently developed methods for combining data from a village-level survey
with remote sensing data derived from Landsat images. Our objective is to analyse the influence of
socio-economic, agro-ecological, geo-physical, and
policy variables on land use, using an ex-post research design and a reduced-form, spatially referenced
multinomiallogit model.
After a brief description of major trends in agricultural and socio-economic development in the
research area, we present the conceptual framework and methodology, including issues and related innovative methods employed in combining
geo-referencing data from various sources, and
present the hypotheses concerning determinants of
land use change. Section 3 presents results of the
econometric model. We conclude with a discussion
of results and their implications for policy and future
research.

2. Trends in population, agricultural growth, and
land use in the research area
The research area is situated in Dak Lak province,
the largest of a total of 63 provinces in Vietnam.
The province has a forest cover of 52% compared to
33% in the overall country (General Statistical Office,
2001). Dak Lak has experienced high immigration
rates since Liberation Day in 1976. During the last
decade, its economy grew rapidly. Major factors of
growth include the rising population supported by
in-migration from other provinces, increases in the
agricultural and irrigated area, improved agricultural
productivity, and rising production and marketed
surpluses in higher-value crops and animals. Apart
from rice, the rapidly growing cash crop production of mainly coffee and rubber, and more recently
pepper, is the major factor for the growth in agricultural exports from Vietnam (Minot and Goletti,
2000). Despite annual growth rates in the population of about 7.7% during 1975-1990 and 6.4%
during 1991-2000, the massive agricultural growth
enabled large increases in per-capita income during
the 1990s. According to official data, forest cover in
Dak Lak province has declined steadily, particularly
where soil conditions allow large-scale coffee production. The basaltic soils suitable for coffee cultivation
cover 40% of Dak Lak province (Dak Lak Statistical
Office, 2001).
The research area is situated in two districts (Lak
and Krong Bong) in the southeastern part of Dak
Lak province. Sixty percent of the entire area consisting of 2400 km2 is covered by forest. In 2000, the
population in the research area was around 124,000
inhabitants (Dak Lak Statistical Office, 2001). Population has doubled since 1981. Roughly 20% of the
population growth was due to government-controlled
resettlement programs in areas delineated as new
economic zones (NEZ) following the fixed cultivation and resettlement program (FCRP) implemented
mainly during the 1980s. Uncontrolled immigration
was strongest during the last decade with high coffee
prices stimulating migration from Central and North
Vietnam to the Central Highlands. However, the research area did not participate in the 'coffee boom'
as much as other districts of the Central Highlands
because only small areas of the two selected districts
have the basaltic soil suitable for coffee production.

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

Agriculture is the main source of income. Paddy
is the most important crop with respect to the factors
income share and area cultivated. Degrees of market
integration differ significantly between villages and
ethnic groups. Ethnic Vietnamese (kinh) 1 have a long
tradition of intensively growing wetland rice and marketing surplus production to local traders. Their villages have a tendency to be located close to roads, and
they usually market a large share of their agricultural
production. On average, they own more paddy area
per head, which they cultivate more intensively than
villages inhabited by ethnic minorities. Before 1990,
very little fertiliser and pesticides were used in the research area. During the nineties, the adoption of new
crops (maize and coffee), fertilisers (Urea and NPK),
and pesticides was promoted by governmental extension programs and related investments in the road and
market infrastructures. Today, the second most important crop is maize, with hybrid varieties cultivated by
65% of households in the research area. Maize has
turned into a major source of cash income during the
last five years, especially for households which are
not able to produce rice above their subsistence needs
and lack suitable soil for coffee production. Livestock
is another important production activity; however, it
will not be considered further in this article because of
its minor importance for land use change in the area.
For possible effects of livestock on land use, see for
example Cattaneo (2001).
According to our analysis of the Landsat images,
forests cover in 1990 accounted for 69% of the total research area. In 2000, forested area increased to
77%, only two absolute percentage points below the
level observed in 1975. At lower elevations and in locations close to villages and roads, bush land, open
canopy, and bamboo forests prevail. Mountainous evergreen forests dominate areas with altitudes above
600 m. Bush and bamboo forests as well as young
open canopy forests are found as secondary vegetation
on areas formerly used for upland cultivation. About
7% of the research area belongs to nature reserves and
1 People of ethnic Vietnamese origin are called kinh people,
which we will use hereinafter to distinguish them from people
belonging to ethnic minority groups (referred to as 'ethnic people').
Politically, both groups are Vietnamese citizens. Also note that
we use the expression 'minority' in a purely quantitative sense
indicating that people belonging to ethnic 'minority' groups are
outnumbered by the kinh in Vietnam.

335

protected areas designated for forest rehabilitation and
biodiversity conservation. Strict enforcement of forest
protection in recent years might have facilitated the
restoration of forest cover in these areas to a fairly
homogenous, closed canopy cover.

3. Methodology
3.1. Conceptual framework

Our conceptual framework draws heavily from
the theory of induced innovation (Boserup, 1965;
Ruthenberg, 1980; Ruttan and Hayami, 1984). We
distinguish two key processes of land use change as
a source for increasing agricultural production: first,
agricultural expansion into previously uncultivated
areas, which usually takes place at an extensive and
constant technological level; and second, agricultural
intensification on already cultivated land. Intensification involves the substitution of land with labour
or capital-intensive technology such as irrigation,
improved seeds, and fertiliser. Boserup (1965) and
Ruthenberg (1980) emphasise the responses of households, communities, and societies to pressures and
opportunities induced by exogenous shift factors such
as population growth, improvement of rural road networks, and investments in markets and the agribusiness sector enabling the introduction of higher-value
perennial crops. In the research area, additional pressures on land use change include the introduction of
protected areas during the 1990s, and a more effective
enforcement of state policies discouraging shifting
cultivation.
These policies and driving forces at the macro and
regional levels induce changes in land use undertaken
by local agents (Pender et al., 1999; Scherr et al.,
1996; Templeton and Scherr, 1997). With the switch
from a planned rural economy to a household responsibility system in the early 1990s, changes in prices,
transaction costs, and availability of technology induced private farmers and entrepreneurs to adjust their
land use patterns quite rapidly, as can be witnessed in
Dak Lak Province. Moreover, the Vietnamese policy
transformation towards more market orientation was
supported by significant public investments in the rural infrastructure and agricultural extension services,
which promoted the adoption of new technologies,

336

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

crops, and animal husbandry systems. As an indication
for the scale of improvement in the rural infrastructure,
the average distance from a village to an all-year road
in the research area decreased from 18 to 6 km between
the two periods under consideration. Apart from policy
and socio-economic factors, changes in the use of land
by agriculture or forestry are determined by a range of
mainly time-invariant, natural conditions (Ruthenberg,
1980) such as rainfall, topography, soil quality, and
other geo-physical and agro-ecological variables.
Chomitz and Gray (1996) developed a widely cited
spatially explicit model based on survey and satellite
data from Belize. They assessed the effect of roads on
land use and employed a land rent model based on theories developed by Ricardo and von Thiinen. Nelson
and Hellerstein (1997) estimated a similar model for
Mexico, including corrections for spatial dependence.
Both models rely on satellite data to derive land cover
and employ geophysical data and limited secondary
information for socio-economic characteristics as independent variables.
Following the conceptual framework of induced
innovation and taking into account recent advances
in the literature using spatial analysis in combining
geo-physical and socio-economic data,2 we explain
land use change as a function of geophysical variables (level and variance of rainfall, soil suitability,
the altitude and slope of land), endogenous (and
therefore lagged) population growth, socio-economic
village characteristics, and operational variables for
measuring the spatial placement of policy-induced investments in road and market infrastructures and the
introduction of new agricultural technology and crops.
We will explore the causal relationships between these
variables in a spatially explicit framework and attempt
to quantify their respective direction and magnitude.
3.2. Sources and methods used for collecting data
This section briefly describes the specification of
the left-hand-side variable land cover3 and distin2 As this special issue features reviews of spatial modeling
approaches for explaining changes in land use, we have chosen to
not include a review section in this paper. Other reviews include
Kaimowitz and Angelsen (2002) and van der Veen and Otter
(2001).
3 Precisely defined, land cover is the (bio) physical cover of the
land surface and immediate subsurface. Land use, on the other

guishes various categories for the underlying hypothesised determinants as right-hand-side variables. The
right-hand variables are separated into geophysical
variables mainly determining the natural agricultural
potential, variables describing the socio-economic
village characteristics influencing land use, and
policy-induced variables.
3.2.1. Land cover data
Changes in land cover were measured using time
series of satellite data. Landsat images for the research area were visually interpreted for the years
1975 (multi-spectral scanner, MSS), 1992 (thematic
mapper, TM), and 2000 (enhanced thematic mapper, ETM). 4 All images were taken in the spring
season between March 4th and April 7th. Hence,
they stem from the same cropping season and from
comparable climatic conditions. This enhances the
interpretation as the spectral reflection of land cover
is easier to compare. In addition, recently updated
1:50,000 UTM maps were scanned, geo-referenced,
and merged to obtain a consistent set of base information. These maps allow the verification of land
cover delineation using additional point information
and linear features such as contours, roads, and rivers.
The interpretation resulted in land cover maps, which
indicate physical land cover of the respective years
for the major land use classes. Overlays produce
quantitative estimates of changes in land cover over
time.
For the econometric analysis, the land cover data
was aggregated into five classes, which were used for
subsequent analysis:
(1) mixed agricultural land, including cash and food

crops as well as plots under shifting cultivation;
(2) paddy fields, both with one and two crops a year;
(3) closed canopy, dense forest;
(4) open canopy, mixed and secondary forest;

hand, describes human employment of that land. In that sense,
e.g. hunting would be a kind of land use while shrub could be
the corresponding cover. However, in literature the two are used
almost synonymously. For the purposes of this paper, we will use
'cover' to denote the categories of the dependent variables and
refer to land 'use' when interpreting the results of the analysis.
4 To match remote sensing data with recall information,
cloud-free satellite images from 1980 to 1990 should have been
used. They were, however, not available.

D. Muller; M. Zeller/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

(5) mixed grass land containing bamboo, bush, and
shrub as well as re-growing shifting cultivation
fields. 5
3.2.2. Geophysical data
To a considerable extent, data on geophysical
variables determine the agricultural potential inherent in a specific plot. Geophysical variables include
rainfall-time series, soil types, elevation, and slope
values. Rainfall data stems from five rainfall stations
in, and several others around the research area. Daily
time series were available starting from Liberation
Day in 1976. We calculated the yearly mean and the
variance of daily rainfall amounts for both time periods considered in the data analysis. 6 Continuous surfaces for these layers were created by interpolating the
point coverage with a regularised spline interpolator.
A digital soil map (DSM) on a scale of 1:250,000
has been reclassified into nine suitability classes for
paddy and mixed agricultural production with 'one'
exhibiting the most suitable soils and 'nine' the least
suitable soils. The suitability classes are based on interviews with soil experts from the region. The digital
elevation model (DEM) is based on contour lines from
American topographic UTM maps, scaled at 1:50,000.
The DEM has a spatial resolution of 50 m x 50 m.
Slope degrees were calculated from this DEM.
3.2.3. Socio-economic village characteristics
A village survey was conducted in 101 randomly
selected villages out of a total of 191 villages in the
research area. The survey provides primary data on the
current status and changes in land use practices since
Liberation Day in 1975, and on the causes of these
changes and their effects on economic, socio-cultural,
5 Field verification reveals that most shifting cultivation plots,
which were in fallow for one or two years, were still classified
as agricultural land. Longer fallow periods result in the category
'mixed grassland.'
6 The rain-fed cropping season is almost all-year-round, and
only 4 months of the year, i.e. December-March, are considered
to be the dry season. During this dry season, however, there is
considerable variation with respect to the commencement and end
of rainfall during these months due to regional diversity in altitude
and micro-climate (proximity to forests). Rainfall during the dry
season influences soil moisture for the planting season and has an
effect on water availability in semi-technical irrigations systems
that use collected rainfall water as a source. Therefore, we chose to
calculate the mean and variance of rainfall data for the entire year.

337

and ecological variables. Recall techniques were
employed to obtain estimates from villagers for Liberation Day in 1976, 1980 and 1990.7 Additional
socio-economic indicators were collected from interviews with communal people's committees and
from secondary sources such as official government
statistics.
A metric variable was created for the age of the villages in years since their foundation. Villages in theresearch area are usually inhabited by kinh or ethnic minority people. Mixed villages do not exist, apart from
one or two Vietnamese families, who usually own a
shop in an ethnic village. For that reason a dummy
variable coded one for an ethnic minority village, and
zero otherwise, was included to capture the effect of
ethnic composition on patterns of land use. Another
dummy was created for villages awarded the status of
a 'hero village.' Villages, which assisted the Northern Vietnamese government in the fight against the
South and the USA were awarded this title after the
war. A variable for land suitable for permanent agricultural production was computed on a pixel basis by
subtracting already cultivated land, land with a slope
over 20°, and land belonging to a soil suitability class
smaller than six. The lagged value of this continuous
dummy variable convertible landwas included in the
regressions. For population data, an inverse distance
weighted interpolation technique, which calculates a
linearly weighted combination from the set of sample
points, was used to derive a continuous population surface. Thus, we account for the fact that the population
is highest at actual village locations and pressure decreases as one moves away from population centres.
The population surface aims to represent population
distribution more realistically with a distribution of the
data values as a property of location rather than an entire area (Bracken, 1994). The lagged value of the continuous population map was included in the data analysis as a pre-determined variable and, therefore, treated
as an exogenous factor in our reduced-form equations.
There is possibly a range of other important variables, which can have a substantial effect on land use.
7 We related the questions for 1980 to a large flood that occurred
in 1981, which nearly all of the villagers remembered. The recall
information from 1990 is related to a period characterized by
economic renovation policy (doi moi), which also provided a
suitable point of reference.

338

D. Muller; M. Zeller/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

For instance, land tenure and property rights shifted
recently from a system based on customary rights to
an official recognition of property rights. The first land
use titles for agricultural land were issued in 1996.
Until today, 65% of the households received these
certificates---45% of them in the past 2 years. Therefore, it is too early to estimate the effects of secure
property rights on land use given our land cover data.
3.2.4. Policy variables
Policy-induced variables reflect investments from
external sources such as governments and donors in
infrastructure and technologies as well as restrictions
on land use imposed by the government.
Surface vectors for roads obtained on a scale of
1:250,000 were corrected for the research area to
a scale of 1:50,000 using the digitised UTM base
maps and the pan-chromatic band from the Landsat
ETM. Market access was measured by the Euclidean
distance to nearest all-year roads for trucks and to
district centres. Based on recall information, we approximated a second road network for the year 1990,
which was, however, highly correlated with distance
to district capitals and, therefore, dropped. We tried to
capture the effect of road upgrades by incorporating
the lagged travel time in hours to the nearest all-year
road from the survey as an additional measure for
market proximity, thus taking the means of transport
and their changes into account. The number of years
since the establishment of a primary school in a village was included as an indicator of investment in
primary education.
Technology variables are incorporated in the analysis with regard to the time of the introduction of
a new technology for agricultural production: (a) the
number of years since the introduction of NPK as a
yield-increasing technology, (b) the number of years
since the construction of a reservoir for irrigation of
agricultural land, and (c) the increase of irrigated area
per village multiplied by the number of years already
irrigated as a measure for the number of irrigated
hectare-years.
The boundaries for National Parks and Nature Reserves were included as a policy variable (Chomitz
and Gray, 1996; Deininger and Minten, 2001). We incorporated the time of protection as the number of
years since a pixel belongs to a protected area, zero
otherwise.

J:i

Integration ofvillage and remotely sensed data

Farmers, and other land users, make their land management decisions based on objectives, constraints,
and the potentials of their households and individual
members. At the village-level, we observed aggregate
behaviour of all land users and other stakeholders in
land allocation and management. Ideally, to integrate
grid-based data with survey data, the scale of the analysis should match the unit of decision-making. Yet, in
Vietnam as in most developing countries, plot maps
and village boundaries are not available. This renders
spatial modelling a time-consuming and costly task
due to the necessary delineation of the spatial extent
of plots or villages, e.g. using global positioning systems (GPS).
The spatial extent of village boundaries could not
be delineated with the time and budget available. 8 To
demarcate the spatial base unit for the integration of
socio-economic variables, the geographic positions of
all villages were recorded with GPS and point coverages created. Village boundaries for all surveyed
villages were then defined using Thiessen polygons,
which are constructed so that each location within a
polygon is closer to all its contained points than to any
other point in the layer (Aronoff, 1995). These polygons were then used as a base unit for village-level
data in sub-sequent analyses (Entwisle et al., 1998).
Hence, survey data-apart from population-takes the
value of the interviewed village for each point, which
is closer to the village's centroid than to any other centroid (see Fig. 1).9 The vast areas of virtually unused
8 Delineating plot boundaries as the base unit of analysis would
match the unit of decision-making of an individual land user much
more accurate, thereby being considerably closer to economic reality. However, this is obviously not feasible for an area of 2400 km2
with approximately 124,000 households involved in agriculture,
each typically having several dispersed plots. Examples of analysis
at the plot level linking geophysical, agro-ecological data on plots
with socio-economic data of farms or villages include Mertens
et al. (2000) and Fox et al. (1994).
9 This method implies that surveyed and (non-sampled) neighbor
villages are similar with respect to land use data. Apart from
numerous field visits into the research area, however, we cannot
validate this assumption because of lack of data on non-sampled
villages. In order to avoid similar issues arising in future research,
we recommend to first construct the Thiessen polygons, and then
randomly select a subset of Thiessen polygons with probabilities
proportionately to size of area for subsequent village-level survey.

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

339

Source: Subset of Landsat ETM, date: 03 March 2000; purchased at the Tropical Rain Forest Information Center
(http://www.bsrsi.msu.edu); village positions from GPS survey of authors.
Notes: Image displayed in band combination 5-4-3.
Fig. I . Landsat satellite image with survey village positions and Thiessen polygons.

and remote forestland are implicitly integrated via geophysical indicators such as topography, soil quality,
and slope as well as distance to major roads, which all
render land use unprofitable on these marginal lands
and should therefore not distort results considerably.
In this study, the unit of analysis is a pixel. The
research area was spatially referenced to pixels with a
size of 50 m x 50 m. Each pixel, therefore, represents
an area of a quarter of a hectare. After resampling all
spatially available information to above grid size, data
was stored as surfaces in a raster GIS.
The research area contains 964,000 grids cells. To
compensate for potential spatial dependence in the dependent variables, Besag' s coding scheme was used
{Besag, 1974, 663/id}, also employed by Nelson and
Hellerstein (1997), Munroe et al. (2001) and Nelson
et al. (2001) in similar studies. The regular spatial

sample was drawn by selecting every fifth cell in the
X- and Y-directions so that no selected cells are physical neighbours. This sampling procedure allows us to
apply standard estimation techniques (Anselin, 1999).
To control potential border effects, an inside buffer of
75 m was cut-off the outer boundary of the research
area. After merging data from the socio-economic survey with geophysical and land use data, 33% of the
grid cells were randomly sampled. These sampling
procedures resulted in a dataset of 20,000 observations
used for subsequent econometric modelling.
3.4. Expected effects of regressors

We ran regressions on four types of regressors. First,
we used time-invariant geophysical variables, with
the exception of rainfall , which we observe in both

340

D. Muller, M. Zeller/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

periods, and second, historical variables, which describe socio-economic characteristics of the villages.
Here, we include population and land available for
conversion as a time-variant, but lagged variables
referring to the state in the previous period. Third,
exogenous policy variables to describe government
investments and macro-level policies are included in
the model. 10
At present, there are no models and test statistics
available which account for substantive spatial interaction in a qualitative dependent variable framework
(Anselin, 2001) as cited in Munroe et al. (2001). To
compensate for potential spatial effects, we used the
coding scheme described in Section 3.3. In addition,
we included two exogenous variables indicating the Xand Y-eo-ordinates of each cell in the grid as a spatial
filter (Nelson et al., 1999; Munroe et al., 2001).
Hypothesised effects of regressors on land use categories can be anticipated based on previously outlined
theoretical considerations, research findings, and field
experience. Table 1 summarises the variables and their
expected effects where a plus sign indicates a positive
expected influence of that variable on the respective
land cover class and a minus indicates a negative effect. Question marks indicate potentially ambiguous
outcomes. In the following, the hypotheses are stated
for the four types of regressors.
3.4.1. Geophysical variables
On higher elevations, agricultural land use is less
feasible and less likely due to more difficult climatic
conditions such as lower temperatures and more difficult terrain. Equally, agriculture on steeper slopes and
poorer soils is usually less profitable and more difficult. We hypothesise that the coefficients for elevation,
slope, and soil are negative for agricultural land use
and positive for forest land.
The amount and variance of rainfall critically affect agricultural activities in several ways. In areas
with high absolute rainfall, more water-demanding
crops can be cultivated. To decrease risks from highly
variable and, therefore, more insecure rainfall, more
drought-resistant crops and a higher crop diversification should be expected. However, since the land cover
data at hand does not enable us to explain crop choice,
10 The former we assume to be exogenous, but later may deal
with sample selection problems.

we can only deduce the following hypotheses: More
absolute amounts of rainfall in the moderate climate
prevailing in the research area 11 can be expected to
increase the natural potential for agriculture, while,
due to increasing risks, one would expect that higher
rainfall variation would reduce land under agriculture
in the absence of irrigation facilities and increase the
likelihood of other uses.
3.4.2. Variables describing the socio-economic
history of the villages
Rural development is essentially path-dependent.
Hence, initial states and historical events influence current and future socio-economic situation of villages,
including land use. In this context, several variables
will be considered and explained in the following.
A positive relation is expected between ethnic minority villages and former shifting cultivation areas,
be they fallow or cultivated. Followed fields are either
interpreted as grass land or as agricultural land, depending on the time of fallow. Some fields might have
already recovered to become secondary, open canopy
forest. Due to these traditional land-intensive cultivation techniques and presumably less political power,
ethnic villages might be associated with more agricultural area (cultivated less intensively), less irrigated
paddy area, and more grass land. Common belief also
attributes deforestation to ethnic people; therefore, we
would expect less open and closed canopy forest.
Available convertible landprovides the potential for
agricultural expansion. A higher lagged value should
increase the probability that these patches will be converted for agricultural land uses. We would expect a
strong positive relation for agriculture and paddy land
and negative signs for other land uses.
Higher lagged populationshould be associated with
increasing demand for agricultural land uses and is
often cited as a major factor influencing deforestation (Tachibana et al., 1998; Kaimowitz and Angelsen,
2000).
The status of 'hero villages' is used as a proxy operational variable to measure the political capitalof a
11 In more tropical settings with higher amounts of rainfall other
authors found the opposite effect (Chomitz and Thomas, 2001).
In the research area rainfall averaged 1800mm between 1976 and
1999. In drier climates where absolute rainfall is a restricting factor
at least part of the year, we do expect an increase in agricultural
production for higher amounts of rainfall.

Table 1
Description and predicted signs of exogenous variables
Level of
measurement

Pixel/village

Source

Geophysical
Slope degrees
Elevation
Soil suitability classesa
Mean rainfall amount
Mean variance of rainfall

Degrees
lOOm
9 classes
lOOmm
lOOmm

Pixel
Pixel
Pixel
Pixel
Pixel

Digital elevation model (DEM)
Digital elevation model (DEM)
Digital soil map (DSM)
Point interpolation
Point interpolation

Socio-economic history of village
Years since village establishment
Ethnic composition
Land suitable for conversion
Lagged population
Hero village

2000-year
0/1
0/1
Households
0/1

Village
Village
Pixel
Pixel
Village

Survey
Survey
Land use maps maps and DEM
Survey (interpolation)
Survey

Policy variables
Distance to district centre
Distance to all-year road
Travel time to all-year road
Years since primary school

Kilometres
Kilometres
Hours
2000-year

Pixel
Pixel
Village
Village

Road network
Road network/survey
Survey
Survey

Technology
Years since construction of reservoir
Increase in irrigated area
Years since introduction of NPK
Nature conservancy
Nature reserve areas

2000-year
Hectare
2000-year

Village
Village
Village

Survey
Survey
Survey

0/1

Pixel

Official park boundaries

Spatial effects
X- and ¥-coordinates

Every 5th

Pixel

Sampled from grid

Mixed
agriculture

-

+
+
+
+
+
+

Paddy

Closed
forest

Open
forest

Mixed
grass

-

+
+
+

?
?

+
+

+
+
+
+
+

+

.-.~

+

+

~

+

-

-

-

-

+

+
+
+

+

+
-

~

~

-.fi;"'
;:;:
OQ

~-

;::

-

?

~

+
+
+

c;,:
c

+

+
+
+
+

?

+
+

+
+

+
+

-

'-.;

?

?

?

?

'-.;

-

+

+

-

?

-

!=:J
;::,

~
~

-

;:;
c;·

"'w

'-l

w
c
~

'-.;

'-.;

I

~

a One variable for soil suitability for paddy and one for mixed agricultural production with 1 = highest suitability and 9 = lowest suitability.

"'.p..
~

342

D. Muller; M. Zeller/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

village. We hypothesise that higher political capital
(Birner and Wittmer, 2002) is expected to improve the
access to government programs and outside assistance.
This may well lead to an improved infrastructure such
as irrigation facilities and better access to extension
services and credit supplies. Subsequently, the intensification effect might be associated with a reduction
of land expansion, therefore, reducing the pressure on
forest land and allowing grass land to recover to become forest once again.
3.4.3. Policy variables
With respect to infrastructure investments by the
government, we employed several operational variables derived from the village survey. Distance and
travel time from the village to all-year roads and to
the two district capitals serve as a proxy for market
access and access to political centres. Lower values
of these variables might be associated with lower forest cover because of higher producer prices, lower input prices, and lower transaction costs compared to
remote locations. Yet, Deininger and Minten (2001)
find that these variables are highly correlated with
population density, soil fertility, and physical capital
such as irrigation facilities. However, that was not the
case in our dataset where these variables all showed
correlation coefficients below 0.5. Since no farm-gate
prices for inputs or outputs are available with spatial
variation, distance and travel times to roads and markets serve as a proxy for prices as well as transaction
costs (Deininger and Minten, 2001). Agricultural land
use is expected to be more likely to occur closer to
all-year roads, while forest cover should be less likely
(Chomitz and Gray, 1996; Pfaff, 1997; Nelson and
Hellerstein, 1997). Again, the effect on mixed grass
land cannot be hypothesised a priori.
Access to education is proxied by the availability of primary schools in years since their opening.
The effect might be uncertain. Common sense tells
us that farmers with better access to education should
be expected to use land more intensively and adopt
new technologies earlier, thus saving land to achieve
a given income or farm output. However, there is also
empirical evidence that educated households might engage more in land clearing (Pichon, 1997).
Technological change, which has been promoted
by a variety of government agencies, is incorporated via the introduction of NPK, one example for a

yield-increasing technology. NPK increases first and
foremost the productivity of land, and one might expect land expansion to become more attractive with
NPK, provided farmers have sufficient labour and
the ability to finance the purchase of agricultural inputs. However, given current labour constraints and
incomplete rural financial markets, we rather expect
increasing yields and more input in production on existing fields. The longer ago the introduction of NPK,
the more likely the possibility of forest cover. On the
other hand, more profitable agriculture could increase
the incentive to expand area under cultivation and,
therefore, lead to a lower forest cover and a positive
coefficient for agriculture (Angelsen and Kaimowitz,
2001). Therefore, the overall expected sign of the
effect is ambiguous. Another variable related to technological change are years since the construction of a
reservoir for agricultural irrigation. We anticipate that
this labour-intensive intensification on existing agricultural areas will induce households to allocate less
time to land clearing and land expansion into upland
areas; accordingly, forested pixels will be more likely
(Shively and Martinez, 2001; Pender et al., 2001).
Inside a protected area, it is impossible to establish property rights for long-term secure cultivation,
thereby decreasing the profitability of agriculture
(Deininger and Minten, 2001). We expect a significant positive coefficient for non-agriculturalland uses
and a regeneration of grass to secondary forest. Protected areas may be located on more marginal lands
with steeper slopes and on less suitable soils. For
that reason, we interact the protection dummy with
slope and soil suitability for mixed agriculture. If our
hypothesis holds, the introduction of these interaction
terms should reduce the significance and the effect of
the protection dummy on preserving forest land.

4. Models and results
4.1. Descriptive statistics
Agricultural land increased by 9% from 1975 to
1992, and has stagnated since then (Table 2). The
agricultural area mainly developed from open canopy
forest and grass. Grassland decreased in the second
period from 11 to 4%. It is interesting to look at total
forest cover, which declined by 10% in the first period,

D. Muller, M. Zeller I Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

343

Table 2
Land cover in km2 , percent of total land and number of patches
Cover class

2000

1992

1975"

km 2

km2

Patches

km2

339
57
17
74
259

146.7
67.2
836.2
1052.3
295.7

746

2398.2

Mixed agriculture
Paddy
Closed forest
Open forest
Grass
Total

339.8
111.0
866.6
962.6
101.5
2381.6b

%

14.2
4.6
36.4
40.5
4.3
100

Patches

%

141
62
14
56
159

352.0
117.0
828.2
827.9
273.5

432

2398.6

14.6
4.9
34.5
34.6
11.4
100

%

6.1
2.8
34.9
44.0
12.2
100

Source: interpretation of Landsat satellite images by Nguyen Thanh Huang (Tay Nguyen University, Buon Ma Thuot) and authors for Lak
and Krong Bong districts, Oak Lak Province, Central Highlands, Vietnam.
a Number of patches only counted for the images from 1992 to 2000, which have the same spatial resolution of 30m x 30m.
h 18 km 2 missing in 2000, because part of the research area was not covered by the scene.

but has grown by eight percent since 1992. Thus, no
severe deforestation has taken place over the last 25
years, with total forest cover decreasing by about 2%.
Another notable feature from Table 2 is the spatial pattern of land fragmentation, measured as the
number of patches under a specific land cover. Land
fragmentation in the last eight years decreased dramatically from 746 patches of land cover in 1992,
to 432 in 2000. Most of that change was due to the
high fragmentation of agriculture and grass in 1992,
compared to 2000, and it reflects the virtual disappearance of shifting cultivation in the research area,
which until today has often been made responsible
for large-scale deforestation.
Detailed descriptive statistics of the independent
variables are reported in Table 4 of the Appendix A.
The range of values in socio-economic and policy variables demonstrates the diverse characteristics of villages. The mean population per pixel increased from
three in the first period to more than five households in
the second period, indicating higher population pressure in the last decade. The Euclidean distance to
all-year roads averages 6 km for all villages, albeit with
a large standard deviation indicating the considerable
variation in village locations. Construction of reservoirs and more irrigated land boosted rice production
by allowing two harvests of wetland rice per year.

4.2. Multinomiallogit
To explore relationships between exogenous and
predetermined variables and the land cover categories
as left-hand side (LHS) variables, a multinomiallogit

specification (MNL) was employed. MNL models estimate the direction and intensity of the explanatory
variables on the categorical dependent variable by predicting a probability outcome associated with each category of the dependent variable. The probability that
Y = h can be stated as (Greene, 1997):
PROB (Y

= h) =

ef3'xth
----,M;-;----

(1)

Lm=lef3'xtm

In (1), m denotes the land cover classes used for
analysis, fJ a vector of estimation parameters and
Xt are the exogenous variables for all Y and at all
locations /. Eq. (1) holds, if the error terms are independently and identically distributed as log Weibull
(McFadden, 1973). Normalising on all probabilities
yields a log-odds ratio (Greene, 1997):
In [ Pth
Plm

J = x; (fJh -

fJm)

(2)

The dependent variable is expressed as the log of the
odds of one alternative relative to a base alternative.
If model assumptions hold, the maximum likelihood
estimators are asymptotically normally distributed,
with a mean of zero and a variance of one for large
samples. Significance of estimators is tested with
z-statistics, which are reported in the output tables.
Likelihood-ratio (LR) tests compare the log likelihood from the full model with the one from a reduced
model omitting explanatory variables. To test the hypothesis with (m - 1) parameters, a likelihood-ratio
and Wald test can be used. Here, only LR test statistics are reported as the two tests showed no major
differences.

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

344

cover over time. About 70% of the pixels from 1992
to 2000 and 60% in the period 1975 to 1992 did not
change over time. Therefore, the lagged values predict
present land use almost perfectly, making model estimation problematic. In the 'model 1990' the variable
for convertible land was dropped due to perfect prediction of paddy land. Since the first nature reserve in
the research area was established in 1991, we included
the protection variable only in the 'model 2000'.
Test statistics are reported in Table 6 in the
Appendix A. Overall, the model for the second period
performs better than the model for the first period due
to fewer missing values and more exact data on land
cover and recall information. Likelihood-ratio tests
for independent variables (Table 7 in the Appendix
A) reveal that most coefficients are significant on
the 1% level in both models, except the interaction
coefficients of protected areas with soil suitability.
Likelihood-ratio tests for combining dependent categories let us reject the hypothesis that categories
are indistinguishable. Overall predictive power as
measured by the locations predicted correctly is high
for both models, with 81% of the pixels predicted
correctly in 'model 2000' and 69% in 'modell990',
respectively (Table 3). The majority of the false

4.3. Empirical results
The MNL has five land cover classes as categorical, unordered dependent variables. One multinomial
logit model was performed for each of the two time
periods, i.e. for 1975-1992 and 1992-2000. Hereafter,
we will refer to the 'model 1990' for the first period
and 'model 2000' for the second period. Survey recall data for Liberation Day and 1980 was used as
'best estimate' for predetermined variables in 1975
and, similarly, recall data from 1990 was employed
for 1992. It would have been more suitable to arrive
at equally long time periods, which, however, was
not possible. 4 To control potential endogeneity problems, only lagged values for time-variant independent variables such as population growth and placement of schools are considered in the empirical applications. In addition, all variables were tested for
multi-collinearity. Model results are reported as raw
coefficients in Table 5 in the Appendix A for closed
forest as the comparison group. In the discussion, we
will also mention the signs of other interesting coefficients not included in Table 5.
The model does not include lagged values of land
use due to relatively little variation in the overall land

Table 3
Predictive power of land use
Predicted land use, 2000
% correct

Mixed agriculture

Paddy

Closed forest

Open forest

2289
304
8
294
302

178
561
9
6

10
0
6084
844
38

251
16
1042
6793
403

41
10
7
55
73

2769
891
7142
7995
822

82.7
63.0
85.2
85.0
8.9

3197

755

6976

8505

186

19619

80.5

Predicted land use, 1990
Observed land use, 1990
Mixed agriculture
1743
Paddy
253
Closed forest
20
Open forest
329
Grass
678

259
657
0
2
30

29
2
5627
968
116

555
24
943
5137
982

327
3
205
409
460

2913
939
6795
6845
2266

59.8
70.0
82.8
75.0
20.3

948

6742

7641

1404

19758

69.0

Observed land use, 2000
Mixed agriculture
Paddy
Closed forest
Open forest
Grass
Total

Total

3023

I

Grass

Total

Source: own calculation. Notes: land use with highest predicted probability as predicted land use; bold entries along the diagonals indicate
correct predictions; number of entries correspond to the number of pixels, i.e. to 900m2 .

D. Muller, M. Zeller!Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

Factor Change Scale Relative to category Grass
.2
:a
.37
.51

.7

.95

c

Age of village (years), 2000

0

Q_____p

c

Population (households), 1990

M

2.4

p

0

p

c

G

Sid Cool

v

c

Years since reservoir, 2000
Sid Cool

~

Age of reservoir • irrigated area, 2000
Sid Cool

-1.6
-1.29
-.98
-.67
Logit Coefficient Scale Relative to category Grass

M

~

Sid Cool

Km to all-year road in 1998

1.76

G

M

011

1.29

~

Sid Cool

Ethnic minority village (0/1)

345

-.38

G

-.05

0

~
.26

.56

.87

Source: own calculation
Notes: The likelihood increases in magnitude from left to right; initial letters indicate variable values of land use classes: M =Mixed agriculture, P =
Paddy, C =Closed forest, 0 = Open forest, G = Grass; grass (G) as the comparison group has a factor change scale of one; variables are either evaluated
for a change in 1 SD (Std Coef) or for a discrete change from 0 to 1values connected by lines are NOT significant at the 5 % level; one example for
interpretation for ethnic minority villages in row two: grass (G) is significantly more likely than all other land uses, while closed forest (C) is the least
likely land use class; paddy (P) is NOT significantly more likely than closed forest (C) as the two are connected by a line.

Fig. 2. Odds ratios of selected explanatory variables for land use in year 2000.

predictions in the 'model1990' are pixels covered with
grass, which were predicted to be mixed agriculture
in 23% of the cases.
Coefficients for most topographic variables are significant at the 1% level and show the expected signs. 12
Agriculture is more likely at lower altitudes, on flatter
land, and on better soils. Rainfall variance does not
always shows the expected signs, which might be due
to relatively little dependence on precipitation due to
irrigation in the 'model 2000' and little rainfall variance in the 'model1990'.
Soil suitability for paddy shows the expected signs,
and better suitability increases the probability of paddy
against all and the probability of agriculture against
the remaining soil classes. Surprisingly, better soils increase the odds of closed canopy forest compared to all
other land use categories; however, it also makes agricultural land uses more probable compared to grass
and open forests.
12 Note that the multinomial legit model with five outcomes
yields 10 possible combinations of outcomes to be compared for
each independent variable, hence, 230 coefficients for 23 variables.
Here, we will focus on closed forest as the comparison group
(base category), if not indicated otherwise.

Odd ratios can facilitate model interpretation as they
are constant for changes in other categories of dependent variables. In Figs. 2 and 3, odds ratios of selected
socio-economic and policy variables are plotted for
both models.
Older villages increase the likelihood of closed forest in the 'model1990.' All coefficients have the opposite direction relative to closed forest in the 'model
2000' (row one in Figs. 2 and 3). This result mirrors
the settlement location of younger villages closer to
roads and populated areas, while older villages are
more evenly scattered across the area. Ethnic villages
have the lowest odds for closed forest (C) in both models. In the 'model 2000,' open forest and grass are
significantly more likely closer to ethnic villages than
other land uses, which points to a regeneration of forest on formerly used shifting cultivation plots and to
a decrease in these cultivation techniques over time.
Lagged population increases the probability of other
land use classes relative to closed forest in 'model
2000,' as we expected. A comparison between the
two periods reveals some interesting changes. Greater
population density is significant at the 1% level in
the 'model 2000,' but had small and insignificant effects in the 'model1990.' These results indicate that-

346

D. MUller; M. Zeller I Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

Factor Change Scale Relative to Category Grass
.t
.t6
.24
.38

.59

.92

SldCoel

c

Ethnic minority village (0/1)

Population (households), 1980
SldCoel

p

stdCoef

c

Age of reservoir • irrigated area, 1990
Sid Cool

-2.31
-1.86
-.97
-1.42
Logit Coefficient Scale Relative to Category Grass

c

G

~

Years since reservoir, 1990

3.51

c

M

StdCoel

2.25

c

b
G{

0

011

Km to all-year road in 1990

1.44

~G

Age of village (years), 1990

-.53

0

G
G

M

-.08

~
.36

.81

1.26

Source: own calculation
Fig. 3. Odds ratios of selected explanatory variables for land use in year 1990.

at lower levels of population density during the first
period-population induced little pressure on change
in land use, but growing population density generated
a demand for paddy and agricultural land. The coefficients for distance from markets and all-year roads
have the expected signs and higher values increase
the odds for closed canopy forest. The availability of
primary schools increases all land use classes in the
'model 1990,' while it decreases the probability of
land area covered with agriculture and paddy. Irrigation has a two-fold effect. Older reservoirs decrease
while more irrigated area increase the likelihood of
pixels to be covered by primary forest in the first period (Table 5). More irrigated area might, thus, have a
positive effect on forest protection through an increase
in land use intensity. The age of protected areas increases the likelihood of open and closed forest cover
compared to all other categories and, therefore, contributed to forest regeneration. On steeper land, forest
protection increases the probability of a pixel covered
with closed forest relative to grass land while the interaction terms with soil quality do not affect land use
classes.
The filter to correct for spatial autocorrelation yields
significant coefficients in X- and Y-direction. The
direction of the coefficients indicates the upper-left
(lower X- and Y-values) as the main area in which
agricultural development is concentrated.

4.4. Implications of the spatially explicit framework
The spatial framework facilitates the integration of
data from natural sciences with socio-economic data.
It allowed capturing a better understanding of driving forces, conditioning factors and outcomes of land
cover change. Continuous measures on variables like
rainfall, slope and distance are major factors determining agricultural development and the inclusion of
their location and spatial arrangement enhance the results and conclusions drawn in this paper. Many of
these conclusions could not have been drawn using
only cross-sectional data. The use of the spatial filter
enhanced overall predictive power manifested by the
prediction matrices as well as by the statistical tests in
both models. However, the changes in statistical power
due to spatial correction remained relatively small with
an improvement of prediction power of 1-2% points,
almost entirely in the categories mixed agriculture and
grass.
Problems for spatially explicit modelling and spatial statistics are frequently found in the combination
of data on natural resources with socio-economic information at an acceptable scale and under reasonable
assumptions and simplifications. The integration of
socio-economic data with continuous spatial layers
poses several challenges. Our attempt to combine land
use data with interpolation techniques and Thiessen

D. Muller, M. Zeller/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

polygons at the village-level addresses this issue. It
could be a reasonable approach considering the size
of our research area. However, this aggregation masks
decision-making processes at the farm and plot levels.
A combination with household level data and more
GPS data for field boundaries would improve the
strength of the overall model.

5. Discussion and policy implications
The findings from the satellite-image interpretation
suggest a decrease in open canopy forest in the first
period due to conversion into rain-fed and irrigated
agricultural land. Forest cover increased during the
1990s by 8%, mainly due to the natural regeneration of mixed grassland. Followed fields formerly
used for shifting cultivation were largely abandoned
during the last decade and regenerated to become
bamboo and open canopy secondary forest. Overall, rainfed mixed agriculture remained constant in
the 1990s, as the reduction in shifting cultivation
was compensated by an expansion of cropping area.
Over time, agricultural production became more locationally concentrated (less patches) with potential
environmental benefits for preserving the integrity
of ecosystems and endangered species populations.
These changes in land use show that shifting cultivation as the traditional farming system practised by
the indigenous population in the research area almost
entirely disappeared in its traditional form during the
last decade.
The effect of ethnic minority villages on land use
shows strong signs in both models. Ethnic villages are
on the average closer to forested and grass areas and
further away from all-year roads and political centres. Forest regeneration at the expense of agricultural
area predominantly occurs closer to ethnic villages.
The increase in forest cover over the last decade
despite the observed population growth does not
correspond to the widely stated positive correlation
between higher population density and lower forest
cover. Instead, it seems to support the findings from
Pender et al. (2001). Permanent conversion of primary forest into agricultural land was hardly observed
and, if so, it took place between Liberation Day and
1990, the key period of the government resettlement
programs.

347

Access to all-year roads improved substantially in
the last decade, thereby facilitating market integration, access to the infrastructure, agricultural inputs,
and public services. The investments in irrigation
and infrastructure, combined with improved access to
roads, markets, and services, were successful in intensifying agricultural production. Higher agricultural
productivity on existing land reduced the need for
shifting cultivation, thus preserving forest cover while
sustaining a much greater population on virtually the
same agricultural land area. Zeller et al. (2000) find
similar linkages between agricultural intensification
and rural income diversification on the one hand and
reduced pressure on forests and soils on the other
hand in one of their research areas in Madagascar.
This was possible through increases in the productivity of food and cash crops (mainly rice), as well
as an increase in cash crop production (mainly maize
and to a lesser extent coffee). Because of this and
on-going urbanisation, the upland arable area as well
as the paddy area reduced slightly, whereas much of
the grassland of the earlier period (due to shifting
cultivation) was reforested to become open canopy
forest and, to a lesser extent, closed canopy forest.
Protected areas contributed to this development by
decreasing the likelihood of non-forest land uses.
Thus, the policy measures have contributed to a reduction in shifting cultivation and facilitated agricultural
intensification.
During the first decade, we can observe a pathway
of land expansion into previously uncultivated areas.
The low population density facilitated extensive land
cultivation based on forest fallow. Few farmers applied
intensive cultivation techniques and production was
subsistence-oriented. The last decade brought about
significant changes in the policy environment such
as investments in road upgrades, irrigation facilities,
and the introduction of new technologies. This period was characterised by intensification without further land expansion and allowed forests to regenerate.
Today, forests cover nearly the same area as in 1975.
The land saving effect of technological progress prevailed over the labour saving effect. In other words,
labour-intensive technical progress diverted resources
away from land-intensive farming systems such as the
various forms of shifting cultivation by augmenting
the return on labour. At present, more people produce
more per capita on less land than ten years ago.

348

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

Investments in the road network did not significantly reduce forest cover as it was outweighed by
intensification on existing land. Road development
seems to contribute significantly to improvements in
productivity and welfare, in that way reducing land
expansion and removing pressure from forests. At the

same time, the shift to a market-driven economy in
1989 (doi moi), state policies on sedentarisation and
forest protection encouraged production and made traditional farming techniques more difficult to pursue,
thus, further contributing to the transformation from
traditional subsistence-based to a market-oriented

Table 4
Descriptive statistics for sampled observations
Variable

Observation

Mixed agriculture, 2000
Paddy, 2000
Closed forest, 2000
Open forest, 2000
Grass, 2000

19617
19617
19617
19617
19617

0.14
0.05
0.36
0.41
0.04

0.35
0.21
0.48
0.49
0.21

0
0
0
0
0

Mixed agriculture, 1992
Paddy, 1992
Closed forest, 1992
Open forest, 1992
Grass, 1992

19757
19757
19757
19757
19757

0.15
0.05
0.34
0.34
0.12

0.36
0.22
0.47
0.47
0.32

0
0
0
0
0

Slope (0 )
Elevation (100m)
Soil suitability for mixed agriculture
Soil suitability for paddy
Rainfall amount (100mm), 1992-1999
Rainfall variance (1 00 mm), 1992-1999
Rainfall amount (100mm), 1976-1991
Rainfall variance (lOOmm), 1976-1991

19787
19787
19776
19794
19780
19780
19780
19780

13.11
8.07
6.86
4.81
16.57
29.97
15.76
2.84

9.54
3.64
1.31
1.57
1.61
6.80
2.59
0.56

0
4.19

Age of village (years), 2000
Ethnic minority village (Oil)
Convertible land (0/1 ), 1992
Population, 1990
Population, 1980
Hero village (0/1)

19798
19798
19727
19780
19780
19798

29.33
0.67
0.08
5.34
2.99
0.26

18.08
0.47
0.27
3.21
2.26
0.44

0
0
0.001
0.000
0

Kilometres to district capital
Kilometres to all-year road, 1998
Kilometres to all-year road, 1990
Travel time to all-year road (h), 1990
Travel time to all-year road (h), 1980
Years since primary school, 2000
Years since reservoir, 2000
Age of reservoir x irrigated area, 2000
Age of reservoir x irrigated area, 1990
Years since introduction of NPK, 2000
Age of protected area (years), 2000

19798
19798
19798
19798
18950
19798
19798
19798
19798
19798
19798

19.10
5.89
17.78
0.80
1.55
12.26
9.70
1.63
0.59
3.95
0.99

10.27
4.95
10.98
1.21
1.65
9.86
8.97
1.93
0.83
3.06
2.51

0.05
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Coordinate in X-direction
Coordinate in Y-direction

19798
19798

869.12
507.27

384.61
231.53

Mean

S.D.

Minimum

9.63
16.73
11.58
1.79

Maximum

44
23.88
9
9
18.65
42.05
20.08
3.88
55

3
3

29.13
33.66
43.43
20.28
43.31
6
5
55
20
10.2
3.4
20
9
1623
1039

Source: primary data on village-level collected by authors through village survey and land cover data through interpretation of Landsat
images; secondary data on geo-physical and agro-ecological variables from the Mekong River Commission (Digital Elevation Model) and
provided by the Department for Agriculture and Rural Development, Dak Lak (Digital Soil Map and protected areas); rainfall data from
own interpolation of data from nine meterological stations, classification of soil suitability classes from expert opinion.

Table 5
Multinomial logit models of land use with closed forest as comparison group
Model2000
Mixed agriculture
Slope e)
Elevation (lOOm)
Suitability for paddy
Suitability for mixed agriculture
Rainfall amount (100 mm)
. Rainfall variance (100 mm)
Convertible land (0/1), 1992
Age of village (years)
Ethnic minority village (0/1)
Population (households)
Hero village (0/1)
Kilometres to all-year road
Kilometres to district capital
Travel time to all-year road (h)
Years since primary school
Years since introduction of NPK
Years since reservoir
Age of reservoir * irrigated area

Model1990
Paddy

Open forest

Grass

-0.166

-0.245

0.006

-0.044

-0.097

(16.08)**

(8.23)**

-1.72

(5.93)**

(15.98)**

Mixed agriculture

Paddy

Open forest

Grass

-0.207

0.012

(7.26)**

(3.50)**

0
-0.06

-4.229

-9.089

-0.819

-1.389

-1.45

-6.937

-0.759

-1.323

(24.48)**

(14.75)**

(45.39)**

(22.19)**

(37.23)**

(10.11)**

(45.55)**

(43.99)**

-0.303

-0.574

-0.345

-0.239

-14.695

-14.981

-14.461

-14.647

(3.06)**

(5.64)**

(3.47)**

(2.25)*

(37.69)**

(37.74)**

(37.11)**

(37.58)**

0.643

0.638

1.03

0.732

0.731

0.906

1.049

0.871

(6.39)**

(6.04)**

(9.92)**

(6.48)**

(8.74)**

(10.06)**

(12.39)**

(10.17)**

~
_..,

~
~

0.845

1.55

-0.099

0.53

1.602

1.67

1.114

1.538

(3.86)**

(4.60)**

-0.81

(2.59)**

(11.40)**

(7.14)**

(9.79)**

(11.45)**

-0.418

-0.154

-0.156

0.265

-0.747

-0.888

-0.222

-0.524

(3.84)**

-1.13

(2.38)*

(2.64)**

(10.12)**

(6.22)**

(3.50)**

(7.24)**

1.045
-1.5

0.291

-1.124

1.703

-0.45

-1.56

(2.59)**

l=l
~

"'

..,~

;;:

"""::::

;:!.

0.04

0.045

0.034

0.035

-0.021

-0.025

-0.028

-0.016

(7.96)**

(7.17)**

(9.86)**

(6.96)**

(4.73)**

(4.07)**

(8.03)**

(3.88)**

0.438

0.194

0.752

1.017

1.584

1.555

1.261

1.701

(2.60)**

-0.94

(6.08)**

(5.99)**

(10.77)**

(8.18)**

(10.45)**

(12.09)**

0.018

0.024

0.01

0.008

-0.013

-0.01

-0.013

-0.017

(5.36)**

(5.65)**

(4.13)**

(2.21)*

(4.01)**

(2.59)**

0.521

-1.268

-1.233

-0.736

0.452

-0.841

(2.49)*

(4.60)**

(9.34)**

(3.54)**

(2.71)**

(3.28)**

(4.52)**
-0.176
-1.3

(5.54)**
0.306
-1.9

-0.502

-0.326

-0.135

-0.177

-0.163

-0.304

0.023

-0.092

(10.53)**

(9.97)**

-1.73

(6.35)**

0.049

0.212

-0.009

0.106

(15.40)**

(5.51)**

(11.96)**

(6.78)**

0.116

0.189

0.079

0.167

(4.12)**

(6.01)**

(3.50)**

(6.01)**

0.242

0.115

-0.034

-0.045

(4.03)**

-1.25

-0.97

-0.68

-1.11

(2.74)**

-0.26

(2.52)*

-0.021

-0.029

-0.001

0.003

0.045

0.101

0.058

0.059

(3.96)**

(3.84)**

-0.35

-0.6

(6.67)**

(9.85)**

(10.08)**

(9.01)**

0.046

0.101

0.034

-0.039

-0.129

-0.086

-0.574

-0.097

-1.93

(3.71)**

-1.88

-1.48

(2.81)**

-1.6

(5.18)**

(2.13)*

0.047

0.034

0.074

0.022

0.072

0.033

0.071

0.126

(3.97)**

(2.07)*

(9.44)**

-1.74

(2.79)**

-0.86

(3.26)**

(5.04)**
0.027
-1.85

~

~

~

;:,
~

;;;
~-

"'
'l

w
<::>
~

'-

v,
v,

:t
~

-0.02

-0.002

-0.019

-0.012

0.05

0.075

0.068

(4.53)**

-0.29

(5.23)**

(2.47)*

(3.45)**

(4.38)**

(5.00)**

w

"""

1.0

....,
Vl

0

Table 5 (Continued)

~

Age of protected area (years)

Mixed agriculture

Paddy

Open forest

Grass

-0.376

-0.363
-1.92

0.019
-0.11

-0.314
-1.72

(2.11)*

~
;:,

Model 1990

Model 2000

Mixed agriculture

Paddy

Open forest

Grass

Interaction protection-slope

0.058

-0.119

0.024

-0.127

Interaction protection-soil

-1.11
0.101
-0.29

-0.69
-0.117
-0.33

(2.19)*
0.119
-0.35

(2.60)**
-0.004
-0.01

Coordinate in X-direction

0

-0.008

-0.001

-0.015

0.005

-0.05

(2.96)**

-0.97

(7.51)**

-0.005

-0.002

0.002

-0.004

(7.15)**

-1.83

(4.38)**

(7.06)**

Constant

16.877

20.284

7.388

-1.708

125.082

152.119

117.319

120.885

Observations

(4.62)**
19576

(3.43)**
19576

(3.34)**
19576

-0.48
19576

(39.48)**
18871

(45.87)**
18871

(36.15)**
18871

(37.38)**
18871

Coordinate in Y-direction

Source: own calculation. Notes: absolute value of z-statistics in parentheses below coefficients.
* Significant at 5%.
**Significant at 1% (coefficients with 5% or higher significance level in bold).

.....~
~
~
;:::
...."'

;::

OQ

::!.
<>
$::

~

0.002

0

0.00

(5.88)**

-1.66

-0.1

(3.77)**

0

0.002

-0.003

-0.003

-0.5

-1.38

(7.59)**

(5.95)**

a

?;1

§

~"'
'.J

~

C>

§

~

.1,.,
~

351

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

production. Moreover, government's expansion and
improvement of irrigation systems enabled and facilitated agricultural development. Rice yields and production almost tripled in the research area in the last
decade. Intensification from improved irrigation systems may have greatly reduced the pressure to expand
cultivated area at the expense of forest.

As we showed, the intensification of agriculturecombined with the (enforced) protection of forested
areas-can reduce the pressure on forested land, and
slow down or even halt the expansion of agricultural
land if coupled with the right policy instruments.
The analysis shows that investments in the infrastructure can facilitate this much-needed intensification of

Table 6
Measures of fit for multinomial logit models
Model 2000

Model 1990

Difference

-25123
-9825
19650 (19480)
30596 (92)
0.000
0.605
0.790
0.856
0.809

-26483
-13552
25862 (18795)
26158 (72)
0.000
0.485
0.746
0.794
0.711

-1360
-3727
-7323 (685)
-4882 (20)
0.000
0.120
0.044
0.062
0.098

Log-Lik intercept only
Log-Lik full model
Deviance (d.f.)
LR Chi 2 (d.f.)
Prob > LR
McFadden's Adj R2
Maximum likelihood R2
Cragg and Uhler's R2
Count R2
Source: own calculation.
Table 7
Likelihood-ratio tests for independent variables
Variable

Model2000

Model1990

Chi2

P > Chi2

Chi2

P > Chi2

404.36
4570.59
131.21
109.03
39.61
70.96

0
0
0
0
0
0

525.95
6405.80
302.51
182.21
139.30
189.63

0
0
0
0
0
0

Convertible land (Oil)
Age of village (years)
Ethnic minority village (0/1)
Population (households)
Hero village (0/1)

58.49
105.24
60.60
40.24
294.62

0
0
0
0
0

86.03
149.78
35.86
81.47

0
0
0
0

Kilometres to all-year road
Kilometres to district capital
Travel time to road (min)
Years since primary school
Years since introduction of NPK
Years since reservoir
Increase in irrigated area (ha)
Age of protected area (years)
Interaction protection-slope
Interaction protection-soil

341.46
61.07
35.20
37.27
38.32
115.90
52.18
71.84
18.97
4.27

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.371

664.52

0

23.28
173.39
56.72
33.55
88.72

0
0
0
0
0

Coordinate in X-direction
Coordinate in Y-direction

126.27
243.93

0
0

170.03
120.76

0
0

Slope (0 )
Elevation (lOOm)
Soil suitability paddy soil
Soil suitability mixed agriculture
Rainfall sum (lOOmrn)
Rainfall variance (100 mrn)

Source: own calculation. Notes: Ho = all coefficients associated with given variable(s) are 0.

352

D. Muller, M. Zeller/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

agriculture without detrimental consequences for forest resources.
The two districts in our study were purposively
selected and are not representative of the entire
province. Our secondary data and satellite images of
other districts in Dak Lak Province not presented in
this paper show a less positive picture as forest cover
continued to decline there during the second decade.
This is presumably due to less mountainous topography and the widespread existence of the basaltic soil
in these other districts. For that reason, the plantation
of coffee and pepper, much of it by state-owned enterprises, expanded rapidly in the 1990s to the detriment
of forest cover. Therefore, our findings relate to one
part of Dak Lak province and cannot be generalised
to all of the Central Highlands. Nonetheless, the
policy implications of this study call for a renewed
emphasis on rural and agricultural developmentcombined with effective enforcement of nature conservancy measures-that can address the subsistence
and income needs through improved technology and
institutions.
With respect to implications for further research, we
conclude that econometric modelling with larger samples no longer causes serious computational problems.
Remote sensing scanners of resolution as used here are
available at low costs for the public and continue to increase in quality. Problems for spatially explicit modelling and spatial statistics are found more frequently
in the combination of data on natural resources with
socio-economic information at an acceptable scale and
under reasonable assumptions and simplifications. The
integration of socio-economic data with continuous
spatial layers poses several challenges. Our attempt to
combine land use data with interpolation techniques
and Thiessen polygons at the village-level addresses
this issue. It could be a reasonable approach considering the size of our research area. However, this aggregation masks decision-making processes at the farm
and plot levels. A combination with household level
data and more GPS data for field boundaries would
improve the strength of the overall model.
Our analysis suggests a variety of possible extensions for future research. The dynamics of forest
cover change could be more deeply examined employing binary outcome models and panel estimation
procedures. With regard to the assumptions of the
independence of irrelevant alternatives, a nested logit

approach could yield more consistent estimates, but
adds complexity to the interpretation. Inferences from
underlying causalities are still difficult to draw given
the reduced-form model used in our analysis. Structural models would yield further insights, but would
also be more data demanding. An additional analysis could explore the potential endogeneity of the
placement of government programs to improve the
rural infrastructure (Bigman and Fofack, 2000). It is
our hope that the analysis presented here may have
highlighted the usefulness of spatially differentiated
models of land use change for agricultural and rural
development policy analysis.

Acknowledgements
The research was initiated by and is affiliated with
the Sustainable Management of Resources in the
Lower Mekong Basin Project (SMRP). The project
is implemented by the Mekong River Commission
(MRC) with support from the German Agency for
Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and the German Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development
(BMZ). This research project is supported by the
Tropical Ecology Support Program of the GTZ. We
are grateful to Regina Birner, Silke Boger, Gerald Nelson, Thomas Sikor, and one anonymous reviewer for
helpful comments on previous versions. Further, we
would like to thank Christoph Feldkotter, Pham Tan
Ha and Nguyen Thanh Thi Huong for their valuable
support concerning Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) and Remote Sensing (RS), as well as in the acquisition of primary and secondary data at the village,
commune, and district levels. We are also indebted to
lecturers from the Tay Nguyen University, Buon Ma
Thuot, who as soil experts provided valuable information for classifying soils. Finally, we would like
to express our gratitude to Nguyen Hong Quan and
Nguyen Hai Nam from the Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development; to Pham Muu Binh, director
of the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development of Dak Lak Province; and to Nguyen Ai Lien,
Tran Huu Nghi, and Tran Ngoc Thanh, who all provided invaluable support in logistics, data acquisition,
dissemination and the discussion of research findings
at the district, province and national levels.

D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

Appendix A
See Tables 4-7.

References
Angelsen, A., Kaimowitz, D., 2001. Agricultural technology and
forests: a recapitulation. In: Agricultural Technologies and
Tropical Deforestation. Oxon, pp. 383-402.
Anselin, L. Spatial Econometrics. http://geog55.gis.uiuc.edu/~luc/
[accessed Nov. 2001], 1999. Richardson, Texas, Bruton Center,
School of Social Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas.
Anselin, L., 2001. Issues in Spatial Probit Models. Department of
Agricultural and Consumer Economics, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign.
Aronoff, S., 1995. Geographic Information Systems: A
Management Perspective. WDL Publications, Ottawa.
Besag, J., 1974. Spatial interaction and the statistical analysis of
lattice systems. J. R. Stat. Soc., Ser. B 36, 192-236.
Bigman, D., Fofack, H., 2000. Geographical Targeting for Poverty
Alleviation: Methodology and Applications. World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Birner, R., Wittmer, H., 2002. Using social capital to create political
capital, How do local communities gain political influence?
A theoretical approach and empirical evidence from thailand.
In: The Commons in the New Millennium, Challenges and
Adaptation. MIT Press.
Boserup, E., 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Aldine,
Chicago.
Bracken, I., 1994. A Surface Model Approach to the Representation
of Population-Related Social Indicators. In: Spatial Analysis
and GIS. Taylor & Francis, London, pp. 247-259.
Cattaneo, A., 2001. Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon:
comparing the impacts of macroeconomic shocks, land tenure,
and technological change. Land Econ. 77, 219-240.
Chomitz, K.M., Gray, D., 1996. Roads, lands use, and
deforestation: a spatial model applied to Belize. World Bank
Econ. Rev. 10 (3), 487-512.
Chomitz, K.M., Thomas, T.S., 2001. Geographic Patterns of Land
Use and Land Intensity in the Brazilian Amazon. Development
Research Group. http://econ.worldbank.org/ [accessed Nov.
2001]. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Oak Lak Statistical Office, 2001. Statistical Yearbook 2000. Buon
Ma Thuot, Vietnam.
Deininger, K., Minten, B., 2001. Determinants of Deforestation
and the Economics of Protection: An Application to Mexico.
The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Entwisle, B., Walsh, S.J., Rindfuss, R.R., Chamratrithirong, A.,
1998. Land-Use/Land-Cover and Population Dynamics, Nang
Rong, Thailand. In: People and Pixels: Linking Remote Sensing
and Social Science. National Research Council, Washington,
DC, pp. 121-144.
Fox, J., Kanter, R., Yarnasarn, S., Ekasingh, M., Jones, R., 1994.
Farmer decision making and spatial variables in Northern
Thailand. Environ. Manage. 18, 391-399.

353

General Statistical Office, 2001. Statistical Yearbook 2000.
Statistical Publishing House, Hanoi.
Greene, W.H., 1997. Econometric Analysis. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Kaimowitz, D., Angelsen, A., 2000. Economic Models of Tropical
Deforestation: A Review. Center for International Forestry
Research, Bogor, Indonesia.
Kaimowitz, D., Angelsen, A., 2002. Economic Models of Tropical
Deforestation: A Review. Unpublished Manuscript, Third Draft.
Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia.
McFadden, D., 1973. Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative
Choice Behaviour. In: Frontiers in Econometrics. Academic
Press, New York.
Mertens, B., Sunderlin, W.O., Undoye, 0., Lambin, E.F., 2000.
Impact of macroeconomic change on deforestation in South
Cameroon: integration of household survey and remotely-sensed
data. World Develop. 28, 983-999.
Minot, N., Goletti, F., 2000. Rice Market Liberalization and
Poverty in Vietnam. International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC.
Munroe, D., Southworth, J., Tucker, C.M., 2001. The Dynamics
of Land-Cover Change in Western Honduras: Spatial
Autocorrelation and Temporal Variation. http://www.cipec.
org/index.html [accessed Jan. 2002].
Nelson, G.C., Harris, V., Stone, S., 1999. Spatial Econometric
Analysis and Project Evaluation: Modelling Land Use Change
in the Darien. http://www.iadb.org/sds/ [accessed May 2001].
Report for the Interamerican Development Bank. Washington,
DC.
Nelson, G.C., Harris, V., Stone, S., DePinto, A., 2001. Land
Use and Road Improvements: A Spatial Econometric Analysis.
http://www.ace.uiuc.edu/faculty/gnelson/ [accessed Nov. 2001].
Agricultural and Consumer Economics Staff Paper AE-4741.
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois.
Nelson, G.C., Hellerstein, D., 1997. Do roads cause deforestation?
Using satellite images in econometric analysis of land use. Am.
J. Agric. Econ. 79, 80-88.
Pender, J.L., Jagger, P., Nkonya, E., Sserunkuuma, D., 2001.
Development Pathways and Land Management in Uganda:
Causes and Implications. International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC.
Pender, J.L., Scherr, S.J., Duron, G., 1999. Pathways
of Development in the Hillsides of Honduras: Causes
and Implications for Agricultural Production, Poverty and
Sustainable Resource Use. International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC.
Pfaff, A.S.P., 1997. What Drives Deforestation in the Brazilian
Amazon? Evidence from Satellite and Socioeconomic Data.
The World Bank Policy Research Department Environment,
Infrastructure, and Agriculture Division, Washington, DC.
Pichon, F.J., 1997. Settler households and land-use patterns in
the Amazon frontier: farm-level evidence from Ecuador. World
Develop. 25, 67-91.
Ruthenberg, H., 1980. Farming Systems in the Tropics, 3 ed.
Oxford.
Ruttan, V.W., Hayami, Y., 1984. Towards a theory of induced
institutional innovation. J. Develop. Stud. 20, 203-223.

354

D. Muller; M. Zeller! Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 333-354

Scherr, S.J., Bergeron, G., Pender, J.L., Barbier, B., 1996.
Policies for Sustainable Development in Fragile Lands:
Methodology Overview. International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC.
Shively, G.E., Martinez, E., 2001. Deforestation, Irrigation,
Employment and Cautious Optimism in Southern Palawan,
The Philippines. In: Agricultural Technologies and Tropical
Deforestation. Oxon, pp. 335-346.
Tachibana, T., Nguyen, M.T., Otsuka, K., 1998. From Deforestation
to Reforestation through Tenure Reforms: The Case of the
Northern Hill Region of Vietnam. Hokkaido University, Tokyo
Metropolitan University and International Food Policy Research
Institute, Tokyo.

Templeton, S.R., Scherr, S.J., 1997. Population Pressure and the
Microeconomy of Land Management in Hills and Mountains
of Developing Countries. International Food Policy Research
Institute, Washington, DC.
van der Veen, A., Otter, H.S., 2001. Land use changes in regional
economic theory. Environ. Modell. Assess. 6, 145-150.
Zeller, M., Lapenu, C., Minten, B., Ralison, E., Randrianaivo,
D., Randrianarisoa, C., 2000. The critical triangle between
environmental sustainability, economic growth, and poverty
alleviation. In: Minten, B., Zeller, M. (Eds.), Beyond Market
Liberalization: Income Generation, Welfare and Environmental
Sustainability in Madagascar. Ashgate Publishing Company,
Aldershot, England, pp. 209-236.

