AGRICULTURAL

ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Consumption effects of genetic modification:
what if consumers are right?*
Konstantinos Giannakas a,*, Murray Fulton b
a Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 216 H. C. Filley Hall, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583, USA
b

Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Sask., Canada S7N 5A8

Received 8 June 2000; received in revised form 29 January 2001; accepted 27 November 2001

Abstract

This paper develops a model of differentiated consumers to examine the consumption effects of genetic modification (GM)
under alternative labelling regimes and segregation enforcement scenarios. Analytical results show that if consumers perceive
GM products as being different than their traditional counterparts, GM affects consumer welfare and, thus, consumption
decisions. When the existence of market imperfections in one or more stages of the supply chain prevents the transmission
of cost savings associated with the new technology to consumers, GM results in welfare losses for consumers. The analysis
shows that the relative welfare ranking of.the 'no labelling' and 'mandatory labelling' regimes depends on: (i) the level of
consumer aversion to GM products; (ii) the size of marketing and segregation costs under mandatory labelling; (iii) the share
of the GM product in total production; and (iv) the extent to which GM products are incotTectly labelled as non-GM products.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: Dll; D82; LIS; Q13; Ql8
Keywords: Consumer welfare; Genetic modification; Labelling; Mislabelling; Segregation costs

1. Introduction

Consumer concern about genetic modification
(GM) of food is one of the most notable features
of agricultural biotechnology. Unlike farmers, who

*

This work was carried out with partial support from the IFPRIled project on agricultural genetic resources and biotechnology policies. This project is primarily funded by the Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida), with additional support from the Canadian International Development
Agency (CIDA). The authors wish to thank Peter Hazell and two
anonymous reviewers of the journal for their useful comments
and insights. This is University of Nebraska-Lincoln Agricultural
Research Division Article no. 13240.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: + 1-402-472-2041;
fax: + 1-402-472-3460.
E-mail address: kgiannakas@unl.edu (K. Giannakas).

have seen agronomic benefits in the new technology
and have quickly adopted transgenic plants such as
Bt cotton and corn and herbicide-resistant soybeans
and canola (Economic Research Service, 1999), consumers have expressed reservations about the foods
produced from these crops. Consumer opposition to
GM products started in Europe and has spread to
other countries.
An Angus Reid poll in eight countries (France,
Germany, UK, Australia, Canada, US, Japan and
Brazil) found that among people aware of genetically
modified foods, 68% on average indicate they would
be "less likely" to purchase a food product if they
knew it contained genetically modified ingredients.
The proportion of respondents expressing aversion
to GM products varied between 57% in the US and

0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B. V. All rights reserved.
Pll: S0169-5150(02)00033-6

98

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

83% in Germany (The Economist, 2000). In an earlier
poll in the UK (MORI poll), 77% of those surveyed
favoured a ban on GM food. Consumer resistance
to GM is founded on health, environmental, moral
and philosophical concerns about the 'new' practice
(Hobbs and Plunkett, 1999; Lindner, 2000).
In response to this consumer reaction, a number
of food companies, such as Marks and Spencer, MeDonalds, Sainsbury, and Tesco in the UK, Nestle in
Switzerland, Carrefour in France, McCains in Canada,
and Frito Lay in the US, have indicated that they
are only accepting/selling non-GM products. Governments in the European Union (EU) and elsewhere have
also responded by introducing mandatory labelling
or by banning specific GM products (i.e. GM corn
and canola in Austria, France, Greece, and Luxembourg) (Hobbs and Plunkett, 1999; Runge and Jackson, 2000). At the international level, the Biosafety
Protocol signed by 130 countries in 2000 in Montreal
required that shipments of living genetically modified
products (such as seeds) are to be labelled as such.
While labelling of food products satisfies consumer
demand for the right to make informed consumption
decisions (Caswell and Mojduszka, 1996; Caswell,
1998), the introduction of segregation and labelling
raises a number of issues that affect everyone in the
food chain. One issue is the added costs that segregation and labelling introduce and the economic
impact of these costs on consumers. A second issue
is that segregation and labelling activities create incentives for the misrepresentation and mislabelling
of GM products as traditional food. Although, there
is a growing literature on the nature and origin of
consumer attitudes towards GM products, most of the
analysis on the economic consequences of these attitudes is rather heuristic in nature. An exception is the
paper by Plunkett and Gaisford (2000) who examine
the welfare effects of introducing GM products, but
do not consider consumer heterogeneity or examine
the possibility of mislabelling.
The objective of this paper is to develop a conceptual model that examines the consumption effects
of GM under alternative labelling regimes and segregation enforcement scenarios. More specifically,
the paper analyses the effect of GM products on the
welfare and purchasing decisions of consumers under: (i) no labelling; (ii) mandatory labelling under
full compliance; (iii) and mandatory labelling when

misrepresentation of the type of the product (i.e.
mislabelling) occurs.
In analysing the consumption effects of GM, this
paper explicitly accounts for consumer heterogeneity.
To capture the different attitudes towards GM, consumers are postulated to differ in the utility they derive
from the consumption of GM products and therefore
in their willingness-to-pay (WTP) for these products.
Consumer heterogeneity is critical in understanding
how demand for both GM and non-GM products exists when labelling occurs.
In this paper, 'genetically modified' products refers
to transgenics-products in which some form of gene
'splicing' has occurred. The new technology is assumed to generate production cost savings while
having no effect on product characteristics that are
observable by consumers; the analysis thus applies to
the producer-oriented first generation GM products
that are credence in nature.
The title of the paper stems from the major result of
the analysis, namely, that if consumers perceive GM
products to be different from their non-GM counterparts, then there is a reasonable expectation that a percentage of consumers will correctly believe that the
introduction of GM products lowers their utility and
would prefer to see these products banned. The key
factors that determine the magnitude of this welfare
loss are the degree of aversion to GM products, the
degree to which the cost savings at the farm level are
not passed through to consumers, and the magnitude
of the costs associated with segregating non-GM products from GM products. Although, this group would
like to ban GM products, when faced with the introduction of GM products as a given, this group will
prefer mandatory labelling to no labelling.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the conceptual model. Sections 3-5 examine
the effect of GM on consumer decisions and welfare
under no labelling, mandatory labelling with full compliance, and mandatory labelling with mislabelling,
respectively. Section 6 compares and contrasts the no
labelling and the mandatory labelling regimes while
Section 7 summarises and concludes the paper.

2. Consumer characteristics and behaviour
The rise of consumer concerns over GM products and the diversity of these concerns suggests that

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

consumers differ in their WTP for GM versus non-GM
food products. In the simplest case, consider a consumer that consumes one unit of either a traditional,
a GM, or a substitute product. Assuming that the
consumer spends a small fraction of total expenditure
on the goods in question, her utility function can be
written as:
Ut

= U-

Pt

if a unit of traditional product is consumed,
Ugm

=U

- Pgm - AC

if a unit of GM product is consumed,
and
Us= U-Ps

if a unit of a substitute product is consumed
where Ut is the utility associated with purchasing one
unit of the traditional product, Ugm the utility associated with purchasing one unit of the GM version of
the traditional product, and Us the utility associated
with purchasing one unit of a substitute product. 1 The
price of the traditional product is Pt. the price of its
GM counterpart is Pgm, and the price of the substitute product is Ps. The parameter U is a per unit base
level of utility while the term A.c gives the discount in
utility from consuming GM product. 2 The parameter
A. is a non-negative utility discount factor while the
characteristic c differs according to consumer and captures the consumer's aversion towards GM products.
1 One example of a product that could be supplied in both a
traditional and a GM form is margarine made from canola. In this
case, butter can be thought of as a substitute product. A second
example could be corn chips (made from traditional or GM corn);
the substitute product is potato chips. Other examples of traditional,
GM, and substitute products include meat coming from animals
fed with (traditional or GM) corn or soybean versus meat coming
from animals tbat are barley fed. For simplicity and without loss of
generality, it is assumed that the substitute product (butter, potato
chips and meat coming from barley fed animals in the preceding
examples) is free of GM ingredients. The implications of relaxing
this assumption are discussed in footnote 6.
2 U can also be interpreted as the maximum WTP for a unit of
the traditional or the substitute product. In such a case, consumer
maximum WTP for the GM product equals U -?-.c. The difference
between the WTP and the price of the (traditional, the GM, or
the substitute) product then provides an estimate of the relevant
consumer surplus.

99

To simplify the analysis, the characteristic c takes values between 0 and 1. Consumers with large values of c
prefer the traditional product rather than the GM product, all else equal. The assumption that A.c is greater
than or equal to 0 is consistent with evidence showing
that consumers are either indifferent or opposed to GM
products (Hobbs and Plunkett, 1999). 3 The analysis
initially assumes that consumers are uniformly distributed between the polar values of c. This assumption
is then modified to allow a bunching or a concentration
of consumers at the ends of the spectrum (i.e. 0 and 1).
Fig. 1 illustrates the situation where no GM product has been introduced. By assumption, the net utility associated with the traditional good is greater than
that associated with the substitute good, i.e. U - Pt >
U-Ps, for all consumers. In such a case, all consumers
purchase the traditional good and total consumer welfare is given by the shaded area in Fig. 1. The effect of
introducing GM products into the market is examined
in the following sections.

3. Consumer behaviour when GM products are
not labelled
Consider first the situation where a GM product is
introduced, but no labelling of the product is carried
out. Because the GM product and its traditional counterpart are marketed together, the price faced by the
consumer, Pnl, is the same regardless of which product is purchased. The lack of information about the
type of the product being sold means that consumers
are uncertain as to the nature of the product they purchase. Since the presence or absence of the GM is
not detectable with either search or experience, the
GM can be referred to as a credence characteristic
(Darby and Karni, 1973; Nelson, 1974). Assuming a
3 While our analysis applies to the producer-focused, first generation, GM products, the model can be extended, with some
modification, to analyse the consequences from the introduction of
consumer-oriented GM products. Specifically, if the new generation of GM products manages to possess attributes valued by consumers (e.g. nutraceuticals), the current aversion to GM products
could become preference for GM products with desirable characteristics. In such a case, the parameter c in the model would capture heterogeneous consumer preferences and ?-.c would represent
utility enhancement (rather than utility discount) from the consumption of GM products (i.e. the relevant utility function would
be written as Ugm = U - Pgm +?-.c).

K. Giannakas, M Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

100

Consumer utility

Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 1. Consumer decisions and welfare prior to the introduction of GM food.

probability of 1/f that the non-labelled product purchased is GM, consumer utility is now4
Unl

= U- Pnl -1/fA.c

if a unit of non-labelled product is consumed,
and
Us= U-Ps

if a unit of a substitute product is consumed
where Unl is the expected per unit utility associated
with purchasing the non-labelled product (i.e. Unl =
1/fUgm

+ (1 -1/f)Ut).

The consumption choice of the individual consumer
is determined by the relationship between the utilities
derived from the non-labelled product and the substitute. More specifically, the consumer with aversion to
GM product given by:

4 The probability that the non-labelled product is GM can be
seen as reflecting the share of the GM product in total production
(i.e. the portion of margarine that is genetically modified in the
example provided in footnote 1). The greater is the production
share of the GM version of the product, the greater is the likelihood
that the non-labelled product is GM.

is indifferent between consuming a unit of non-labelled
product and a unit of the substitute-the utility associated with the consumption of these offerings is the
same. Obviously, consumers with a lower aversion to
GM products (i.e. consumers with c E [0, c~1 )) will
prefer the non-labelled product while consumers with
higher aversion to GM products (i.e. consumers with
c E (c~1 , 1]) will consume the substitute. 5
Since consumers have been assumed to be uniformly distributed with respect to their aversion to OM
products, the level of aversion corresponding to the
indifferent consumer, c~, also determines the share
of the non-labelled product to total consumption, SnJ·
The consumption share of the substitute, Ss, is given
by 1 - c~ 1 . More specifically, SnJ and Ss can be written
as:

5 The focus of the analysis on individuals that were consumers
of the product prior to its genetic modification guarantees the
positive sign of c~1 . More specifically, for consumers to prefer
the product prior to its genetic modification it should hold that
U - Pt > U - Ps where Pt represents the price of the product
before genetic engineering. Due to the cost savings associated with
the new technology, the price of the non-labelled product Pnl will
be less than, or equal to, Pt.

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

101

Consumer utility

V-Pnl

U-pt

U-ps

0~--------------------~.--------------------~
Cnz

Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 2. Consumption decisions and welfare effects under GM and no labelling.

and
Ss

Ps- Pnl
= 1- :....::._....::.....:=
1/rA.

Fig. 2 graphs the determination of s 111 and ss. The
downward sloping curve graphs the utility associated
with the unit consumption of the non-labelled product for different levels of the differentiating attribute
c, while the (continuous) horizontal line shows the
utility derived from the consumption of the substitute. The dashed U - Pt curve is the utility curve
prior to GM. Thus, Fig. 2 is constructed on the
assumption that the price of the non-labelled product equals the price of the traditional product, i.e.
Pnl = Pt·
The intersection of the two (continuous) utility
curves determines the level of the differentiating
attribute that corresponds to the indifferent consumer, c~ 1 , as well as the consumption shares of the
non-labelled product and the substitute. Consumers
'located' to the left of c~1 purchase the non-labelled
product while consumers located to the right of c~1
find it optimal to consume the substitute. Consumer
welfare under no labelling is given by the area under

the effective utility curve shown as the bold kinked
curve in Fig. 2. 6
Comparative statics results can easily be drawn from
this model. More specifically, a decrease in the price of
the non-labelled product shifts the Unt curve upwards
and increases Sn! while an increase in the price of the
substitute causes a downward shift of the Us curve
that increases Sn! (i.e. asnJ/aPnl < 0 and asnJ/aps >
0). Finally, an increase in A. (i.e. an increase in the
utility discount from consuming GM product for any
level of c) and/or an increase in the likelihood that
the non-labelled product is genetically modified, 1jr,
6 Relaxing the assumption that the substitute product (e.g. butter
and potato chips in the examples above) remains free of GM
ingredients would result in a clockwise rotation of the utility curve
associated with its consumption through the intercept at U - p,
in Fig. 2. Similar to the case of the non-labelled product, the
slope of the new utility curve for the substitute product would
be determined by the utility discount factor A, and the share of
the GM version of the substitute product to its total production.
Obviously, genetic modification of the substitute product reduces
consumer welfare and increases the consumption share of the
non-labelled product (i.e. margarine and corn chips) relative to the
case where the substitute (i.e. butter or potato chips) remained in
its conventional form.

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton! Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

102

Consumer utility

U-pnz
U-p,
U-ps

Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 3. Welfare effects when GM reduces the market price (Pnl < Ptl·

cause a clockwise rotation of the U0 1 curve through
the intercept at U - Pol that reduces the share of
the non-labelled product to total consumption (i.e.
Bs0 1/BA. < 0 and Bs0 1/B1/I < 0).
The effect of GM on consumer welfare depends
largely on the effect of the technology introduction on
the market price of the non-labelled product. The effect
of GM on the final price of the product determines
whether there will be any gains for consumers as well
as the extent of losses due to consumer aversion to
GM technology.
More specifically, if the existence of market imperfections in one or more stages of the food chain
prevents the transmission of the cost savings to the
consumers, the price seen by consumers is not affected
by GM. As was noted earlier, Fig. 2 is constructed
on the assumption that the price of the non-labelled
product remains unchanged, i.e. Pol = Pt· Under this
assumption, the introduction of GM products leads to
a loss in welfare to consumers in aggregate. This loss
in welfare is given by the hatched area. Although the
consumers located at c = 0 experience no loss in welfare, all consumers located to the right of this point
see their utility fall. The extent of the realised welfare
loss depends on the level of consumer aversion to

GM products c, the utility discount factor A, and the
likelihood that the non-labelled product is GM, 1/J.
If the production costs savings due to GM are transmitted to consumers (i.e. in the case of a perfectly competitive food chain), GM technology reduces the price
of the product relative to its price prior to GM, Pt, and
consumers with relatively low level of GM aversion
will realise an increase in their welfare. Consumers
with relatively high aversion to GM product experience a reduction in their welfare since the price effect
of GM is outweighed by the utility discount from GM
product consumption. Fig. 3 graphs the effect of GM
on consumer welfare when Pol < Pt·
The analysis can be easily modified to examine
cases where consumers are not uniformly distributed
with respect to their value of c but, rather, are lumped
at either end of the continuum. For instance, when
consumers do not perceive GM products as being different from their conventional counterparts (i.e. when
c = 0 for all consumers), the introduction of the new
technology will either leave the welfare of consumers
unaffected (case where Pol = Pt. Fig. 2), or will make
all consumers better off (case where Pol < Pt, Fig. 3).
On the other hand, when the aversion of all consumers
is relatively high (i.e. when c = 1 for all consumers),

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

GM will cause consumer welfare to fall. More generally, when the distribution of consumers is continuous
(but not uniform), the welfare effects of GM depend
on its skewness, i.e. the more skewed is the distribution towards 1, the greater are the losses and the lower
are the gains (when Pnl < Pt) from the introduction
of the new technology.
Overall, the results of this section show that GM
technology and no labelling may result in some consumption switching to the substitute good and a net
welfare loss. If the number of consumers experiencing
a welfare loss is substantial, a ban could be both rational and welfare improving. For net consumer losses
to be realised it must hold that: (i) the price decrease
from GM (if any) is relatively small; (ii) the discount
in utility from consuming the GM product is relatively
high; (iii) the likelihood that the non-labelled product
is genetically modified is relatively high; and/or (iv)
consumers are concentrated at the right hand edge of
the aversion spectrum.

4. Consumer behaviour with mandatory labelling
and full compliance
Consider now the consumer choice problem in an
institutional arrangement with a mandatory labelling
regime in place. In this case, traditional (non-GM) and
GM products are segregated and marketed separately.
Consumers now have a choice between a non-GM
labelled product, its GM labelled counterpart, and a
substitute product. 7 Consumer utility is given by:
U[ =U-p;

if a unit of non-GM labelled product is consumed,
7 While the analysis assumes that both GM and traditional products are legally required to be labelled, the results are more general
and apply to the case where only the GM or the traditional product
has to be labelled. Specifically, when only traditional products are
labelled, unlabelled products will be perceived as GM products.
Similarly, if GM products are legally required to be labelled as
such, unlabelled products will be perceived as being traditional.
This symmetry does not hold, of course, when labelling is voluntary. With voluntary labelling, the labelling of a product as GM
does not imply that non-labelled products are traditional in nature.
Thus, suppliers of traditional food will always have incentives to
label their produce as being traditional. Consumers would perceive
products that are not labelled as traditional as being genetically
modified.

Ugm

=

103

U - Pgm - A.c

if a unit of GM labelled product is consumed,
and
Us= U-Ps

if a unit of a substitute product is consumed
where pf is the price of the traditional product after the
introduction of the new technology. All other variables
are as previously defined.
The GM product and the non-GM product are not
necessarily priced the same. In fact for any (positive) quantity of the GM labelled product to be demanded (i.e. for Ugm to exceed U[),Pgm should be less
than pf. There are two reasons why the GM product
will be priced lower than its traditional counterpart.
First, mandatory labelling means increased marketing
and segregation costs. These transaction costs associated with identity preservation cause consumer prices
to rise. The majority of these costs are incurred in
the non-GM labelled product chain (Lindner, 2000),
which, in turn, implies that consumers of the traditional product face a greater price increase. 8 Second,
it is assumed that GM technology generates production cost savings at the farm level. Some, if not all, of
the cost savings may be transmitted to the consumer
of the GM product.
Not only do the existence of marketing and segregation costs imply that U - Pgm > U - pf, the
size of these costs significantly affects the consumption shares of the products being examined. More
specifically, the greater the marketing and segregation costs, the greater is the price increase of the
non-GM labelled product (relative to the price of the
product prior to GM, Pt), and the lower is the utility
associated with the unit consumption of the non-GM
labelled product, U(. For relatively high marketing
and segregation costs, the utility from consuming the
non-GM labelled product might fall below the utility
8 The labelling of one type of product would only affect the
quantitative nature of the results by reducing the labelling costs in
the supply chain of the product that would not have to be labelled.
However, when any type of labelling occurs, traditional and GM
products will have to be segregated. The segregation costs will
always be higher for producers of the traditional product due to
the effort required to preserve the identity of their produce by
keeping it separate from the GM product that consumers regard
as being inferior.

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

104

Consumer utility

U-Pgm

14------Sgm

0

*

Cf

Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 4. Consumption decisions and welfare effects when segregation costs are relatively low (U-p; > U-Ps) and

associated with the consumption of the substitute (i.e.
U- pf < U - Ps). In such a case, consumers with
a relatively high aversion to GM products will switch
to the substitute product-there is no market demand
for the traditional (non-GM) product.
Fig. 4 depicts the consumption decisions under
mandatory labelling when marketing and segregation
costs are relatively low (i.e. when U - pf > U - p 5 ).
In this case, no consumer switches to the substitute.
The consumption shares of the GM and non-GM labelled products are determined by the intersection of
the Ugm and U{ utility curves. The consumer with
aversion to GM given by

* : U - Pgm - A.c *
1

c1

=U -

Pt1

pf- Pgm
=* c1* = ----'--)..----=--

is indifferent between consuming a unit of GM and
non-GM labelled product-the utility associated with
the consumption of these offerings is the same. Consumers with low aversion to GM products (i.e. consumers with c E [0, c!)) prefer the GM product, while
consumers with high aversion to GM products (i.e.
consumers with c E (c~, l]) consume the non-GM labelled product.

Pgm <p 1•

When consumers are uniformly distributed between
the polar values of c, c~ also determines the share
of the GM product in total consumption, Sgm· The
consumption share of the non-GM labelled product,
St. is given by 1 - c~, i.e.
sgm=

pf- Pgm
)..

(=ct)

and
St

=

I

1 _ Pt - Pgm
)..

Obviously, the share of the GM labelled product falls
as its price and/or the utility discount factor increase,
and rises as the price of the non-GM labelled product
increases (i.e. Bsgm/BPgm < 0, Bsgm/BA. < 0, and
Bsgm/Bpf > 0).
When the transaction costs from mandatory labelling are relatively high (i.e. when U- pf < U- p 5 ),
some consumers switch to the substitute product.
The consumption shares of the GM product and the
substitute product are determined by the intersection of the Ugm and Us curves (Fig. 5) and can be

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

105

Consumer utility

U-pgm

U-pt

U-p,
U-p;

s,

0
Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 5. Consumption decisions and welfare effects when segregation costs are relatively high (U-p; < U-Ps) and Pgm <p1 •

written as:
Ps- Pgm
*
Sgm =
(= cl)
A
and

=

l _ Ps - Pgm
A
Similar to the case of smaller marketing and segregation costs examined earlier, Sgm falls as Pgm and/or A
increase, and rises asPs increases (i.e. asgm/aPgm <
0, asgm/aA < 0, and asgm/aps > 0).
The welfare effects of GM under mandatory labelling clearly depend on the effect of GM technology
on the price of the GM product. More specifically, if
the price of the GM product is less than the price of
the product prior to its GM (i.e. if Pgm <p1) consumers
with relatively low aversion to GM product will gain
from the new technology. Consumers with relatively
high aversion to GM product experience a reduction in
their welfare due to: (i) the utility discount from GM
product consumption; and (ii) the price increase of the
traditional product caused by the marketing and segregation costs. Note that for Pgm to be reduced relative
to pr, two conditions should be met. First, the market
Ss

structure must be such that production costs savings
from the GM technology are transmitted to consumers
and, second, the effect of the reduced production costs
on the market price of the GM product should outweigh the effect of increased transaction costs associated with mandatory labelling.
Fig. 4 graphs the effect of GM on consumer welfare
when marketing costs are relatively low (i.e. U- pf >
U - Ps) and Pgm <Pt. The dashed U - Pt curve is the
utility curve prior to GM. For net consumer gains to be
realised it should hold that: (i) the price decrease from
GM is relatively high, (ii) the discount in utility from
consuming the GM product is relatively low, and/or
(iii) the marketing and segregation costs are relatively
low. A bunching of consumers at the left-hand edge
or the right-hand edge of the diagram would increase
the gain or loss, respectively.
More specifically, the greater the price reduction
from GM, the greater the upward shift of the Ugm
curve, the greater the consumer gains and the lower the
welfare loss from the new technology. Similarly, the
lower the A, the greater the slope of the Ugm curve,
the greater the gains and the lower the consumer
losses from GM. Finally, the greater the marketing and

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

106

segregation costs incurred in the non-GM product
chain, the greater the downward shift of the U - pf
curve and the greater the consumer welfare losses
from the new technology.
Fig. 5 depicts the welfare effects of GM when the
transaction costs from mandatory labelling are relative!~ high (i.e. when U- pf < U-Ps) and Pgm 2:: Pt·
In this case, no consumers gain from the new technology. The extent of the realised welfare losses depends
on the level of aversion to GM c, the utility discount
factor A., and the level of Pgm·

5. Consumer behaviour under mandatory
labelling: the effect of mislabelling
This section of the paper analyses the consequences
of mislabelling on consumer purchasing decisions and
welfare. Mislabelling refers to the case where producers or processors misrepresent the type of the product
sold in the market; they label GM products as non-GM
(or in a case where only GM products are required
to be labelled, they fail to label their GM products as
such) in an attempt to capture the price premium paid
for traditional (non-GM) produce.
When incidents of mislabelling occur in the food
marketing system, consumer trust in labelling falls.
Consumers can be expected to assign a probability to
the event that what is labelled as 'non-GM' is in fact
genetically modified. Because of the uncertainty regarding the nature of the product consumed, the utility
derived from the consumption of the non-GM labelled
product,
equals e[U- pf- A.c] + (1- e)[V- p1 ],
where e is the likelihood that the non-GM label is fal~e
and the product is actually genetically modified.9
Taking into account this uncertainty, the consumer
utility under mislabelling becomes:

uzn,

Utm

=

U -

pf - eA.c

and
Us= U-Ps

if a unit of a substitute product is consumed.
Relative to the situation of full compliance examined in the previous section, product misrepresentation results in a discount in the utility associated with
the consumption of the non-GM labelled product.
Graphically, this utility discount can be seen as a
clockwise rotation of the utility curve associated with
the non-GM labelled product through the intercept at
U - pf in Figs. 5 and 6.
Consider first the case where marketing and segregation costs are relatively low (i.e. U - p~ > U - Ps).
Compared to the case where mislabelling does not
occur, mislabelling reduces both consumer welfare
(shaded area in Fig. 6) and the consumption share of
the non-GM labelled product. Some of the (previously)
non-GM labelled product consumers (i.e. those with
cE(c/, ci]) switch to the GM labelled product while
consumers with a relatively high level of c (i.e. consumers with cE(c2, 1]) switch to the substitute. The
greater the probability ethat the non-GM label is false
and/or the greater the utility discount from the consumption of GM products, A., the greater the welfare
losses from mislabelling and the greater the share of
non-GM product consumers that switch to the GM
product and the substitute.
In the presence of mislabelling, the consumption
share of the GM labelled product, sgm• equals c 1 , the
share of the non-GM labelled product, St. equals c 2 CJ, while 1 - c2 percent of consumption moves to
the substitute. Mathematically, the consumption shares
can be written as

=

s
gm

St

= :Ps_____ _.:pf
.___:_
eA.

if a unit of non-GM labelled product is consumed,
Ugm

= U-

I

Pt- Pgm _
A.(1 -e) (- CJ)

pf- Pgm

A.(l-e) (=c2-CJ)

and
Pgm- A.c

I

Ss

if a unit of GM labelled product is consumed,
9

Note that the consumer utility when the non-GM labelled
product is GM is given by U-p;- J...c (rather than U-p m - J...c)
since the price paid for the consumption of the product isg (and
not Pgm).

p;

= 1-

Ps e~ Pt ( = 1 - C2)

When the marketing and segregation costs are relatively high (i.e. when U - pf < U - Ps), then mislabelling, as opposed to full compliance, has no effect
on either welfare or the consumption decisions of

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

107

Consumer utility

-+-

Sgnz

st

_____.

-+-

ss _____.

Cz*
Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 6. Consumption and welfare effects of mislabelling when segregation costs are relatively low (U -

consumers since in this case no traditional (non-GM)
product is consumed (Fig. 5).

6. No labelling versus mandatory labelling
After having analysed the consumption effects of
GM technology under the 'no labelling' and 'mandatory labelling' regimes, the question that naturally
arises is which labelling regime dominates in terms of
its effect on consumer welfare. Or put in a different
way, since the introduction of GM products can result
in net welfare losses under both the 'no labelling'
and the 'mandatory labelling' regimes, what regime
harms consumers the least?
The determination of the factors affecting the relative performance of the two labelling regimes is
straightforward. Fig. 7 shows the effective utility
curves under no labelling (dashed kinked curve) and
mandatory labelling under full compliance (solid
kinked curve) when the marketing and segregation
costs are relatively low. For simplicity and without
loss of generality Fig. 7 depicts the situation in which

p; >

U - Ps).

the price of the non-labelled product Pnl equals the
price of the GM labelled product Pgm.
The shaded area NL reflects consumer utility under
the no labelling regime that is lost when mandatory
labelling is introduced. Similarly, the area ML represents consumer utility that is lost from a switch from
mandatory labelling to no labelling. Obviously, consumers located to the right of c+ will favour mandatory labelling, while for consumers located to the left
of c+ no labelling is the preferred labelling regime.
The ranking of the labelling regimes in terms of their
net effect on consumer welfare depends on the relative size of the shaded areas in Fig. 7; if NL is greater
than ML, then no labelling is the superior regime. Obviously, when the assumption of a uniform distribution of consumers is relaxed, the welfare ranking of
the two labelling regimes is affected by the skewness
of the distribution. In general, the greater the number of consumers that are characterised by a relatively
high aversion to GM products (i.e. the more skewed
towards one is the distribution of consumers with respect to their value of c), the greater the likelihood that
mandatory labelling is the preferred labelling regime.

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

108

Consumer utility

U-Pnt
U-Pgm

U-ps

0
Differentiating consumer attribute (c)
Fig. 7. Mandatory labelling vs. no labelling when segregation costs are relatively low (U-p; > U- p 8 ).

Comparative statics results can easily be derived
from Fig. 7. For instance, an increase in the likelihood
that the non-labelled product is GM (i.e. an increase in
1/J') causes a clockwise rotation of the UnJ curve (Unl =
U- Pnr-1/1' "Ac) that increases ML and reduces NL. The
greater is 1/J', the greater is the consumer support for
mandatory labelling. Similarly, an increase in the marketing and segregation costs associated with mandatory labelling will shift the U - pf and U - Pgm - "Ac
curves downward increasing NL and reducing ML.
The greater the marketing and segregation costs, the
greater the proportion of consumers favouring no labelling; when marketing and segregation costs are relatively high (i.e. when U - pf < U - p8 ) the area ML
vanishes and no labelling is the superior regime.
Finally, when the assumption of full compliance
is relaxed and the possibility of product misrepresentation is introduced, the mandatory labelling regime
becomes even less appealing from the consumers'
standpoint; mislabelling increases the likelihood that
no labelling is superior in terms of its effects on total
consumer welfare. The greater the probability that
mislabelling occurs, the greater the consumer utility
losses under mandatory labelling, and the greater

the likelihood that an ali-or-nothing choice between
the two labelling regimes in terms of their effect on
consumer utility will favour no labelling.

7. Concluding remarks
This paper develops a model of differentiated consumers to examine the effects of GM technology on
the welfare and purchasing behaviour of consumers.
The conclusion of this paper is that if consumers perceive GM products to be different from their traditional counterparts, then demands for the banning of
GM products and GM labelling are rational. For instance, when the existence of market imperfections in
one or more stages of the supply chain prevents the
transmission of the cost savings associated with the
GM technology to consumers, then the introduction
of GM products will generally result in welfare losses
for consumers. This is true regardless of the labelling
regime that is in place.
Given that GM products have been introduced
into the food system, the analysis also shows that
the relative welfare ranking of the 'no labelling' and

K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 97-109

'mandatory labelling' regimes depends on: (i) the
level of consumer aversion to GM products, (ii) the
segregation costs associated with mandatory labelling;
(iii) the share of the GM product in total production;
and (iv) the extent of mislabelling. More specifically, the greater the segregation costs associated with
mandatory labelling, the greater the likelihood that no
labelling is the superior labelling regime. The greater
the likelihood that the non-labelled product is GM,
the greater the likelihood that mandatory labelling
will be preferred.
Finally, when the possibility of product mislabelling is introduced into the analysis, the desirability
of mandatory labelling by consumers falls. The uncertainty about product characteristics due to mislabelling
reduces consumer welfare and drives some non-GM
product consumers out of the market. The lower
the level of trust in the labelling system, the greater
the expectation that mislabelling occurs, the greater
the consumer utility losses under mandatory labelling,
and the greater the likelihood that an aU-or-nothing
choice between the two labelling regimes in terms of
their welfare implications favours no labelling.
The results of this paper can provide an explanation for policy decisions about GM technology and
labelling observed around the world. Relatively low
(or zero) consumer aversion to genetic engineering
coupled with a reduced price of GM products and
significant segregation costs associated with mandatory labelling could be among the reasons why a 'no
labelling' policy has been adopted by countries such
as the US and Canada. Increasing consumer concerns,
however, and the relatively high level of consumer
trust in the food safety institutions in both countries
could increase the relative efficiency of, and hence the
consumer demand for, mandatory labelling.
A relatively high aversion to GM technology coupled with a lack of a price reduction for GM products
would rationalise mandatory labelling, an outcome
seen in various EU countries. However, a high level
of distrust of food safety and inspection systems can
undermine the value of labelling. This result sheds
light on the demand for an outright ban of GM

109

products by some European consumers, since faith in
the food inspection systems there has been reduced
by food safety scares such as the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) crisis in the British beef
industry.
In summary, consumer concerns about GM products
can be expected to affect consumption decisions and
to influence the public policy response demanded by
consumers. These consumption decisions, along with
the decisions made by policy makers as to how GM
products are introduced into the food system, can have
significant impacts on the demand for GM products
throughout the food system. These system effects, in
turn, will affect the decisions made by farmers as to
which crops they grow as well as decisions made by
life science companies as to the pricing and the development of GM technologies.
References
Caswell, J., 1998. Should use of genetically modified organisms
be labelled? AgBioForum 1, 22-24.
Caswell, J.A., Mojduszka, E.M., 1996. Using informational
labelling to influence the market for quality in food products.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78, 1248-1253.
Darby, M., Karni, E., 1973. Free competition and the optimal
amount of fraud. J. Law Econ. 16, 67-88.
Economic
Research Service, 1999. Genetically engineered crops for pest
management. Economic Research Service, US Department of
Agriculture, www.econ.ag.gov/whatsnew/issues/biotech.
Economist, 2000. Blech. 15 January, p. 69.
Hobbs, J.E., Plunkett, M.D., 1999. Genetically modified foods:
consumer issues and the role of information asymmetry. Can.
J. Agric. Econ. 47, 445-455.
Lindner, B., 2000. The future of Frankenstein foods. In:
Proceedings of the Paper Presented at the 44th Annual
Conference of the Australian Agricultural and Resource
Economics Society, Sydney.
Nelson, P., 1974. Advertising as information. J. Polit. Econ. 81,
729-754.
Plunkett, M.D., Gaisford, J.D., 2000. Limiting biotechnology?
Information problems and policy responses. Cur. Agric. Food
Res. Iss. 1, 21-28.
Runge, C.F., Jackson, L.A., 2000. Labelling, trade and genetically
modified organisms (GMOs): a proposed solution. J. World
Trade 34, 111-122.

