Agricultural Economics, 6 (1991) 115-128
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam

115

A stochastic dynamic programming framework
for weed control decision making:
an application to Avena fatua L.
Sushil Pandey

1

Department of Agricultural Economics, School of Agriculture, The University of Western
Australia, Nedlands, W.A. 6009, Australia

and R.W. Medd
Agricultural Research and Veterinary Centre, Forest Road, Orange, N.S. W. 2800, Australia

(Accepted 22 November 1990)

ABSTRACT
Pandey, S. and Medd, R.W., 1991. A stochastic dynamic programming framework for weed
control decision making: an application to Avena fatua L. Agric. Econ., 6: 115-128.
This paper develops a stochastic multi-period decision model to analyse a continuous
wheat cropping system infested by wild oats (Avena fatua L.), in southern Australia. The
multi-period solutions is obtained by employing a dynamic programming model in conjunction with a bioeconomic simulation model. An empirically estimated dose response function
is used to derive the optimal herbicide rate. Uncertainties due to environmental effects on
the performance of herbicide and crop yields are modelled and optimal decision rules
derived. The results indicate that substantial economic gains can be realised if herbicide
dose decisions are taken by considering future profit effects of current decisions, as opposed
to the more common approach of only considering the current-period effect.

INTRODUCTION

Weeds impose a considerable economic burden on the Australian farmer.
Total losses due to weeds for 1985 j86 have been estimated to be approximately A$1500 million (Combellack, 1987). In 1984, farmers in Australia
Present/Correspondence Address: Department of Agricultural Economics and Business
Management, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W. 2351, Australia.
1

0169-5150j91j$03.50 © 1991 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

116

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

spent over $220 million on herbicides (Blacklow et al., 1984), a large
proportion of which was for weed control in wheat. Despite such massive
expenditure, may important attributes of the crop-weed-herbicide system
are not explicitly modelled in deriving herbicide dose recommendations.
For example, in some states of Australia it is illegal to apply any dose of
herbicide other than that specified on the label (Pannell, 1989). In other
states farmers may legally apply any dose up to that specified on the label
but the recommendations are based on simplified singly-period threshold
concepts with ad-hoc adjustments for risks.
Uncertainty in the crop-weed-herbicide system arises mainly from the
variability in the performance of control measures, variability in the weedfree yield and variability of weed density. Feder (1979) has theoretically
investigated the effect of some of these risks on the optimum dose of the
control agent in a generic framework. Most contributions on modelling the
effects of risk on pest control decisions are deficient because only one
source of risk is modelled at a time, In reality, risks faced by farmers are
manifestations of several sources of uncertainties and hence models which
accommodate multiple sources of risk are likely to have greater relevance.
Benefits from weed control have a multi-period dimension due to (a) the
effects of current level of control on future infestation levels, (b) development of herbicide resistance, and (c) herbicide carryover effects. Even
though the current profits may not be adequate to recoup the current costs
of treatment, some treatment may be justifiable if the possible prevention
of future losses is also taken into account. Crop rotation decisions in many
cases are governed by such long-term considerations. Similarly, if resistance
to herbicides is likely to develop, recommendations based only on current
period effects will be suboptimal. The models of decision making in weed
control must thus be cast in a multi-period framework.
The purpose of this paper is to present a systems model for herbicide
recommendations taking into account multi-period effects of current weed
control decisions, stochastic influences and farmers' attitude towards risk.
Our objective was to develop a stochastic multi-period decision model for
weed control which could be solved using dynamic programming in conjunction with a bioeconomic model and which considered uncertainties in
the performance of herbicide and crop yields in deriving optimal decision
rules. An empirically estimated dose response function is used to derive the
optimal dose of the control agent, a non-residual post-emergence herbicide. Although all three types of multi-period effects can be built into the
model, data limitations permitted the incorporation of only the effect of
the current level of control on future infestation. This is done in the
context of a continuous wheat cropping system in southern Australia which
is infested with wild oats (Avena fatua L.).

WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L.

117

AN ECONOMIC MODEL OF WEED MANAGEMENT

For the purpose of this study, we have assumed a farm of non-specific
size is uniformly infested with wild oats, is a closed system with negligible
export or import of weed seeds and is managed by one farmer. The
economic output of the farm is the grain yield of an annual crop. The
farmer wishes to maximise profit (or utility) over a planning horizon of T
periods. The profit function is assumed to be stationary in the sense that its
parameters are constant over time. The decision problem is to derive an
optimal strategy for the control of wild oats using diclofop-methyl. The
solution is the dose of herbicide applied in each time period such that the
present value over the planning horizon is maximised.
The solution to the problem can be found by using the tools of the
optimal control theory. Let B(sDI' X 1 ) define profit in time period 't' as a
function of the seed density in the soil (so) and herbicide dose (X). In the
parlance of the optimal control theory, so and X are the state and decision
variables, respectively. The change in seed density from one time period to
the next depends on the initial seed density which determines the potential
for seed production during the current time period and the quantity of
herbicide used which determines the reproductive output. Let G(so I' X 1 )
be a function measuring the change in seed density. The function G
represents the equation of motion. Also, let S(soT) represent the terminal
value of the weed seed bank at the end of the planning horizon. The
objective function, assuming profit maximisation, is to maximise present
value (Pv):
T-1

max

PV

=

E B (SD

I'

XI) 8 I

+ 8 I s(SD T)

(1)

t= 1

subject to
SD 1 + 1 - SD 1 = G(sol' X 1 )
where 8 1 is the discount factor for time period 't'. Applying Pontryagins'
Principle of Maximum, one of the first-order conditions requires that:

t=0,1, ... ,T-1

(2)

Equation (2) is equivalent to the usual first-order condition of setting
marginal profits equal to zero if either A1 + 1 or aG ;aX1 is assumed to be
zero. The costate variable A1+ 1 represents the marginal change in present
value caused by a marginal change in the number of seeds at the beginning
of time period 't '. Other things remaining constant, an increase in the
current number of seeds (and hence weeds) reduces future profits; hence
A1 + 1 < 0. Also, aG ;aX1 < 0 because, ceteris paribus, future weed popula-

118

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

tion is reduced if the addition to the seed bank is reduced by increasing the
current herbicide dose. The second term in equation (2), which measures
the marginal benefit resulting from the effects of current level of control on
future infestation, is hence non-negative. Due to the beneficial of the
current level of control on future profits, the current marginal productivity
of control inputs is increased. This results in a higher level of control than
when current profits are maximised.
DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING MODEL

Dynamic programming is a computationally efficient method for solving
the maximisation problem specified in equation (1). The method has been
used for deriving optimal weed control strategies by Fisher and Lee (1981),
Shoemaker (1982) and Taylor and Burt (1984). Its more general application
for agricultural resource management has been reviewed by Kennedy
(1986). The advantage of dynamic programming is that risk elements can be
more easily incorporated, compared with other programming methods, and
globally optimal solutions can be found even if the objective function is
non-concave and discontinuous. To obtain a solution the total planning
horizon is divided into periods (or 'stages' in the dynamic programming
parlance) and the optimal solution for each stage derived. The interdependence of decision between stages is captured by using the concept of the
state as these variables portray the nature of the system at the beginning of
each stage. Thus the effects of decisions in one stage on the following stage
is transmitted through the state variable. State variables need to be defined
so that all information relevant to the current decision problem is embraced by the state variables. This requirement of dynamic programming is
called the condition of Markovian independence (Nemhauser, 1966).
With the post-emergence herbicide as the control agent, weed density at
the time of spraying is one of the state variables. If seeds exhibit dormancy,
as in the case of wild oats, the number of viable seeds in the soil is another
state variable. However, weed density can be ignored if a constant proportion of the seed bank is recruited. Thus, in the deterministic model in
which all stochastic variables are replaced by their mean values, the seed
bank population is the only state variable. The stochastic model is properly
specified as having two state variables. However we used Taylor and Burt's
(1984) decomposition method since it is more efficient for solving the
stochastic model. The decomposition procedure is explained in a later
section.
The uncertain variables included in the model are the efficacy of
herbicide and weed-free yield. All other variables such as crop price, weed
density and spray efficiency are assumed to be known with certainty. It has

WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L.

119

been the experience of farmers and researchers that the variability in
herbicide efficacy is one of the dominant sources of risk in weed control.
Similarly, weed-free yield is strongly influenced by climatic factors and this
impinges on the profitability of weed control decisions.
In the literature on pest management, it is usual to consider pest density
as an uncertain variable. Uncertainty arises both from non-uniform spatial
distribution and with difficulties in measuring pest density. When the
planning horizon is a single-period, it is straight forward to model spatial
variability in weed density. However, in a multi-period framework, it
becomes necessary to introduce a state variable for each portion of land
with different weed densities. Such a dynamic programming model would
be very difficult to solve. Thus the assumption made here is that a farmer
would subjectively partition land into nominal categories according to the
density of the weed. The spraying decision for a particular portion then
depends on the weed density category. Formulated this way, the optimal
decision rule for a farmer with more than one partition can be easily
obtained from a single-state dynamic programming solution.
The solution procedure involved in the dynamic programming model is
described by the recursive equation:

v; (SD

f'

Wr) = max [ E 7T ( SD f' Wr ' xt) + () E v;- 1( SD t - 1 ' Wr- 1 ) ]
X,

t=l,2, ... ,T

(3)

where v;Csn 0 Wr) is the optimal value function at stage 't' given seed
density (sn) and weed density (W); 7T is the current profit if decision X is
implemented and E is the expectations operator. In accordance with the
dynamic programming method, time subscripts are specific in reverse
order. Thus, the last year of the planning horizon is labelled as stage 1, the
second last year as stage 2, and so on.
The length of the planning horizon, T, may be finite or infinite. In the
solution of the infinite horizon problem, the optimal decision rule depends
on the value of the state variable but not on the decision stages. In the case
of the finite horizon problem the optimal decision depends both on the
value of the state variable and the decision state. An approximate solution
of a finite horizon problem can be derived by first solving the model for an
infinite horizon such that v; : : : v; _1 and using the optimal decision rule
corresponding to v; for deriving solutions for a finite horizon problem.
In the deterministic model, weed density was deleted as a state variable
because it is assumed to be a constant proportion of seed density. In the
stochastic model weed density was retained along with seed density giving
two state variables. The model was solved in two steps. First, the optimal
value function for an infinite horizon problem was derived by dropping

120

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

weed density as in the case of a deterministic model. In the second step,
the optimal value function derived in the first step was substituted for v;._ 1
and an additional iteration solved. The recursive equation for the second
step being:

(4)
The two-state variable problem is solved in the second stage by specifying
current profit as a function of weed density and seed density. Although
v;._ 1 is specified as a function of sot-l only, the decision rule derived is not
myopic because the multi-period effects of current decisions are reflected
by the seed bank population which appears in v;._ 1• It is also assumed that
weed density in the current period does not have any significant indirect
effect on weed density in the next period.
For deriving numerical solutions, the state and decision variables were
represented by 63 and 17 discrete values, respectively. The decision alternatives considered are different doses (including non-use) of diclofopmethyl up to the maximum permitted dose. For each starting value of the
state variable, profits and ending values of the state variable were calculated for all discrete decision alternatives. For the ending value of the state
variable falling between the two grid points, the optimal value function was
approximated by linear interpolation between the adjacent grid points.
Risk is introduced to the model through random variables. Two random
variables are required to incorporate risk of herbicide efficacy and weedfree yields. In the estimated weed kill function (see bioeconomic model),
herbicide efficacy depends on soil moisture, which can take one of three
ranked values. A discrete probability distribution for the soil moisture was
derived by analysing climatic data. Values from this distribution were
selected by Monte-Carlo sampling. In the case of weed-free yield, the
simulated values (see bioeconomic model), were used directly as a sample
from its distribution. The random variables associated with the soil moisture at the time of spraying and the weed-free yield were sampled independently. This is justified because correlation between them is expected to be
low. Whereas herbicide efficacy is highly influenced by soil moisture at the
time of spraying, the weed-free yield depends on the moisture regime
throughout the life of the crop.
Bioeconomic simulation model

A bioeconomic simulation model was developed to trace the effect of
weed control decisions on both the current and the future profits. The
overall model is comprised of submodels for weed population dynamics,

WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L.

121

yield response to weed infestation, weed kill function, weed-free yield of
crop, and climatic and economic factors.
A life cycle model of wild oats is used for predicting seedling recruitment, plant survival, seed production and seed survival. The recruitment of
wild oats is not synchronised and occurs in waves during its life cycle (Quail
and Carter, 1968; Amor, 1985). Given that the control agent is a non-residual post-emergence herbicide, modelling is helped by dividing seedlings
into three cohorts. Plants which emerge before sowing belong to the first
cohort. The second cohort encompasses plants emerging after sowing but
before the post-emergence herbicide is applied. Plants emerging after the
application of the post-emergence herbicide constitute the third cohort.
The seed bank is assumed to be homogeneous and recruitment in each
cohort is specified as a constant proportion of the seed bank. Values of
23%, 12% and 2% recruitment were assumed respectively for the three
cohorts. All seedlings in the first cohort are assumed to be killed by
presowing operations. Due to the competitive effects exerted by seedlings
upon each other, only a proportion of seedlings survive to maturity.
Empirical evidence indicates that the majority of deaths in the second
cohort seedlings occur before the biologically appropriate time for the
application of the post-emergence herbicide (Medd, unpublished data).
Thus, it is assumed that the full effect of density-dependent mortality is
realised before the application of diclofop-methyl.
Plant fecundity is also density-dependent and is described by a hyperbolic function, where the maximum number of seeds produced per plant
were 118, 22 and 4 for plants belonging to cohorts one to three, respectively. Some proportion of new seeds produced, in this case 10%, is
assumed to be removed by the combine. Also, a proportion (65%) of the
existing seed bank is lost due to natural mortality. Thus, the seed dynamics
can be described by the following identity:

(5)
where snt+l is the size of the seed bank at the start of the period t + 1, sn 1
is the starting stock of seed bank, G is the loss due to recruitment, M is the
loss due to mortality, and N is the new seed added to the seed bank. Most
of the parameters for the model are obtained from experimental work at
Orange, N.S.W. (Medd and Ridings, 1990). Values of the parameters
unavailable from this source were obtained from experimental work in the
United Kingdom (Cousens et al., 1986).
The yield (Y) of a weedy crop is specified as:

Y= Y*g(W)

(6)

where Y * is a parameter representing the maximum attainable yield in a

122

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

weed-free situation given the level of environmental and management
inputs, W is the weed density at maturity, and g( ·) is a function often
called the 'relative yield response' (Lanzer and Paris, 1981). By definition,
g(O) = 1 and g( oo) = c *, where 0 < c * :::; 1. Thus the function g( ·) provides
a scaling factor. An implicit assumption contained in this specification is
that Y * and g( ·) are separable. This assumption seems plausible and has
been widely used to describe the yield response to various factors such as
irrigation (Doorenbos and Kassam, 1979), fertilisers (Lanzer and Paris,
1981), weeds (Cousens et al., 1986) and insect pests (Feder, 1979).
It is usual to represent g( ·) in the case of pests by a linear or sigmoidal
function of pest density (Feder, 1979; Zimdahl, 1980). Cousens (1985) has
argued, however, that g( ·) is more accurately represented as a hyperbola
in the case of weeds. The specific form suggested is:

g(W)

=

1- Wj(a- 1 + Wb- 1 )

(7)

where 'a' and 'b' are the parameters, with values of 104.4 and 1.22,
respectively. The parameter 'a' is a measure of the marginal yield loss as
the weed density approaches zero. The parameter 'b' is an estimate of the
maximum proportionate yield loss of a weedy crop. Since crops and weeds
exert competitive effects on each other, yield loss due to weeds also
depends on crop density. Based on Australian data, Martin et al. (1987)
found 'a' to be proportional to crop density and their parameter estimates
have been used herein.
Dose response function relates the quantity of herbicide applied to the
proportion of weeds killed. The dose response relationship has the properties of a probability distribution function (Finney, 1971; Lichtenberg and
Zilberman, 1986). Since the response to herbicides is a binomial variable
(with the plants being considered as dead or alive), probit and logit
regressions are the appropriate methods for efficient estimation of dose
response relationships (Finney, 1971; Hewlett and Plackett, 1979). The
logit specification is used in the present study, the specific relationship for
diclofop-methyl being:

(8)
where P is the proportion of weeds killed, X is the quantity of herbicide
applied (up to a maximum dose of 2liters ha - 1), SM and A are measures of
soil moisture and additives which also affect the performance of herbicide,
and u is the random disturbance term.
Data from field experiments testing diclofop-methyl for control of wild
oats, conducted by Hoechst in Western Australia, Victoria and New South
Wales were adjusted for the effects of natural mortality using Abbott's
formula (Finney, 1971). Based on the description of the soil moisture in the

WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L.

123

trial report as wet, average and dry, the soil moisture variable was rated as
3, 2 and 1, respectively. The dummy variable 'A' specified the addition
(A = 1) or omission (A = 0) of wetting agent. Estimates of a 0 = -0.88 ±
0.23, a 1 = + 1.66 ± 0.24, a 2 = + 0.64 ± 0.12 and a 3 = + 0.45 ± 0.18 (x 2 =
151, n = 155) obtained using the computer package GLIM (Anonymous,
1986) were all statistically significant (P < 0.05) and had the expected signs.
To take account of factors influencing the weed-free yield of wheat we
employed a wheat growth simulation model developed at the Western
Australian Department of Agriculture. The model inputs daily climatic
data and yields for 74 years from 1912 to 1985 were predicted for Merredin,
W.A. All management-specific inputs were assumed nonlimiting in the
simulation. The yield predicted by the model was appropriately scaled
down to reflect the average management practices. The average adjusted
yield for the 74 simulated years was 1 t ha- 1•
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In order to derive a deterministic solution, the weed-free yield and the
proportion of weeds killed for a given herbicide dose were set at their
respective average values. As outlined under the dynamic programming
methodology, the solution represents the optimal decision as a function of
the state variable, but not of the decision state. Also, although the number
of seeds in the soil is the state variable, results are presented in terms of
weed density.
The optimal decision rule derived by solving the infinite horizon problem
shows that herbicide dose increases, but at a diminishing rate, as weeds
2.5

_......

2.0

Cd

s

Q)

1.5

"'0
"0
0)

"0

1.0

'G

:e
0)

::r:

0.5
0.0

0

100

200

300

400

500

Weed density (plants/m 2)
Fig. 1. Optimal deterministic multi-period decision rule.

124

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

Initial seed density 5000/m 2
............ ,..........

200

multi-period
single-period

Initial seed density 100/m 2
~

150

multi-period
single-period

-·-·-·11J·-·-·

"'_g
~
"'
::§,

.q

100

"'~

~

"0
Q)
Q)

:3:

50

5

10

15

20

Year
Fig. 2. Time traces of weed density resulting from the application of multi-period and
single-period optimal decision rules for two initial seed densities.

become more dense (Fig. 1). The decision rule illustrated is straight
forward and is seen as a useful applied decision making tool. A notable
consequence of herbicide dose being dependent on weed density is that
savings are possible. For instance, a herbicide dose of 1.5 litres ha _, is
specified for a wild oat density of 75 plants m- 2 whereas 50 plants m- 2
requires a dose of 1.3 litres ha- 1 . Such savings affect profits and the
present value of an infinite stream of profits is maximised if the decision
rule is applied every year.
Time traces of weed density when the optimal decision rule (Fig. 1) is
applied repeatedly are shown in Fig. 2. These traces were derived for initial
seed densities of 100 and 5000 seeds m- 2 , representing low and high
populations. The weed density corresponding to the approximate steadystate in the case of multi-period optimisation was around 3 plants m - 2
compared with 40 plants m- 2 in the single-period case. Thus, by using the
multi-period framework for decision making, the wild oat population is
substantially minimised, but not eradicated at the optimal steady state.
The cumulative gain in present value when the multi-period, instead of
the single-period decision rule is applied repeatedly, is shown in Fig. 3.

125

WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L.

100

Initial seed density (no/m 2 )

100
80
5000

.5
Q)
u~

60

c:: "'

Q).;::

'-fh

<2~

~
"0
Q)

.:::

C)

::>

"'

40

>

~E

::; Q)
Q)
E "'
....
::>

u

0.

20

0

-20

L----~---1..._--~-----'

0

10

20

Year
Fig. 3. Cumulative differences in present values between multi-period and single-period
solutions for two initial seed densities.

These results demonstrate that the present value of profits is higher under
multi-period optimisation and the gain over the single-period solution
increases over time, more so at the lower initial seed density. Thus, in the
case of wild oats, significant gains can be realised in future periods by
reducing the weed burden early in the planning horizon even if current
gains from such actions might be negative.
In the stochastic case, where transitions are probabilistic, solutions were
derived using the two-step methodology described earlier and with the
similar proviso that farmers were assumed to maximise expected profits.
These results, along with the single-period optimal solution are depicted in
Fig. 4. Here the optimal solution depends on weed density as well as seed
density. For a given weed density, the optimal herbicide dose decreases
with an increase in the seed bank. This is realistic since it is expected that
the seed bank could be more readily manipulated by herbicide dose when
there are few seeds in the soil to start with. On the other hand, when the
initial seed bank is large, varying the addition to the seed bank by killing
more weeds is unlikely to affect the seed bank substantially. When the seed
bank is very large, the multi-period solution approaches that of the singleperiod.

126

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

Seed density (no/m2)

500
1000
3000
5000
single-period
solution

2.5

'2

§

2.0

<I)
</)

0
"d

1.5

<I)

"d

Tl

:e

1.0

<I)

::r:

0.5

Weed density (plants/m 2 )
Fig. 4. Optimal stochastic multi-period and single-period decision rules.

If farmers are assumed to be risk-averse, then both the mean and
variability of profits enter the objective function. If herbicide performance
is assumed to be stochastic but the weed-free yield is deterministic, an
increase in herbicide will reduce the variability of profits. Thus a risk-averse
farmer would tend to apply more herbicide compared to a risk-neutral
farmer. If herbicide performance is assumed to be deterministic but the
weed-free yield is stochastic, the opposite result will hold because the
variability of profits increases with an increase in herbicide rate. This is
indicated by the structure of the yield response function specified in
equation (6). The expected direction of change is ambiguous if both the
weed-free yield and herbicide performance are assumed to be stochastic
simultaneously. In this context, the generalisation usually made in the
literature that herbicides are 'risk-reducing' (Binswanger, 1978; Feder,
1979) is therefore misleading. Our considerations reveal that the source of
risk and how it is entered into the profit function influence whether or not
an input such as herbicide reduces risk.
CONCLUSION

In order to improve decision making about herbicide dose in cropping
systems we concluded it is necessary to consider multi-period effects and

WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L.

127

uncertainties due to environmental effects on crop yield, weed density and
herbicide efficacy. This objective was achieved by combining a method of
stochastic dynamic programming with a bioeconomic simulation model, to
generate return matrix and transition probabilities, together with the novel
inclusion of an empirically estimated dose response function. The development of such a model enabled the derivation of dynamically optimal dose
of a post-emergence herbicide. The results indicated that the dynamically
optimal solution maintained a lower steady-state weed population and
higher economic returns compared with the single-period solution. From
this we concluded that a long term approach to weed control is economically superior.
A limitation of the model is that only one of the long term effects, viz.
The effect of current control on future infestation, is explicitly modelled. If
resistance to herbicide is likely to develop, the policies derived here will
not be optimal. However, the strength of the approach developed here is
that such long term effects can be easily incorporated if the appropriate
relationships can be quantified.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Funding from the Western Australian Wheat Research Committee and
the University of Western Australia for Sushil Pandey, and from the Wheat
Research Council of Australia for the demographic work of R.W. Medd
conducted with the technical assistance of Kim Jones and Barry Kay at
Orange is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
Amor, R.L., 1985. Seasonal emergence of weeds typically occuring in the Victorian cereal
belt. Plant Prot. A., 1: 18-20.
Anonymous, 1986. The Generalised Linear Interactive Modelling Systems Manual. Numerical Algorithms Group, Oxford, 186 pp.
Binswanger, H.P., 1978. Risk and uncertainty in agricultural development: an overview. In:
J.A. Roumasset, J.M. Boussard and I. Singh (Editors), Risk, Uncertainty and Agricultural Development. Agricultural Development Council, New York, pp. 383-397.
Blacklow, W.M., Pearce, G. and Humphries, A.W., 1984. Allocating scarce resources to
weeds research in Australia. In: R.W. Madin (Editor), Proc. 7th Australian Weeds Con£.,
17-21 September 1984, Perth, W.A., Australia, pp. 90-107.
Combellack, J.H., 1987. Weeds in cropping - their cost to the Australian economy. Plant
Prot. Q., 24: 2.
Cousens, R., 1985. A simple model relating yield loss to weed density. Ann. Appl. Bioi., 107:
239-252.
Cousens, R., Doyle, C.J., Wilson, B.J. and Cussans, G.W., 1986. Modelling the economics of
controlling Avena fatua in winter wheat. Pestic. Sci., 17: 1-12.

128

S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD

Doorenbos, J. and Kassam, A.H., 1979. Yield response to water. FAO lrrig. Drain. Pap. 33,
Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, 193 pp.
Feder, G., 1979. Pesticides, information and pest management under uncertainty. Am. J.
Agric. Econ., 61: 97-103.
Finney, D.J., 1971. Probit Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 333 pp.
Fisher, B.S. and Lee, R.R., 1981. A dynamic programming approach to the economic
control of weed and disease infestation in wheat. Rev. Market. Agric. Econ., 49:
175-187.
Hewlett, P.S. and Plackett, R.L., 1979. The Interpretation of Quanta! Responses in Biology.
Edward Arnold, London, 82 pp.
Kennedy, J.O.S., 1986. The econometrics of damage control: why specification matters. Am.
J. Agric. Econ., 68: 261-273.
Lanzer, E.A. and Paris, Q., 1981. A new analytical framework for the fertilisation problem.
Am. J. Agric. Econ., 63: 93-103.
Lichtenberg, E. and Zilberman, D., 1986. The econometrics of damage control: why
specification matters. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 68: 261-273.
Martin, R.J., Cullis, B.R. and McNamara, D.W., 1987. Prediction of wheat yield loss due to
competition by wild oats (Avena spp.). Aust. J. Agric. Res., 38: 487-499.
Medd, R.W. and Ridings, H.l., 1990. Feasibility of seed kill for control of annual grass
weeds in crops. In: E.S. Delfosse (Editors), Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Biological Control of
Weeds, 6-11 March 1988, Rome, Italy, pp. 645-650.
Nemhauser, G.L., 1966. Introduction to Dynamic Programming. Wiley, New York, 256 pp.
Pannell, D.J., 1989. Economics and the law relating to flexibility of chemical rates. Plant
Prot. Q., 4: 104-106.
Quail, P.H. and Carter, O.G., 1968. Survival and seasonal germination of seeds of Avena
fatua and A. ludoviciana. Aust. J. Agric. Res., 19: 721-729.
Shoemaker, C.A., 1982. Optimal integrated control of Univoltine pest population with age
structure. Oper. Res., 30: 40-61.
Taylor, C.R. and Burt, O.R., 1984. Near optimal management strategies for controlling wild
oats in spring wheat. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 66: 50-60.
Zimdahl, R.L., 1980. Weed crop competition: a review. International Plant Protection
Centre, Oregon State University, 196 pp.

