AGRICULTURAL

ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50
www.elsevier.corn!locate/agecon

Cash cropping and food crop productivity: synergies or trade-offs?
Jones Govereh a, T.S. Jayne b,*
Food Security Research Project, Lusaka, Zambia
Department of Agricultural Economics, Agriculture Hall, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1039, USA
a

b

Received 25 January 2001; received in revised form 24 January 2002; accepted 10 April2002

Abstract
The case for promoting export-oriented cash crops in Africa has generally been based on their direct potential contribution
to agricultural productivity and small farmer incomes. A relatively neglected avenue of research concerns the synergistic
effects that cash cropping can have on other household activities, including food production. The conventional view that cash
crops compete with food crops for land and labour neglects the potential for cash crop schemes to make available inputs
on credit, management training, and other resources that can contribute to food crop productivity, which might otherwise
not be accessible to farmers if they did not participate in cash crop programs. This article builds on previous research by
hypothesising key pathways by which cash crops may affect food crop activities and empirically measuring these effects
using the case of cotton in Gokwe North District in Zimbabwe. Analysis is based on instrumental variable analysis of survey
data on 430 rural households in 1996. Results indicate that_.after controlling for household assets, education and locational
differences-households engaging intensively in cotton production obtain higher grain yields than non-cotton and marginal
cotton producers. We also find evidence of regional spill-over effects whereby commercialisation schemes induce second
round investments in a particular area that provide benefits to all farmers in that region, regardless of whether they engage in
that commercialisation scheme. The study suggests that the potential spill-over benefits for food crops through participation
in cash crop programs are important to consider in the development of strategies designed to intensify African food crop
production.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Africa; Zimbabwe; Cash crops; Cotton; Productivity; Food security

1. Introduction
Meeting the challenge of raising rural incomes in
Africa will require some form of transformation out
of the semi-subsistence, low-input, low-productivity
farming systems that currently characterise much of
rural Africa. In some areas of eastern and southern Africa, food crop intensification was formerly
• Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-517-355-0131;
fax: +1-517-432-1800.
E-mail address: jayne@msu.edu (T.S. Jayne).

promoted through state-led programs integrating subsidised credit, input delivery and crop purchase by
state marketing boards that operated even in remote
farming areas (Rohrbach, 1988; Byerlee and Eicher,
1997; Putterman, 1995). However, these policies
eventually accumulated large budget deficits and became financially unsustainable, leading to an often
sudden withdrawal of services to farmers and an associated stagnation or decline in the use of cash inputs
on food crops (Jayne and Jones, 1997). Farmers in
many countries are purchasing less hybrid seed and/or
less fertiliser for food crops than during the former

0169-5150/02/$- see front matter© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PIT: S0169-5150(02)00066-X

40

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

period of controlled marketing. 1 Renewed growth in
African agriculture will require financially sustainable
intensification of existing cropland, since most of the
high-potential farmland in Africa is already under
production.
High-value cash crops represent one potential avenue of crop intensification. Evidence from other
parts of Africa indicates that farm incomes and productivity can benefit from engaging in cash crops
with well-developed channels for procuring inputs on
credit and marketing the crop (Dione, 1989; Goetz,
1993; Von Braun and Kennedy, 1994; Kelly et al.,
1996; Poulton et al., 1998; Dorward et al., 1998).
But the active promotion of non-food cash crops
in Africa is often impeded by perceptions that they
compete with food production and exacerbate household food insecurity. 2 The effects of shifting to more
commercially-oriented cropping patterns on the allocation of households' resources are complex and
need to be more fully understood to guide agricultural policy formation. In addition to the direct effect
of cash cropping on household incomes, there may
be important indirect effects of cash cropping on the
productivity of other household activities such as food
cropping. These potential synergies between cash
crops and food crops have been generally neglected
in food crop research and extension programs, 3 although they may have important implications for

1 For evidence from eastern and southern Africa, see Jayne and
Jones, 1997; Howard and Mungoma, 1997; Kherallah eta!., 2002.
2 The World Bank and other donors have come under renewed
criticism from civil society groups contending that support for
cash cropping in Africa benefits mainly foreign marketing firms
and reduces the amount of food available for consumption. Consider the following except from a full page advertisement in the
New York Times on 18 January 2000, by a lobby group called
"Turning Point Project", representing over 60 NGOs and research
foundations: "Globalised industrial-style agriculture does not grow
staple foods for the hungry, or for their communities. Global corporations favour luxury high profit items: flowers, potted plants,
sugar cane, beef, shrimp, cotton, coffee, soybeans for export to
wealthy countries. Local people are often left with nothing. In
Africa, where severe famines occurred in the past decade, newly
industrialised agriculture does not produce staple foods, but record
crops of ... cotton and sugar cane! For export. As export crops
and livestock use up available land, small farmers are forced to
use marginal, less fertile lands. Staple food production for local
use plummets, increasing hunger."
3 For informative exceptions, see Goetz, 1993 and Dione, 1989.

programs designed to promote smallholder food crop
productivity growth.
This paper studies the synergies between cash cropping and food crop productivity at the household level
using the case of Gokwe North District in Zimbabwe.
The paper theorises two potential pathways by which
cash crop schemes may affect food crop productivity
and then empirically measures these effects. Results
are based on econometric analysis of cross-section
household survey data collected in 1996. The findings suggest that, especially under conditions of credit
and input market failures, participation in cash crop
schemes may enable households to acquire key inputs
and skills which they can use to increase the productivity of other enterprises in their crop mix. A better
understanding of why and how these synergies occur
can help in the design of policy strategies to intensify
food crop production in Africa.

2. Conceptual framework: synergies between
cash crops and food crops
Economists have long advocated specialisation and
commercialisation as part of a broader strategy of
comparative advantage. The underlying premise is
that markets allow households to increase their incomes by producing that which provides the highest
returns to land and labour, and then using cash to buy
household consumption items, rather than being constrained to produce all the various goods needed for
consumption (Timmer, 1997). While this concept of
comparative advantage is well accepted undfu the assumption of frictionless markets, in reality the process
of commercialisation involving non-food cash crops
can be impeded by risks and costs in the food marketing system. Food market failures give rise to the
well-understood non-separability of household production and consumption decisions, which accounts
for the potential breakdown of agricultural commercialisation strategies based on comparative advantage
(Singh et al., 1986; Fafchamps, 1992). These arguments form a large part of the foundation of the long- .
standing critique of cash crop promotion in Africa. '
However, there are other less well-understood nonseparabilities between crop choice and access to inputs and training and other investment decisions that
need to be considered in understanding the normative

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

and positive implications of agricultural commercialisation strategies. For example, farmers with limited
cash income may be able to afford key inputs only
if provided on credit; and in many areas agricultural
credit tends to be available primarily through interlocked cash crop schemes (Dorward et al., 1998). The
case for cash cropping has generally been based on
the direct contribution that these crops can have on
farm incomes. A relatively neglected avenue of research concerns the effects that cash cropping can have
on the productivity of other household activities. The
following sections classify two potential pathways by
which cash cropping may affect the productivity of
other crops: (1) household-level synergies; and (2) regional spill-over effects.
2.1. Household-level synergies
Household-level synergies occur when the household's participation in a commercialised crop scheme
enables it to acquire resources that otherwise would
not be available, for use on other enterprises in
the crop mix. There are several pathways of this
type. Under conditions of constrained access to farm
credit, households' ability to intensify food crop production may depend on their participation in cash
crop schemes. Strasberg (1997), for example, finds
that under credit and input market failures in northern Mozambique, participation in cotton outgrower
schemes was the primary means of acquiring cash
inputs for use in food production. In parts of Central
Province, Kenya, smallholders engaging in coffee production obtained through their coffee co-operatives
access to credit, inputs, extension services and equipment for use not only on coffee but also on food
crops. The coffee co-operatives' explicit support of
members' food crop production was based on the
premise that this would raise their ability to sustainably and profitably participate in coffee production,
which would in turn provide longer term benefits
to the company (Govereh et a!., 1999). In Zambia,
farmer application of pesticides acquired through
participation in cotton outgrower schemes benefited
grain yields as well as cotton due to 'wind drift'
(Fereidoon et a!., 1996). Due to crop rotation, maize
can benefit from residual fertiliser acquired on credit
from participation in cotton schemes and applied to
plots on which cotton was grown the year before

41

(Dione, 1989). Access to these inputs on credit was
not assured for households choosing to concentrate
their farming activities on food crops alone. These
examples indicate the potential non-separability between crop choice decisions and access to resources
and opportunities.
Agricultural commercialisation may have an indirect impact on food productivity via its effects on
animal traction adoption. When faced with poorly
functioning credit markets, cash cropping can provide a needed source of cash for purchasing lumpy
assets such as animal traction equipment and draught
power which can also be used to intensify food crop
production. 4 In Mali, 70% of the farmers surveyed by
Dione (1989) perceived cotton production and use of
fertiliser as the two most important conditions determining the profitability of animal traction adoption.
Rental markets for oxen and plough usage do exist in
many areas but oxen owners typically reserve the perceived optimal time for animal traction functions for
their own plots, leaving renters with the option to rent
weakened oxen at sub-optimal times. Cash-generating
crops can help farmers overcome capital constraints
on the purchase of lumpy assets and inputs, which
can be used to expand food crop as well as cash crop
production (Von Braun and Kennedy, 1994).
Promotional support and training of cash crop
producers by private firms may also raise the productivity of existing household resources devoted to
food crop productivity. In Zimbabwe, the Department
of Agricultural and Technical Services (AGRITEX)
co-operates with private fertiliser and pesticide manufacturing firms in training farmers at the Cotton
Training Institute. One important part of the training
program focuses on pest scouting. Farmers get extensive training in determining the critical stages of
economic injury to a cotton stand. Mariga (1994) argues that cotton instills discipline in farmers because
of its stringent husbandry requirements. Such knowledge not only improves cotton management skills
but improves the overall quality of farm husbandry.
For example, farmers with knowledge of cotton pest

4 Animal traction's contribution to food crop production has
been observed to involve elements of both area expansion (by
allowing more land to be cultivated than under hand-hoe plowing
technology) and yield improvement (through timeliness of land
preparation, planting and weeding). See Govereh, 1999.

42

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

scouting may be better able to determine the stage
at which maize stalk-borers or grain weevils cause
economic injury. Mariga (1994) asserts that such
investments in human capital through participation
in cash crop programs has had a positive spill-over
effect on food crop productivity.

investments that support food crop production). The
remainder of this paper examines these issues based
on the case of cotton in Gokwe North District of
Zimbabwe.

3. Data and sampling frame
2.2. Regional spill-over effects
Regional effects occur when a commercialisation
scheme attracts investments to a region which provide
widespread spill-over benefits to all farmers in that
region regardless of whether they engage in that commercialisation scheme. For example, the promotion
of input-intensive cash crops can make key inputs
more readily available in the area, for use on food
or cash crops. Dione (1989) found that the introduction of cotton to southern Mali increased the demand
for fertiliser, which subsequently stimulated private
investment by input manufacturers, distributors and
retailers. These investments made fertiliser and other
inputs more accessible and profitable not only for use
on cotton (which was the primary impetus for the
expansion of input supply in these areas) but also for
farmers who only produced staple food crops. These
examples highlight the potential synergies between
input-intensive cash crops and subsistence crops.
Regional spill-over effects can also occur when agricultural commercialisation spurs private investment in
market infrastructure that improves the productivity of
other farm activities, including food crop production.
It has been observed that private investment in transportation infrastructure to support cash crop activities
has also raised the returns to smallholder grain production and grain traders' operations (Strasberg, 1997).
The general inductive argument built up from these
cases is that commercialised crop production and
marketing programs may create important synergies
with more subsistence-oriented crops. These potential synergies arise from both household-level and
regional-level spill-over effects. Whether these synergies actually arise depends on the perspectives and
approaches that marketing firms adopt toward smallholders (e.g. whether credit is provided under terms
that are not available in 'open markets', whether the
input and output marketing system that develops to
support the cash crop induces auxiliary private sector response in service provision and infrastructural

The data used in this study is based on a multiple
visit survey of 480 rural households in 1996. The survey was designed and implemented under the Project
on Integrated Assessment of Trypanosomosis Control
Strategies and Their Impacts. This component of the
overall project was a collaboration between The International Livestock Research Institute, The University
of Zimbabwe, The Regional Tsetse and Trypanosomasis Control Program and The Department of Veterinary Services, Tsetse Control Branch of Zimbabwe.
Gokwe North District was selected for implementing the survey. Gokwe is a major cotton producing
area and has been a destination for internal immigrants
seeking the fortunes associated with cotton. The influx of immigrants into Gokwe is often dubbed "the
white gold rush". A four-stage stratified sampling procedure was adopted to select study sites within Gokwe
North. The first stage involved purposive selection of
three cluster areas that experienced early, mid and recent tsetse fly clearance. Each cluster area falls under
Natural Region III (moderately high agro-ecological
potential). They are found along the major drainage
systems with soils that are moderately well drained,
sandy clay loam or clay. These soils have high agricultural potential and no farmers in the sample applied
any supplementary nutrients. The most limiting input
was animal traction because the soils (vertisols) are
hard and difficult to work manually.
During the second stage, two wards were purposively selected from each of the cluster areas. Selection of two wards per cluster area provided an
opportunity to identify differences in local administration that could have affected the settlement process. In
the third stage, two villages were purposively selected
within each ward: one village had the best access to
services in 1996 and the other village had the worst
access to services at that time. At the fourth stage,
a random sample of 40 households, representing approximately 15-25% of the village population, was
drawn from each village. The resulting sample size

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

was 482 households. Households were interviewed
for information on demographics, farm and non-farm
activities, agricultural practices and asset holdings.

4. Research questions and method of analysis
The conceptual framework in Section 2 suggests
that the intensity of cotton production in Gokwe
North may potentially influence the productivity of a
farmer's other crops. This section develops a model
for measuring (1) the determinants of cotton commercialisation at the household level, and (2) the
contribution of cotton commercialisation to food crop
yields and production.
Some key descriptive features of the data are important in guiding model specification. Cropping patterns in Gokwe North are concentrated on two crops.
Maize accounts for 47.4% of cropped area, while cotton accounts for 45.2%. 5 However, there are clear differences in the reasons for growing these crops: 100%
of the cotton production was marketed, while 93.8%
of the maize production was consumed on the farm.
Cotton sales contributed 83.6% of the value of marketed crop income. In this area of Zimbabwe, agricultural commercialisation is virtually synonymous with
expanding cotton cultivation.
The major inputs in the cotton system that may
give rise to household-level synergies with food
crops are draught equipment, herbicides, pesticides
and sprayers. These purchases are made from cotton
traders who are in local village centres or from larger
dealers in town centres. The key technologies in the
maize production system are hybrid seed and animal
traction. Fertiliser is not commonly used in these areas because the soils do not have nutrient deficiencies
that require the use of inorganic fertiliser. Traction is
a key production input because the soils are heavy and
difficult to work with a hand hoe. Traction equipment
is important both in expanding the household's cultivable land and in allowing for more timely planting.
Given our hypothesis that a household's grain crop
productivity may be related to its involvement in
cotton production, we develop an indicator of cotton
commercialisation. We define the household's cotton
5 The remaining 8% of cropped area is devoted to groundnuts,
sunflower, millet and sorghum.

43

commercialisation index, CCI;, as the value of cotton sales over total crop production for household i.
This index is neutral with respect to farm production,
and measures the household's involvement in cotton
relative to its total farm output. This index ranged
from zero (for 19% of the cases) to 96% across the
sampled households, with a mean of 42%. We model
cotton commercialisation as a function of exogenous
household characteristics, X;, and administrative zone
dummy variables, D;:
CCI;= ao

+ a1X; + a2D; + e;

(i = 1, ... , 453 households)

(1)

We specify models of Y; and Y;/A;, the gross value
of food output per household and per hectare output
of food crops 6 , as:

(2)

y.
A';

= b~ + b~ X; + b;cci; + b~RSi + b~D; + u;
(3)

where RS;, represents regional spill-over effects; e;,
u; and u;' are residual terms.
Because cotton commercialisation and food production are endogenously determined, an instrumental
variables approach was used to estimate both (2) and
(3). The appropriateness of this approach, however, is
contingent on finding instruments that are correlated
with CCI; but not food production or yields. Instrumental variables for cotton commercialisation were:
the distance from each household to the nearest cotton buying outlet and the number of cotton sprayers
owned by the household. Definitions ofthe specific exogenous, endogenous and instrumental variables and
their expected signs are found in Table 1.
What is the hypothesised pathway by which food
crop productivity in (3) is related to the intensity
of household cotton production? The presence of
household-level synergies is measured by the effects of cotton commercialisation in (2) and (3). The
6 This is admittedly a partial measure of land productivity, but
it was not possible to construct more sophisticated measures of
multi-factor productivity due to the paucity of information on land
rental values and seasonal wages.

44

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

Table I
Description of variables included in models
Anticipated sign
Commercialisation
index (CCI;)
Endogenous variables
Cotton commercialisation index-value of cotton production
divided by value of total crop production (%)
Exogenous variables (X;)
Farm size: combined size of all arable plots including the
garden (ha)
Family size: total household number of adult equivalents
(persons)
Education: household-head's years of formal education
(years)
Farm capital: value of working farm implements and
draft animals (Z$)
Migrant settler: dummy variable = I if family migrated to
Gokwe North since 1950
Certified farmer: dummy variable = I if household member
has completed an intensive public extension program
Gender: dummy variable = I if female headed household
Village-level mean cotton yield (kg/ha)
Locational dummy variables (D;)
Zone 1: dummy variable = 1 if household resides in village
cleared of tsetse flies in the early period (1965-1976)
Zone 2: dummy variable = 1 if household resides in village
cleared of tsetse flies in the mid period (1976-1984)
Regional spill-over effects (RS;)
Cotton traders: number of cotton input traders and buyers
based in each village in 1996
Instrument variables (Z;)
Sprayers: number of cotton sprayers owned by household
Distance to marketing depot: average distance from village
to the cotton marketing depot (km)

measurement of regional spill-over effects, RSi, requires a exogenous village-level indicator of cotton
commercialisation. The variable chosen to represent
regional spill-overs was the number of retail dealers
distributing cotton inputs and buying seed cotton,
and is intended to measure the extent of village-level
investment in cotton-related service provision. We
hypothesise that as the density of cotton-related services increases, such services will increasingly benefit
food crop production in that area. However, to the
extent that the density of cotton traders and grain
output are both driven by underlying agro-ecological
factors, RS; could be endogenous. We include administrative zone dummy variables, D;, in each model

Grain
production (Y;)

Grain production
per hectare (Y;IA;)

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
?

?

+

+

+

?

?

+

+

+

?

?

+

?

?

+

+

+

+

IV
IV

IV
IV

to control for unobserved agro-ecological and infrastructural effects across locations, but there may still
be some variation within zones so the results should
be interpreted cautiously. In recognition of this, we
estimate models (1), (2) and (3) both with and without the inclusion of the regional spill-over term (the
village-level number of retail cotton dealers) to examine the robustness of the model. Additionally, we
estimate a separate maize yield model that includes
mean village-level cotton yields to further control for
unobserved locational factors.
Unfortunately, data on households' allocation of
fertiliser and other inputs on food crops were not
available, hence we must model the effects of cotton

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

45

Table 2
Household characteristics according to cotton commercialisation index in Gokwe North District, Zimbabwe, 1995-1996
Characteristics

Sample size (n)
Land size (ha)
Fallow area (ha)
Family size (number)
Farm capital investment (Z$)
Animal draft teams (number)
Used animal draft power (%)
Family head years in school (years)
Master farmer certified (%)
Female headed (%)
Grain yield (kg/ha)
Grain output (kg per capita)
Total crop income/ha cropped (Z$)
Total crop income per capita (Z$)
Grain self-sufficient (%)
Grain selling households (%)
Distance to market (km)

Cotton commercialisation indexa
Non-cotton
growers (0%)

First tercile
(1-66%)

Second tercile
(67-82%)

Third tercile
(>82%)

Total

80
4.39
1.29
5.9
2254
0.36
42
4.5
2
21
1165
481
1690
639
59
20
27.5

118
5.62
0.78
6.4
4353
1.09
74
5.9
6
II
1443
495
2271
1492
81
42
25.2

110
5.66
0.71
6.8
5120
1.20
75
6.0
12

122
7.87
0.78
6.6
6806
1.65
79
6.8

430
6.04
0.85
6.5
4855
1.14
70
5.9
8.4
13.0
1167
385
2396
1732
57
27
24.5

11

11
11

1037
331
2340
1525
50
25
23.5

1007
263
3001
2822
41
21
22.6

Source: Own calculations using Socioeconomic Impact Assessment of Tsetse and Trypanosomosis Control Surveys, Gokwe North District,
Zimbabwe, 1995-1996.
a Cotton commercialisation is defined as value of cotton sales divided by value of total crop production; this variable ranges from zero
(i.e. household does not grow cotton) to 100% (cotton constitutes 100% of the household's crop output).

commercialisation on food production and draw inferences about the causes rather than model the effects
of cotton commercialisation on food crop input use
explicitly.

5. Characteristics of commercialised smallholder
farmers
As a prelude to the econometric analysis, we provide some descriptive insights on four categories of
farmers: those households not growing cotton (about
19% of the sample), and three relatively equal groups
of the remaining households stratified into terciles
according to their involvement in cotton production
as indicated by the cotton commercialisation index
(Table 2). We see that mean land holding size is
greater for cotton growers than non-cotton households, and that land holdings increase with the intensity of cotton production. Fallowed area, on the
other hand, is greater for non-cotton households. Cotton growers have accumulated more draught animals

and farm capital assets (mostly draught and pesticide
equipment) which enable greater area to be put under
cultivation. To acquire draught cattle in Gokwe North
District, 53% of the farmers use income from cotton,
20% use a combination of cotton and maize income
and 18% use wage savings. Intensity of cotton production also appears to be higher for households having a 'master farmer' ,7 those that are male-headed,
and those located relatively close to a cotton buyer.
We also find prima facie support for the oft-cited
assertion that cash crops are grown at the expense
of household food production. Results in Table 2 indicate that per capita grain production is highest for
the non-cotton households and the lowest tercile of
cotton producers. These households produce roughly
85% more grain per capita than households in the
most intensive cotton production tercile. Almost 60%
of the non-cotton producers are grain self-sufficient
as opposed to 41% for households in the top cotton
7 These are households that have passed an agricultural husbandry training course by the national extension service.

46

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

production tercile. However, the fact that farmers in
the highest tercile still manage to produce 263 kg of
grain per capita on average indicates that even the
most intensive cotton producers secure at least some
portion of their food needs through own production.
Moreover, the results in Table 2 also show that
household cotton commercialisation is associated with
higher gross per capita crop income. Households in
the top cotton tercile have about four times the crop
income per capita and almost double the crop income
per cultivated hectare as non-cotton producers. While
households not growing cotton tend to have higher
levels of grain production, clearly the commercialised
cotton producers are in a better position to buy their
residual food needs from local markets using cotton
revenue. They are also in a better position to afford
cash inputs for food crop production from local dealers who sell almost exclusively on a cash basis only.
These observations are consistent with evidence found
in other studies of agricultural commercialisation (Von
Braun and Kennedy, 1994; Strasberg, 1997). However,
these bivariate figures do not provide any clear insights into the effects of cotton commercialisation on
household grain production or productivity, which we
address in Section 6.

6. Econometric results
6.1. Determinants of cotton commercialisation
Many factors are involved in accounting for the
wide differences observed in cotton commercialisation
across the sample. As shown in Table 3, column (a),
the proportion of cotton in total production (CCI) is
positively associated with farm size, education of the
household head, the value of farm capital, the number of cotton sprayers and a relatively early clearing
of tsetse from the village in question. Family size,
households that are female-headed and distance from
the nearest cotton buyer are negatively related to cotton commercialisation. Despite their statistical significance, differences in farm size, family size and farm
capital all have relatively small effects on the CCI,
holding other factors constant.
The most important factors associated with cotton
commercialisation are arguably educational levels, the
distance from the farm to the nearest cotton buyer

and villages that were cleared of tsetse fly relatively
early. A difference of 5 years education is associated
with roughly a 9% difference in the predicted CCI.
A difference of 10 km distance to the nearest cotton
buying outlet is associated with a 6.8% decline in the
CCI. The share of cotton in total crop production for
households in villages that were cleared of tsetse fly
relatively early in the settlement of Gokwe North was
about 10% higher than in households in areas cleared
relatively recently. This may be because areas with
early tsetse fly clearance have had more time to accumulate draught animals and traction equipment, which
are shown to be significantly associated with the intensification of cotton production.

6.2. Effects of commercialisation on food production
Columns (b) and (c) of Table 3 show the instrumental variable (IV) models for household grain
production. The IV results point to an absence of
household-level synergies between cotton and grain
production. The share of cotton in total crop production is associated with neither a strong increase nor a
decline in total grain production. While cotton commercialisation apparently does not contribute to grain
production, there must be countervailing positive effects on grain output that offset the substitution of
land from grain to cotton. We examine this issue in
Section 6.3.
As expected, household grain production is significantly associated with farm size and the value of accumulated farm assets. An additional hectare of land
owned is associated with about Z$ 150 more grain
production (equivalent to about 120 kg of maize),
other factors constant. The relationship between maize
yields and farm size is even stronger when all other
household variables are evaluated at their means for
different farm size categories within the sample. We
calculated the mean values for all other household
variables for farms within the 20-30th percentile
of farm size (2.80-3.66 ha) and for farms within
the 70-80th percentile (6.28-9.71 ha). The predicted
maize production for the two groups, based on model
results in Table 3, column (c) are 972 and 1602kg,
respectively, a difference of roughly Z$ 800.
Households tend to have higher levels of grain production in locations that were recently cleared of tsetse
fly. Households in the early and mid clearance areas

Table 3
Model results for commercialisation, food crop productivity and output equations
Model 1: cotton
commercialisation index
(OLS)

Model 2: value of grain production per
household in Z$ (IV)

(a)

(h)

Coefficient

t-Statistics

Instrument variables
Sprayers
Distance to cotton
buyer (km)
Constant
S.E.
N
Adj. R2

(c)

Coefficient

t-Statistics

(e)

(d)

Coefficient

t-Statistics

Coefficient

t-Statistics

(f)

Coefficient

t-Statistics

~

Coefficient

t-Statistics

~
~

Endogenous variables
Commercialisation index
Exogenous variables
Farm size (ha)
Family size (number)
Education of head (years)
Migrant settlers
Gender
Value farm capital (Z$)
Certified farmer
Early cleared grad
Mid cleared grad
Cotton traders
Cotton yield, villagelevel mean (kg/ha)

Model 3: value of grain production per hectare (Z$/ha) (IV)

-2.79

-0.19

1.09

0.08

14.13

2.04*

15.31

2.18*

12.15

1.23

~

~

,

~

1.18
-0.8
1.72
-3.31
-7.96
0.39
4.28
9.58
4.56

3.23*
-2.25*
4.87*
-1.26
-2.25*
2.24*
0.98
3.17*
1.4

8.34
-0.6

4.03*
-2.74*

60.37

8.97*

162.97
28.82
1.41
596.9
-292
50.12
-422.75
-641.16
-1738.8

5.15*
1.05
0.04
3.00*
-1.04
3.16*
-1.27
-2.49*
-6.53*

14D.48
36.24
-6.8
675.16
-279.71
44.72
-314.31
-633.35
-1931.5
75.5

4.37*
1.34
-0.19
3.41*
-1.01
2.92*
-0.95
-2.62*
-7.13*
2.84*

-69.45
20.22
-10.67
2.45
-41.65
7.72
36.97
-171.96
-838.51

-4.62*
1.55
-0.63
O.D3
-0.31
1.05
0.23
-1.41
-6.63*

-76.29
22.45
-13.17
26.23
-37.92
6.61
69.92
-178.71
-897.03
22.94

-4.88*
1.70**
-0.77
0.27
-0.28
0.86
0.44
-1.45
-6.81*
1.78**

-70.47
20.46
-7.95
18.64
-64.9
7.99
89.12
-172.13
-870.05
21.91
0.09

-3.56*
1.51
-0.47
0.24
-0.45
1.02
0.53
-1.36
-4.97*
1.65**
0.30

sis'
"'~

"":::!....,
1:

~

a
~

c;s
c

~"
Co
"'

"N
0
&;
'-

w

23.884
424
0.264

1547.3

2.12*
1738
424
0.263

1032.7

1.391
1713
424
0.278

910.4

2.62*
826.5
424
0.193

754.02

2.09*
832.7
424
0.194

909.55

1.92**
813.7
424
0.204

10

t!,

0

Source: Own calculations using Socioeconomic Impact Assessment of Tsetse and Trypanosomosis Control Surveys, Gokwe North District, Zimbabwe, 1996-1997.
• Denotes statistical significance (one-tailed test) at the 5% level.
•• Denotes statistical significance (one-tailed test) at the 10% level.

:!::i

48

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

produced 1.5-3 tonnes less grain than households in
locations cleared recently. As shown in model (1),
smallholders in the early clearance areas have intensified into cotton to a greater extent, facilitated by the
relatively longer period of time in which cattle and
traction equipment could be accumulated.
When the number of cotton input traders is included
in the model (column c), this variable is positively and
significantly correlated with household grain output.
The coefficients of the other statistically significant covariates remain relatively unchanged. While the main
economic activity in most of these villages is cotton
production, the presence of cotton traders had positive
spill-overs on smallholder grain production. In 25% of
the villages sampled, there were three or fewer cotton
traders, while eight or more cotton traders were found
in the top 25% of villages. Many of the inputs sold by
these traders can also be applied to food crops. A shift
from three to eight traders was associated with a Z$
375 increase in household grain production (the mean
level over the entire sample was Z$ 1665 in 1996 Z$).
As indicated earlier, it is plausible that there is an
underlying association between the number of cotton
traders in a village and the agro-ecological potential
of that area. While we cannot rule out that this affects our results, we attempted to control for agroecological potential in the village sample selection
process (Section 3) and further control for differences
in tsetse fly clearance which reflect the timing of
draught animal introduction into an area. Moreover,
we control for household-level characteristics that
would tend to also reflect geographic differences in
productive potential (e.g. farm capital assets, landholding size, family size). Given the inclusion of these
location and household-level variables controlling for
grain production potential, it would seem reasonable
to conclude that the association between the number
of cotton traders and household grain crop production
largely reflects the positive spill-over effects that service provision investments for cotton have on grain
crop production.
6.3. Effects of cotton commercialisation on food
productivity
Results in Table 3, model 3, highlight the complementary relationship between cotton commercialisation and household grain yield. Four results in column

(d) show that the effect of the household commercialisation index on food productivity is positive and significant. Moving from the 25 to 75th percentile of the
cotton commercialisation index is associated with a Z$
370/ha increase in grain yields (equivalent to 296kg
at prevailing maize price levels), a 25% increase over
mean grain yields in the entire sample. We cannot say
precisely why households with intensive cotton production obtain higher grain yields than non-cotton and
marginal cotton farmers because data on input usage
on fields devoted to food crops is not available. However, as we have indicated earlier, cotton producers
have access to key inputs such as credit and training
through the cotton schemes that are either not accessible on credit terms to non-participating farmers, or
simply not available to them at all.
Farm size has a significant and negative effect on
maize yields. Other factors held constant, smaller
farms were more productive in the use of land than
large farms. The results suggest that maize yields
decline by Z$ 44/ha (3.6% of mean yield levels in
the sample) as landholdings increase by 1 ha, ceteris paribus. The inverse relationship between maize
yields and farm size also holds up when all other
household variables are evaluated at their means for
different farm size categories. 8
Family size makes a positive but imprecisely estimated contribution to grain yields. And households in
areas cleared relatively recently from tsetse fly infestation tend to have higher grain yields than households
in early-clearance areas, perhaps reflecting declining
fertility due to the longer duration of cultivation in
the latter areas. Demographic attributes such as family
size, gender of the household head, and settler status
do not have any important effects on grain productivity. Farmers that received master farmer training obtain higher grain yields than other farmers, but this
effect is not statistically significant.
The inclusion of the regional spill-over variable in
model 3 (column e) makes only a marginal contribution to the adjusted R 2 and has little effect on the coefficient estimates of the significant variables in column
(d). Nevertheless, the effect of the regional spill-over
8 Following the procedure explained in Section 6.2, the predicted
maize yields for those households between the 20th and 30th
percentiles of farm size versus those between the 70th and 80th
percentile, based on model results in Table 3 column (e), are 726
and 462 kg/ha, respectively.

J. Govereh, TS. Jayne I Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

variable on food crop productivity is positive and significant at P = 0.08. Everything else constant, an additional cotton input retailer in the area boosts grain
output by Z$ 22.9/ha. When village-level cotton yields
are introduced in column (f) to further control for unobserved village factors, the CCI coefficient declines
slightly and is imprecisely estimated. The effect of an
additional cotton trader in the area has roughly the
same effect as in column (e), and is barely significant
at P = 0.10. Because the cotton retailers provide a
range of services for farmers growing food crops, including inputs used in maize production, the growth
of cotton appears to be associated with increased grain
productivity.

7. Conclusions and implications
This paper addresses the potential for cash crop
production to promote food crop productivity. We
argue that in addition to the direct stimulus that cash
cropping can have on household incomes, there may
be important indirect effects of cash cropping on the
productivity of other household activities such as food
cropping. We have classified two potential pathways
by which these benefits occur: household-level synergies, in which a farmer's participation in a commercialised crop scheme enables her to acquire resources
that would otherwise not be accessible for use on
other crops; and regional spill-over effects, which
occur when a commercialisation scheme attracts new
investments to a region thereby providing benefits to
all farmers in that region, regardless of whether they
engage in the commercialisation program. We find
that farmers benefited from both of these pathways in
the case of cotton production in Gokwe North District
in Zimbabwe, although the case for household-level
synergies is less clear-cut. Specifically, the econometric results indicate that-after controlling for household assets, education and training and locational
differences-households that engage intensively in
cotton production tend to have higher grain yields than
non-cotton and marginal cotton producers. But because they allocate relatively less of their land to food
crops, the intensive cotton farmers produce about the
same amount of grain as the non-cotton farmers, other
factors constant. We also find a positive association between the number of cash crop traders in a given vill-

49

age and the value of grain output produced per household and per hectare in that village, although these
results should be interpreted cautiously due to the
potential endogeneity of cotton traders in the models.
These findings call into question the frequently
heard assertions that cash crop production comes at
the expense of household food security. Certainly
there are instances in which such problems have occurred, but our findings indicate that this cannot be
considered a determinate outcome. Especially in the
presence of credit market failures (which frequently
occur in many areas of Africa where credit repayment
is hindered by firms' inability to control the output
market), low-resource farmers' ability to obtain inputs is constrained. Participation in cash cropping
programs may allow farmers to overcome such market failures facing food crop input and credit supply.
However, whether these complementarities actually
materialise depends on whether cash cropping firms
are able to continue to recoup their up-front costs and
support farmers through purchase of the cash crop. A
useful analysis of the strategic interactions between
smallholders and cash crop trading firms is contained
in Dorward et al. (1998).
The potential synergies or trade-off between cash
crops and food crops have been generally neglected
in food crop research and extension programs, although they may have important implications for
programs designed to promote smallholder food crop
productivity growth. To a large extent, agricultural
and nutrition policies in the region have historically
formulated rural development strategies with a food
crop focus and have implicitly or sometimes explicitly regarded diversification into non-food cash crops
as detrimental to household food security objectives.
Our findings suggest that, to the contrary, there is
some potential for high-value cash crops to promote
food crop productivity. We hope that this article will
succeed in stimulating further analysis of the complex
interactions between smallholder commercialisation
involving non-food crops and household food security
and income growth in sub-Saharan Africa.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding for
this research by the Food Security II Co-operative

50

J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Agricultural Economics 28 (2003) 39-50

Agreement (PCE-A-00-97-00044-00) between AID/
Global Bureau, Office of Agriculture and Food Security, and The Department of Agricultural Economics
at Michigan State University. The Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Enterprise Division, Office of
Sustainable Development, Bureau for Africa, USAID
(AFR/SD/ANRE) also supported this work. Additional financial support was provided by The International Livestock Research Institute, The University of
Zimbabwe, The Regional Tsetse and Trypanosomosis
Control Program, and The Department of Veterinary
Services Tsetse Control Branch of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Government of Zimbabwe. This article
has benefited from the useful comments of Takashi
Yamano, Maxwell Mudhara, Edward Mazhangara,
Colin Poulton, David Tschirley and two anonymous
reviewers.

References
Byerlee, D., Eicher, C. (Eds.), 1997. Africa's Emerging Maize
Revolution. Lynn Reinner Publishers, Boulder, CO.
Dione, J., 1989. Informing Food Security Policy in Mali: Interactions Between Technology, Institutions and Market Reforms.
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI.
Dorward A., Kydd, J., Poulton, C. (Eds.), 1998. Smallholder
Cash Crop Production Under Market Liberalization. CAB
International, New York.
Fafchamps, M., 1992. Cash crop production, food price volatility,
and rural market integration in the third world. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 74 (!), 90-99.
Fereidoon, J., Mulila-Mitti, J., Mitti, G., Phiri, E., 1996. Integrated
Crop Management: A Guide for Sustainable Smallholder
Farming. Integrated Crop Management/Food Legume Project,
Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture Food and
Fisheries, Zambia.
Goetz, S., 1993. Interlinked markets and the cash crop-food crop
debate in land-abundant tropical agriculture. Econ. Dev. Cultural
Change 41, 343-361.
Govereh, J., 1999. Impacts of Tsetse Control on Immigration
and Household Accumulation of Capital: Zambezi Valley,

Zimbabwe. Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI.
Govereh, J., Nyoro, J., Jayne, T., 1999. Smallholder Commercialisation, Interlinked Markets, and Food Crop Productivity:
Cross Country Evidence from eastern and southern Africa,
Paper Presented at the Fourth Agricultural Transformation
Workshop, Nairobi, Kenya. USAID/Africa Bureau/Sustainable
Development Division, Washington, DC.
Howard, J., Mungoma, C., 1997. Zambia's Stop-and-Go Maize
Revolution. In: Byerlee, D., Eicher, C. (Eds.), Africa's Emerging
Maize Revolution, Lynn Reinner Publishers, Boulder, CO.
Jayne, T., Jones, S., 1997. Food marketing and pricing policy
in eastern and southern Africa: a survey. World Dev. 25 (9),
1505-1527.
Kelly, V., Diagana, B., Reardon, T., Gaye, M., Crawford, E., 1996.
Cash Crop and Food Grain Productivity in Senegal: Historical
View, New Survey Evidence, and Policy Implications, MSU
Staff Paper 95 (05).
Kherallah, M., Delgado, C., Gabre-Mahin, E., Minot, N., Johnson,
M., 2002. Reforming Agricultural Markets: Achievements
and Challenges. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
MD.
Mariga, I., 1994. Cotton research and development. In: Rukuni, M.,
Eicher, C. (Eds.), Zimbabwe's Agricultural Revolution. Harare
University of Zimbabwe Press, pp. 219-233.
Poulton, C., Dorward, A., Kydd, J., 1998. The revival of
smallholder cash crops in Africa: public and private roles in
the provision of finance. J. Int. Dev. 19 (1), 85-103.
Putterman, L., 1995. Economic reform and smallholder agriculture
in Tanzania: a discussion of recent market liberalization, road
rehabilitation, and technology dissemination efforts. World Dev.
23 (2), 311-326.
Rohrbach, D., 1988. The Growth of Smallholder Maize Production
in Zimbabwe: Causes and Implications for Food Security.
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI.
Singh, I., Squire, L., Strauss, J., 1986. Agricultural Household
Models: Extensions, Applications, and Policy. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Strasberg, P.J., 1997. Smallholder Cash-Cropping, Food-Cropping
and Food Security in Northern Mozambique. Unpublished PhD
Dissertation, Michigan State University, East Lansing.
Timmer, C.P., 1997. Farmers and markets: the political economy
of new paradigms. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 79, 621-627.
Von Braun, J., Kennedy, E., 1994. Agricultural Commercialisation,
Economic Development, and Nutrition. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, MD.

