WP 2003-30
September 2003

Working Paper
Department of Applied Economics and Management
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853-7801 USA

Rural Poverty Dynamics:
Development Policy Implications

Christopher B. Barrett

It is the Policy of Cornell University actively to support equality of educational
and employment opportunity. No person shall be denied admission to any
educational program or activity or be denied employment on the basis of any
legally prohibited discrimination involving, but not limited to, such factors as
race, color, creed, religion, national or ethnic origin, sex, age or handicap.
The University is committed to the maintenance of affirmative action
programs which will assure the continuation of such equality of opportunity.

Rural Poverty Dynamics:
Development Policy Implications
Christopher B. Barrett*

September 2003 Revision
Prepared for invited presentation to the
25th International Conference of Agricultural Economists
Durban, South Africa
* Department of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853-7801 USA; email: cbb2@cornell.edu This paper has benefited greatly from
conversations, collaborations and/or comments from Larry Blume, Doug Brown,
Michael Carter, Paul Cichello, Alain DeJanvry, Bruce Gardner, Ravi Kanbur, Dan
Maxwell, John McPeak, Bart Minten, Chris Moser, Andrew Mude, Festus Murithi, Ben
Okumu, Willis Oluoch-Kosura, Frank Place, Tom Reardon, David Sahn, David Stifel,
Brent Swallow and Erik Thorbecke, and from data collection and analysis assistance
from Solomon Desta, Travis Lybbert, Paswel Phiri, Jean Claude Randrianarisoa, Jhon
Rasambainarivo and Justine Wangila, although none of them bear any responsibility for
any remaining errors of mine. This work has been made possible, in part, by support
from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Grant No. LAGA-00-96-90016-00 through the BASIS CRSP, and the Strategies and Analyses for Growth
and Access (SAGA) cooperative agreement through Africa Bureau, USAID. The views
expressed here are mine and do not represent any official agency.
 Copyright 2003 by Christopher B. Barrett. All rights reserved. Readers may make verbatim copies of this document for noncommercial purposes by any means, provided that this copyright notice appears on all such copies.

Rural Poverty Dynamics:
Development Policy Implications
ABSTRACT
This paper summarizes a few key findings from a rich and growing body of research on
the nature of rural poverty and, especially, the development policy implications of
relatively recent findings and ongoing work. Perhaps the most fundamental lesson of
recent research on rural poverty is the need to distinguish transitory from chronic
poverty. The existence of widespread chronic poverty also raises the possibility of
poverty traps. I discuss some of the empirical and theoretical challenges of identifying
and explaining poverty traps. In policy terms, the distinction between transitory and
chronic poverty implies a need to distinguish between “cargo net” and “safety net”
interventions and a central role for effective targeting of interventions.

1

INTRODUCTION
“Most of the people in the world are poor, so if we knew the
economics of being poor we would know much of the economics
that really matters. Most of the world=s poor people earn their
living from agriculture, so if we knew the economics of agriculture
we would know much of the economics of being poor.”
- T.W. Schultz (1980)
T.W. Schultz’s words are no less true today than they were when he opened his
1979 Nobel Prize in Economics acceptance lecture with them almost a quarter century
ago. Economics has nonetheless advanced significantly in its understanding of poverty
since Schultz’s seminal contributions. This paper tries to summarize a few key findings
from a rich and growing body of research over the 25 years since Schultz about the
nature of rural poverty and, especially, the development policy implications of
relatively recent findings and ongoing work.
As will be explained in greater detail below, economists have begun to focus
more precisely on the useful distinction between transitory and chronic poverty. Each
has a different implication for poverty alleviation policy. Policymakers’ and
researchers’ greatest concern revolves around chronic poverty, which seems to result
from low initial endowments of productive assets, inability to generate high returns
from the assets one owns, severe shocks that wipe out accumulated wealth, or some
combination of these. Asset stocks appear central to the story of chronic poverty
because returns on assets can be endogenously increasing for any of several reasons and
because financial market failures can impede the poor’s capacity to invest in productive
assets to surmount thresholds at which the returns on assets are increasing. This has
significant implications for both the design of research to identify such thresholds and
for the targeting and emphasis of policies intended to address chronic poverty.
RURAL POVERTY DYNAMICS: WHAT WE KNOW
Poverty is a complex, multifactorial concept reflecting a low level of well-being.
We economists tend to use income or expenditure flows as a proxy for welfare and thus
to use inherently arbitrary – albeit often rigorously constructed – poverty lines to define
who is and is not poor. This approach is appropriately contested within the social
sciences, and there has been considerable advance in the use of multidimensional
2

poverty measures (Bourguignon and Chakravarty 2002, Duclos et al. 2003). But for the
sake of simplicity, here I accept income as our discipline’s dominant welfare measure
and move on.
Although the measurement of poverty is an important technical concern, my
interest lies not in where one locates a poverty line, nor in precisely how many people
fall below it, nor how far below it, at a given point in time. Although these are
indisputably important issues, they are inherently static concerns. Rather, I wish to
focus on the dynamics of measures of well-being, and only loosely relative to a poverty
line – who climbs above it, descends below it or oscillates around it – because poverty
dynamics is the more fundamental policy concern.
The reason for poverty dynamics’ primacy is that some but not all of the poor
need help through policy. As the rest of this section explains more fully, policy research
needs to distinguish between transitory and chronic poverty. One class of policies –
safety nets – can effectively block the transitorily poor’s descent into chronic poverty.
Another class of interventions – which I term cargo nets, for reasons explained below –
can help the chronically poor find a pathway out of poverty. Picking the right policy to
help a given poor subpopulation depends on an accurate understanding of rural
poverty dynamics.
At this point, a brief digression into the simple mathematics of income dynamics
may help frame the ensuing discussion with a bit more precision. Let me take the
standard approach of using income as an (imperfect) measure of well-being. For any
individual observational unit (a person, household, village or nation), measured
income, Y, is merely the sum of earned returns from productive assets, temporary
income shocks and measurement error,
Y = A`R + _T + _M

(1)

where A is a vector of productive assets controlled by the household, R is a vector of
returns on the assets in A, _T represents transitory exogenous income that is
independent of asset productivity (e.g., lottery winnings, gifts),1 and _M represents
researcher measurement error. Returns are stochastic, thus
R = r + _R

(2)

1

Remittances from migrant household members would fall under A’R, as it relates to an allocation of assets (labor
power) to a particular activity and location.

3

where r is the expected return and _R is an exogenous shock to physical productivity
(e.g., due to rainfall or pests) or input or output prices. Assume all shocks (_M , _R and
_T) are mean zero, constant variance and serially independent. This framework depicts
income as a function of asset holdings, casting it in a familiar portfolio management
framework. The mean and variance of income are thus simply
E[Y] = A`r

(3)

V[Y] = A’V[_R]A + V[_T] + V[_M],

(4)

respectively. Expected income depends fundamentally on one’s endowment of
productive assets and the sorts of returns one can reap from those assets thanks to
production technologies and markets. Income variability results not just from
stochastic returns to land, labor, financial savings and other productive assets, but also
due to volatility both in unearned transitory income and, in an econometrician’s
sample, in measurement error.
Substituting (2) into (1) and then totally differentiating yields an expression for
income change as a function of change in asset stocks, change in expected returns on
assets, and various shocks2:
dY = dA`R + A`dr + A`d_R + d_T + d_M

(5)

Of course, because the errors are all mean zero and serially independent, ex ante
expected income change reduces to just
E[dY] = dA`r + A`dr

(6)

This equation embodies the core of poverty reduction strategies over at least the past
half century. In the initial term on the righthand side of equation (6), dA reflects
(dis)investment patterns, including involuntary asset shocks due to, for example, theft,
natural disasters, injuries or permanent illness. For many years, anti-poverty policy has
focused on changing Y through dA, via land reform to transfer land to the poor,
education and health programs to build up the poor’s human capital, post-drought
livestock restocking to reconstitute herds adversely impacted by climatic shocks, etc.
Over the past fifteen to twenty years, increasing attention has been paid to the second
term, emphasizing dr, the change in expected returns to productive assets.

2

This simple partitioning is very similar to Dercon’s (2000) innovative approach, but without the necessity of
imposing the assumptions that there is a unique concave production technology, that markets are complete and
competitive, or that households maximize profits (equivalently, that households’ consumption and production
decisions are separable). Those assumptions inherently rule out the poverty trap phenomena to which I turn
momentarily.

4

Policymakers and development scholars have expressed renewed concern about
technological advance for smallholder farmers – most recently in the form of
biotechnological and agroecological approaches to boosting yields – and about marketoriented sectoral and macroeconomic reforms intended to improve the output/input
price ratios net of market access costs faced by the rural poor.
Transitory and chronic poverty
Recent research has underscored, however, that much poverty is transitory in
nature.3 Put differently, because the errors in equations (1) and (2) are mean zero, many
realizations are necessarily negative, leading to lower-than-expected incomes that push
people a bit below the poverty line for a relatively brief period of time, although their
expected incomes lie above the poverty line. Moreover, temporarily low incomes are
sometimes chosen by people as part of a long-term accumulation strategy, as almost
any graduate student knows from personal experience. The incomes of the transitorily
poor – whether temporary poverty is by chance or by choice – subsequently recover as
new draws are made on income’s stochastic elements (_R, _T) or as they begin to enjoy
the payoff from voluntarily foregone income, often without any external assistance
from charities or governments. While even transitory poverty is plainly undesirable –
and safety nets to keep the transitorily poor from falling into chronic poverty are
critically important, as we discuss below – the obvious capacity of the transitorily poor
to pull themselves up by their bootstraps means that policy interventions on their
behalf are not always needed. Indeed, costly government interventions that risk
disturbing their self-sufficiency may sometimes be undesirable.
One must be careful, however, not to jump to the erroneous conclusion that
interventions on behalf of the poor are therefore unnecessary or undesirable. For one
thing, exit rates from (and entry rates into) poverty tend to be overstated due to
measurement error, which can inadvertently lead to overestimation of transitory
poverty and a policy bias against intervention to assist the poor. The basic problem is
that d_T, the change in transitory income, d_R, the change in returns on assets, and d_M,
the change in measurement error, all necessarily lead to regression toward the mean in
panel data. While the former two constitute true change in transitory income – due to
3

See in particular one of the original studies in this vein, by Grootaert and Kanbur (1995), the excellent
recent volume by Baulch and Hoddinott (2000), and the various studies cited therein.

5

interruptions in interhousehold transfers or to crop yield shocks, for example – they
cannot be easily separated in data from changes in measurement error across periods
due to questionnaire revisions, respondent fatigue or replacement, new field
enumerators, etc. Because d_T and d_R are essentially impossible to identify separately
from d_M, measurement error tends to inflates estimates of transitory poverty by
creating artificial variability in incomes, leading to upward bias in estimates of the share
of the poor people who are able to pull themselves out of poverty unassisted (Baulch
and Hoddinott 2000, Luttmer 2002).4
Safety nets and cargo nets
The problem of getting estimates of transitory poverty rates correct matters
because the chronically poor5 cannot climb out of poverty on their own without external
assistance. Such assistance can come directly, in the form of transfers, or indirectly, in
the form of policy reforms that relax constraints on the choice sets faced by the
chronically poor, enabling them to take advantage of previously inaccessible
opportunities and to exit poverty of their own accord.
Interventions to combat chronic poverty can take one of two forms: preemptive
and redemptive. The first, preemptive interventions, are safety nets, which aim to
prevent the non-poor and transitorily poor from falling into chronic poverty. Because
people can become transitorily poor up to some threshold level and still recover on their
own, often quickly, the role of safety nets is to keep them from crossing that threshold,
from becoming chronically poor. Safety nets restrict entry into the ranks of the
chronically poor. In the preceding notation, safety nets truncate the lower tails of the
distributions of _T and _R. Emergency feeding programs, crop or unemployment
insurance and disaster assistance are common examples of formal safety net
interventions by governments and outside agencies. Social solidarity networks and
4

In sample, there are additional problems of inference associated with prospective bias due to
nonrandom attrition from the sample over time due to respondent death, refusal to participate in later
survey rounds, residence-based sampling after endogenous household division or union, and failure to
trace migrant households. The evidence is quite mixed as to how significant a problem these phenomena
pose. See the Spring 1998 issue of the Journal of Human Resources, Alderman et al. (2000), Falaris (2003)
and Rosenzweig (2003) for details.
5
I use the terms “chronically” and “persistently” poor interchangeably. Some analysts like to try to
distinguish between the two based on frequency of observations below a poverty line or mean income
over a period relative to the poverty line. This paper, however, is not the place to delve into these
technical details.

6

systems informal mutual insurance often provide safety nets internal to communities.
The common partial displacement of the latter by the former should serve as a caution
on the design of safety nets, however, so as to minimize the crowding out of informal
safety nets.6
The second, redemptive form of poverty reduction intervention is meant to lift
people or to help them climb out of poverty. I refer to these as cargo nets. Safety nets
catch people, keeping them from falling too far; then people step off the net and climb
back up on their own. Cargo nets, by contrast, are used to help climbers surmount
obstacles or even to lift objects, overcoming the structural forces(gravity, in the case of
literal cargo nets) that would otherwise keep them down. In the notation we are using,
cargo nets shift A and r. Familiar examples of cargo net policies include land reform,
targeted school feeding programs, targeted microfinance or agricultural input
subsidization projects, etc. Safety nets block pathways into chronic poverty for the nonpoor and transitorily poor. Well-designed and implemented cargo nets can set people
onto pathways out of chronic poverty.
Identifying and explaining chronic poverty
Because different people need different types of assistance through policy or
project interventions, researchers and policymakers must be able to sort between them.
The descriptive task of distinguishing the chronically poor from the transitorily poor is
a significant challenge. One can establish ex post whether people recovered after falling
below a poverty line, provided one has sufficient time series data on the same
individuals or households. But at the time when policymakers need to decide on
prospective interventions, it can be difficult to predict ex ante from data who will
recover and who will not. Hence the attention paid over the past decade to identifying
the correlates of “chronic” or “persistent” poverty.7 Analysts can use past panel data to
identify good predictors of future well-being in order to be able to predict which of
today’s poor are likely to become non-poor by some future date. If done accurately,
such estimation can provide a basis for targeting interventions among the poor,
enabling policymakers to distinguish between the non-poor and the transitorily poor,
6

See Cox and Jimenez (1992), Dercon and Krishnan (2003) and Albarran and Attanasio (forthcoming) for empirical
evidence on such crowding out effects.
7
See, for example, Baulch and Hoddinott (2000), World Bank (2000), Carter and May (2001) or the papers
in Hulme and Shepherd (2003).

7

for whom cargo nets – as distinct from safety nets – are unnecessary and possibly even
unintentionally harmful, and the chronically poor who need direct assistance if they are
to escape poverty.
The trick therefore lies in our ability to decompose poverty between those who
are, to use Carter and May’s (2001) terminology, “structurally” poor – that is, expected
to remain chronically poor unless they receive assistance – and those who are
“stochastically” poor, who one would expect to exit poverty of their own accord before
long, i.e., the transitorily poor. This sort of decomposition has great potential as a tool
for informing policy design because governments, donors and operational agencies
(e.g., NGOs, or multilateral agencies of the United Nations) faced with large numbers of
structurally poor individuals or households face a distinctly different challenge than do
those serving large numbers of stochastically poor persons. Once we know how to
distinguish the transitorily or stochastically poor from the structurally or chronically
poor using panel data econometric methods, the next challenge is to identify the
mechanisms that lead to chronic poverty in order that interventions can treat causes
rather than merely symptoms.
Some people are born into poverty and have difficulty escaping because they do
not enjoy the education, health or nutrition required to accumulate crucial physical
stature and cognitive capacity early in life (Loury 1981, Strauss and Thomas 1998, Basu
1999), because they do not inherit land or capital sufficient to add value to their human
capital, or because they cannot effectively employ the assets they own to generate
income (Carter and May 1999). There is no good empirical evidence of which I am
aware on intergenerational earnings transmission in low-income rural settings.
Hopefully, before too much longer we will have good data and evidence on this
question from Africa, Asia, Latin America or Central and Eastern Europe. In the
meantime, the evidence from higher income countries such as Finland and the United
States suggests that even where governments offer relatively generous support for
children’s education, health and nutrition and where financial markets are relatively
accessible even to poor people, estimated elasticities of intergenerational earnings
transmission are high, on the order of 0.6-0.8, and primarily attributable to credit
constraints rather than to inherited ability.8
8

See Lucas and Pekkala (2003) for an especially interesting study using an extensive data set from
Finland. They find low transmission from parents’ earnings to those of their children, but high

8

A variant of the “meager inheritance” explanation of chronic poverty looks at
somewhat larger scales to explain chronic poverty on the basis of geography, both at the
macro scale of nation states and subcontinental regions (Bloom and Sachs 1998, Gallup
and Sachs 1998) and at intra-national scale (Hentschel et al. 2000, Elbers et al. 2001, Jalan
and Ravallion 2002, Ravallion and Datt 2002). Natural resources such as soils, forests,
water and wildlife are a fundamental input to rural economies, health shocks due to
climate-dependent infectious disease are a primary threat to livelihoods, local
governance influences patterns of public goods provision, and the perishability and low
value-to-bulk ratio of raw commodities makes market access crucial to profitability.
Because of the coordination problems intrinsic to many natural resources management
and marketing decisions, a meso-level poverty trap can emerge where the collective
endowment is weak and mechanisms to resolve coordination problems do not yet exist
(Barrett and Swallow 2003). Geography plainly matters to patterns of poverty and
poverty dynamics.
Where some face poverty because of meager inheritance and a bad start to life,
others start off luckier but fall into poverty because of an adverse shock or series of
shocks. Natural disasters and civil strife are tragic not just because of the temporary
displacement and deprivation they bring but, most all, because they can wipe out in a
moment what households have labored years to accumulate through disciplined
savings and investment. Brief disturbances can have persistent effects (Hoddinott and
Kinsey 2001). These two effects are often mutually reinforcing as those who start off
with a bad lot are far more likely to suffer serious adverse shocks that knock them back
down as they struggle to climb out of poverty (Dercon 1998, Barrett and Carter 2001).
Easterly (2001, p. 197) reports that “between 1990 and 1998, poor countries accounted
for 94 percent of the world’s 568 major natural disasters and 97 percent of disasterrelated deaths.” Worldwide, the poor are several times more likely to suffer injury or
illness than are the rich (Prasad et al. 1999).

transmission rates from total family income to children’s earnings, implying financial liquidity rather
than intrinsic ability is the most likely cause. Recent research on the United States suggests that about 65
percent of fathers’ earnings differentials relative to the broader population is transmitted to their children
(Mazumder 2001), with that transmission rate growing over the past couple of decades (Levine and
Mazumder 2002).

9

RURAL POVERTY DYNAMICS: WHAT WE STILL NEED TO LEARN
Explanations of chronic poverty to date have thus revolved around (i)
individual, household or community-level asset endowments (Dercon 1998, Carter and
May 1999, Maluccio et al. 2000, Haddad and Ahmed 2003), (ii) exogenous changes in
returns to asset endowments (Gunning et al. 2000, Maluccio et al. 2000), or (iii) the
impact of shocks and their persistence on welfare (Glewwe and Hall 1998, Hoddinott
and Kinsey 2001, McPeak and Barrett 2001, Elbers et al. 2002, Gertler and Gruber 2002,
Yamano and Jayne 2002, Barrett et al. 2003, Dercon 2003). The latter class of
explanations, however, offers an important clue toward an emerging area of research
that is of particular importance to understanding rural poverty dynamics.
Shocks can have persistent effects only in the presence of hysteresis that
generates irreversibility or differential rates of recovery. These effects suggest
important nonlinearities in the relationship between assets stocks and income growth,
nonlinearities commonly associated with the concept of poverty traps. This is a
burgeoning area of research in which many of us are presently engaged. There remains
much to learn about the empirics and theory of poverty traps.
Uncovering poverty traps and threshold effects
The pivotal feature of poverty traps is the existence of one or more critical
thresholds of wealth that people have a difficult time crossing from below.9 As a
consequence poverty persists for a long time, often measured in generations. Above the
threshold, endogenous growth processes carry people toward a high-productivity
steady state, while below the threshold, people sink toward a low-productivity
subsistence equilibrium.10 These thresholds give rise to the important distinction
between cargo nets and safety nets. The appropriate positioning of safety nets lies just
above thresholds at which natural path dynamics break in different directions.
The idea of multiple equilibria in this general context has been around for at least
75 years, dating to Young (1928), Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and Myrdal (1957), if not
9

A crucial point, and one commonly misunderstood, is that these thresholds are not deterministic. Rather they
reflect the point at which the expected path dynamics bifurcate, where E[dA] or E[dY] – depending on whether one
is working in asset or income space – switches signs. Intuitive examples of such thresholds include homelessness or
permanent physical disability.
10
There may be more than two stable dynamic equilibria. See Zimmerman and Carter (2003) for an example with
three stable dynamic equilibria.

10

earlier. In recent years, however, economists have begun to formalize such concepts
and to appreciate the central role of threshold effects that generate bifurcated welfare
dynamics, with some people staying or climbing out of poverty and others mired in a
long-term poverty trap. Absent such thresholds, all poverty would be transitory with
everyone converging toward a single equilibrium income level, as posited by
neoclassical economic growth theory (Solow 1956). Overwhelming empirical evidence
against such unconditional convergence has motivated considerable research over the
past fifteen or so years on “new” theories and empirics of economic growth.11 To date,
this work has focused heavily at the macroeconomic level of nation states, but the logic
applies equally at meso and micro levels, where it may actually prove more useful for
policy purposes (Barrett and Swallow 2003).
The idea of multiple dynamic equilibria and its implication of threshold effects
becomes especially salient because it gives rise to significant potential endogenous
change in returns to asset endowments. There are at least three distinct mechanisms by
which this can occur. First, risk avoidance behavior can cause endogenous selection of
low return portfolios that have relatively low variability in returns (Rosenzweig and
Binswanger 1993, Zimmerman and Carter 2003). Second, credit market imperfections
can constrain the feasible matching of variable input choices with quasi-fixed factors of
production (i.e., assets), leading to a positive correlation between an agent’s ex ante
asset stock and the rate of return on those assets (Bardhan et al. 2000). Third, there can
be locally increasing returns due to discrete choices of technologies or occupations
(Banerjee and Newman 1993, Barrett and Blume 2003).
By any of these three mechanisms, as asset stocks increase, expected returns on
assets, r, increase, generating an added boost to income beyond that associated with
adding to asset stock at a constant (much less diminishing) rate of return. This is a
significant refinement of the dominant recent approach which, as previously described,
has focused on inducing exogenous changes in returns to the poor’s productive assets
due, for example, to market liberalization policies. Poverty traps depend
fundamentally on endogenous change in returns on asset holdings, so that income is at
least locally increasing in asset stocks. We have learned in recent years that returns can
indeed prove endogenous, at the micro level of individuals or households, growing
11

Easterly (2001) offers an especially accessible, even entertaining treatment of the evolution of growth theory and
the empirical evidence on economic growth.

11

with one’s asset stock, at the meso level of communities, due to interhousehold
externalities and coordination, or at the macro level of countries, due to political
economy effects. 12 The net effect are patterns of persistent poverty that replicate
themselves across multiple scales, termed “fractal poverty traps” by Easterly (2001) and
Barrett and Swallow (2003).
The possible endogeneity of returns to assets can be readily seen by returning
briefly to the mathematics of income dynamics. To establish the effect of changing asset
stocks on income, we implicitly differentiate equation (5) with respect to A and take
expectations:
E[dY/dA] = r + A`E[dr/dA]

(7)

Equation (7) indicates that income growth can occur not just due to exogenous change
in rates of return – dr from equation (6) – or to growth in the asset stock with a constant
rate of return – the first term of equation (7) – but also due to induced growth in rates of
return as people accumulate assets. This is a testable hypothesis. Because we observe
neither r nor dr/dA, we need to estimate them:
dY/dA = _+ _’A + _

(8)

where our estimate of _ provides a best estimate of r and our estimate of _ represents
the E[dr/dA] vector with what is likely to prove a heteroskedastic regression error, _.
Rejection of the null hypothesis that _=0 provides strong evidence in favor of the
endogeneity of rates of return, with rejection in favor of the alternate hypothesis that at
least one element of _>0, and none negative, signaling locally increasing returns
characteristic of threshold effects associated with poverty traps.13 These returns can be
to scale – of a single asset – or to scope, reflecting complementarity across assets that
endogenously boosts productivity and thus income. This can perhaps be seen most
easily by specifying (9) with respect to each of the multiple asset stocks held by
households or individuals in the relevant population:
dY/dAi = _i+ _j _ijAj + _i

(9)

Simultaneous estimation of the system of equations represented by (9), each for a
different asset, Ai, would establish the assets for which overall returns appear to be
endogenously increasing, enabling development professionals to focus more precisely
on the assets that most matter to helping the poor to climb out of chronic poverty.
12

This distinction parallels that between internal and external economies of scale in the international trade literature.
Conversely, if at least one element of _ is negative and none positive, this would imply convergence, based
on decreasing returns to scale.
13

12

Furthermore, comparison of the expected marginal returns to each asset could establish
the relative expected income gains achievable from transfers of or de novo investment
in each type of asset. Such estimates establish expected benefits, which can then be
compared against cost estimates for different types of interventions so as to improve the
likely yield from scarce funds invested in asset accumulation among the poor.
Of course, equations (8) and (9) are equivalent to endogenizing r in equation (3)
and estimating income levels, rather than changes in income, as a polynomial function
of A. A second-order example would be the simple regression model
Y = A`r = _ + _i _iAi+ _i_j_ijAiAj + _

(10)

where convexity of E[Y] in A signals endogenously increasing returns on assets
consistent with the existence of a poverty trap, and concavity would indicate
convergence.
Establishing the existence of endogenously increasing rates of return to assets is
only one part of the research challenge. The more practical – and more difficult – task is
to identify the thresholds at which welfare dynamics appear to bifurcate. These are the
points where one can usefully distinguish between the transitorily poor who remain
above the threshold and therefore should recover on their own, and the (perhaps
newly) chronically poor who were born or have fallen below the threshold and whose
path dynamics will carry them toward a meager, subsistence equilibrium in the absence
of assistance.
Thresholds can sometimes be found via autoregressions of welfare measures
such as assets, income or expenditures on past values of the same measure. The
methodological problem, however, is that the autoregressions have to allow for
relatively high-order polynomial relations in order that one can feasibly find thresholds.
Such thresholds can be tricky to identify, especially using parametric estimation
methods because in theory one should find few observations around the unstable
dynamic equilibria that define thresholds. This requires sufficient sample sizes, not
only in cross-section but perhaps especially in the time domain, in order to capture low
probability observations in the neighborhood of threshold points. Without sufficiently
dense data or flexible estimators, inflection points will typically be washed out in global
parametric estimation off of just two or three observations per unit, more likely
manifesting themselves more subtly as heteroskedastic and positively autocorrelated
errors. If considerable within-sample heterogeneity in exogenous conditions causes the

13

location of thresholds to vary considerably between households within the population
under study, then uncovering them empirically becomes harder still. In sum, detection
of thresholds associated with multiple dynamic equilibria and poverty traps can be
extremely difficult, even if they exist. As U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld
infamously asserted prior to the 2003 Iraq war, the absence of evidence is not the same
as evidence of absence. The methodological challenges of precisely identifying poverty
traps and threshold effects remain formidable.

Figure 1: Nonparametric estimates of expected herd size transitions in southern Ethiopia

Nonparametric methods can be very effective in locating thresholds, as
demonstrated in Figure 1, taken from Lybbert et al. (2002). This graphic depicts the
nonparametric autoregression of the natural logarithm of household herd size one and
ten years ahead on current values using 17 years’ herd history data on 55 pastoralist
households from the Borana Plateau of southern Ethiopia. The solid, 45-degree line
represents dynamic equilibrium, points where current and expected future herd sizes
are the same. The S-shaped asset dynamics reveal a threshold household herd size –
reflecting an unstable dynamic equilibrium – of approximately 12-15 cattle. Below that
level, pastoralists effectively become sedentarized because the lactating herd is too
small to split so as to support both migrating herders and a nonmigratory base camp of
women, children, the elderly and the infirm. Below the threshold herd size, livestock
holdings tend to collapse toward an equilibrium of about one head of cattle because of

14

optimal portfolio rebalancing – manifest as net sales of livestock – and frequent
agroclimatic chocks to which they cannot respond through migration . Above the
threshold, the herd can be split, enabling migratory extensive grazing of the dry herd
(and a few lactating animals used to feed trekking herders) in response to
spatiotemporal variability in forage and water availability, thereby achieving a higher
dynamic equilibrium herd size of 50-75 head. Because the density of observations just
below the threshold is low, second and third order polynomial parametric regressions
did not initially uncover this relationship. Hence the value of nonparametric methods
for empirical inquiry into poverty traps.
Note as well the crucial difference from the conventional empirical approach of
looking for differences in growth rates across quantiles of a wealth or income
distribution. Prospective differences in accumulation dynamics differ relative to the
thresholds that define the boundary of a poverty trap, not relative to the seams between
distribution quantiles. Consequently, unless the quantile divides just happen to
correspond with those thresholds – which they almost surely will not – the quantilebased approach will generally miss threshold effects associated with poverty traps.
Qualitative research methods more familiar to the other social sciences can prove
especially helpful in uncovering the thresholds that underpin chronic poverty (Hulme
and Shepherd 2003). Precisely because there should be few observations in the vicinity
of unstable dynamic equilibria, the task of identifying thresholds can often defy
statistical methods based on observational data. Yet the poor can often identify in openended conversations what it takes to be able to shift to a different production
technology (e.g., from sedentarized cattle husbandry to extensive pastoralism in the
preceding example), a different livelihood strategy (e.g., from petty trade to
wholesaling), or to migrate to a place offering brighter prospects. If asked, the poor can
often pinpoint the asset(s) responsible for endogenous returns. Economists are slowly
warming to the integration of qualitative data collection with our more familiar
quantitative methods, begetting a promising union for policy-oriented poverty research
(Kanbur 2003).
An indirect signal of threshold effects can sometimes be found in distributional
data. Because poverty traps give rise to birfurcated welfare dynamics, people who
initially start out close to one another can follow sharply divergent trajectories. In the
presence of threshold effects, therefore, the tendency over time will be for people to

15

cluster around a small number of stable equilibria that serve as local basins of
convergence, with discernible troughs between these points. This will be apparent in
cross-sectional income (or expenditure or other welfare measures) distribution data as
multiple modes around dynamic equilibria, leading to what Quah (1996) has termed
“twin-peakedness”, which might be more generally thought of as “multi-peakedness”.
We see two examples of twin-peakedness in Figures 2 and 3, which present
nonparametric density estimates of two different welfare distributions. Figure 2 plots
the 1989 per capita daily incomes of a sample of households in Madzuu, a village in
Kenya’s western highlands where good soils, abundant rainfall and moderate access to
urban markets (such as Kisumu) create some, albeit limited opportunities for upward
economic mobility. Poverty rates nonetheless remain very high, with 61 percent below
a $0.50/day per capita poverty line in both 1989 and 2002 and only 9 percent above it in
both periods.14 Figure 3 displays the density of 1997 per capita herd sizes among
pastoralists on the Borana Plateau of southern Ethiopia, a region of relatively favorable
agroecological potential for pastoralists, therefore likewise offering some chance for
upward economic mobility among a subpopulation typically far poorer than national
averages. In each case, there’s a dominant mode at a low level, around $0.50/day per
capita income in Madzuu and 1-2 cattle per person in Borana, and a secondary mode at
a much more desirable level, about $1.30/day per person in Madzuu and 15-20 animals
per capita in Borana. These sorts of bimodal distributions suggest the existence of
threshold effects that lead to birfurcated welfare dynamics, with some people heading
toward a low-level stable equilibrium and others toward a higher one.

0.20

1.0
0.15
0.8

0.6

0.10

0.4

0.0
0.00

0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
2002 per capita daily income (US$), Madzuu

3.00

Rosenblatt-Parzen density

Rosenblatt-Parzen density

14

0.2

0.05

0.00
0

5
10
15
20
1997 household per capita herd size, Borana, Southern Ethiopia

The daily per capita income figures are in inflation-adjusted 2002 US dollar terms.

16

Figure 2: Bimodal income in western Kenya

Figure 3: Bimodal cattle wealth in southern
Ethiopia

Of course, in many very poor communities, we find unimodal distributions, not
because thresholds do not exist, but more likely because too few people cross them to
create sufficient density at higher equilibria to find these effects in the data.15 Such
places reflect geographic poverty traps (Jalan and Ravallion 2002). Where the
underlying agroecological conditions, market access, or sociopolitical stability – or some

Rosenblatt-Parzen density

3

2

1

0
0.00

0.50
1.00
1.50
Per capita daily income (2002 US$), 1996 (dotted) and 2002 (solid)
Fianarantsoa, Madagascar

combination of these – are such that there exist few pathways out of poverty in the
absence of significant external interventions.
Figure 4 exhibits one such example, from Madagascar’s poorest province,
Fianarantsoa. The graphic shows distinctly unimodal distributions of daily per capita
income distribution (again in constant 2002 US dollars) of households surveyed in 1996
and again in 2002, with a mode of only $0.20-0.25/day per person. In communities as
desperately poor as these, income appears unimodal because virtually everyone is
caught in a geographic poverty trap. The distinct leftward compression of the income
distribution in 2002, relative to 1996, reflects the effect of a sharp covariate shock, the
eight month national crisis that befell Madagascar following the violently disputed
presidential elections of December 2001.
15

In relatively wealthy communities in which few people face serious obstacles to wealth accumulation, welfare
distributions similarly appear unimodal, because relatively little of the population falls below a threshold associated
with a poverty trap. Because the focus of this paper is poverty, we do not discuss this case any further.

17

Figure 4: Intertemporal shifts in unimodal income distributions
To summarize, longstanding hypotheses about multiple equilibria are receiving
renewed attention in the empirical literature on development microeconomics. Highly
suggestive evidence is emerging that indeed Myrdal, Rosenstein-Rodan and Young
may have been correct about the existence of distinct accumulation trajectories, one or
more of which are associated with chronic poverty. If confirmed through further
(qualitative, quantitative or mixed methods) empirical research and explained
adequately with one or more theories of poverty traps applicable to the contexts from
whence the data originate, these findings would have significant implications for
development policy. In particular, empirical corroboration of the existence of poverty
traps would signal the necessity of renewed activism by donors and governments to
address insufficiency of asset holdings among the chronic poor.
Explaining poverty traps
There are multiple pathways out of rural poverty, so one needs to beware of
presenting too simplistic or mechanical a description. For some, the optimal pathway is
through agricultural intensification and commercialization. For others, it lies in
migration to an urban area. For others, the right strategy involves gradual transition out
of agriculture and into rural non-farm activities.16 Some will use a combination of these
strategies. The key is not the particular path to be followed, which may vary markedly
across space, time and even among individuals in the same location and moment.
Rather, the key is the existence of some pathway out of poverty, a strategy in which
current optimal choices predictably lead to the accumulation of sufficient productive
assets so that the household can reasonably expect to earn an investible surplus above
and beyond immediate consumption needs, enabling continued accumulation and

16

The role of the rural non-farm economy in facilitating escape from poverty has been widely
undervalued in agricultural and development economics. A range of studies in recent years have
uncovered a positive relationship between non-farm income and household welfare indicators, in
particular, that greater nonfarm income diversification causes more rapid growth in earnings and
consumption (Barrett et al. 2001b). In places where the ranks of landless or near-landless poor are
swelling rapidly, the rural non-farm economy will become essential to poverty reduction strategies (Jayne
et al. 2003).

18

steady growth in all or most welfare measures. A poverty trap exists when a
household’s optimal strategy does not lead to such accumulation, when the feasible
choice set essentially precludes accumulation.
Why might this be? A range of sophisticated theoretical models have emerged
over the past twenty years to explain the phenomenon of poverty traps.17 This is not the
place to try to review this literature, not least of which because I could not begin to do
justice to the elegance of some of the models. Instead, let me focus on two key features
that underpin the logic of poverty traps in virtually every published model:
endogenously increasing returns and financial market failures.
If returns on assets increase in wealth, this (somewhat tautologically) implies
increasing returns to scale due to some mechanism, often modeled as resulting from
externalities or societal level coordination problems such as agglomeration economies.
The key becomes understanding why any low-level dynamic equilibrium would exist in
the presence of increasing returns. The pivotal feature seems to be discreteness. If
occupational or technology choice is discrete – if people cannot combine different jobs
or production technologies at arbitrarily fine scales, gradually shifting from the lower
return one to the higher return one – and there exist nontrivial fixed or sunk costs to
making the shift, an entry barrier emerges that will segregate a population into those
who can clear the poverty trap threshold and those who cannot.
One implication of this is the potential importance of what Barrett and Blume
(2003) term “transition technologies”, options that are inferior to the highest return,
state-of-the-art technologies, but superior to the lowest return options presently chosen
and – most importantly – accessible to those presently choosing lowest return strategies.
Like the concepts of multiple equilibria and poverty traps, the idea of intermediate
technologies has been around for a long time. Formal theorizing is, however, new and
may shed light on its importance. Ideally, intermediate technologies build in their own
demise by inducing people onto an improved accumulation trajectory that, in time,
leads them to shift from the intermediate technology to a still-better option, which may
actually predate the intermediate technology but which was previously inaccessible
without the intermediate step. Moser and Barrett (2003) find some evidence of
“technology adoption ladders” of this sort, with Malagasy peasants proving more likely
17

An incomplete listing of key papers would include Loury (1981), Romer (1986), Lucas (1988), Azariadis and
Drazen (1990), Krugman (1991), Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and Zeira (1993), Mookherjee and Ray
(2002) and Zimmerman and Carter (2003).

19

to adopt a high-yielding rice cultivation practice if they first adopt off-season cropping
of tubers in their rice fields, mainly because off-season cropping helps resolve seasonal
cash liquidity constraints to adoption of the new practice.
This particular example also underscores the centrality of financial market
failures to the logic of poverty traps. If people could borrow freely, then everyone of
like latent ability could make optimal investments for their circumstances and there
would be no significant variation in interpersonal welfare within sites in equilibrium.
Conditional convergence would be to steady states that vary only by inherited ability.
Plainly, that is a fantasy world. In the real world, limits on credit and insurance access
confront the chronically poor with binding constraints that limit their ability and
willingness to invest today in order to reap higher steady state income in the future.
Asset accumulation failures are the predictable result (Dercon 1998, Carter and
Zimmerman 2000, Gunning et al. 2000, Carter and May 2001, Mude et al. 2003).
The problem is even more pernicious than mere accumulation failures.
Productivity suffers too because when people do not have access to credit or insurance
so as to enable them to move consumption across periods, they inevitably find
alternative markets through which they can get costly quasi-credit. For example,
farmers will sell crop at low prices immediately after harvest, fully expecting to buy
back the same crop months later at a considerably higher price. Given an immediate
need for cash for any of a host of reasons, but lacking access to credit or cash savings,
farmers commonly “borrow” through product markets. This appears to us economists
as significant allocative inefficiency, although it can be an optimal strategy for a
severely credit constrained household. Other farmers will use labor markets for similar
purposes, working for cash wages during planting season when a bit more time spent
on their own farm would enable them to employ a cultivation method yielding
significantly higher yields, and thus greater future marginal revenue product of labor.
The premium on cash today from low wages can be more than sufficient to compensate
for foregone productivity even a few months later (Moser and Barrett 2003). This
appears as technical inefficiency, choosing to operate within the feasible production
frontier, even though it can be an optimal choice for the farmer.
So what can be done about financial markets failures that beget poverty traps?
The literature on rural finance and microfinance is vast. I could not hope to undertake
an effective review of this literature in just a couple of paragraphs. Rather, I want

20

merely to emphasize the centrality of work on microfinance and rural finance to
research on poverty. The good news is that much excellent recent and ongoing research
exists on how to resolve financial markets failures so as to empower the rural poor to
conserve their scarce capital in the face of adverse shocks and to accumulate additional
productive capital.18
Discreteness and financial constraints can jointly generate significant poverty
traps. Faced with entry barriers to more remunerative livelihood strategies or
production technologies offering higher yields and lacking the liquid assets or
borrowing capacity to meet those minimum entry requirements, the poor must
commonly choose demonstrably lower return activities or portfolios or inferior
technologies (Dercon and Krishnan 1996, Bardhan et al. 2000, Barrett et al. 2000, Barrett
et al. 2001a, 2001b, Barrett and Blume 2003, Moser and Barrett 2003, Zimmerman and
Carter 2003). Exactly where the relevant threshold points associated with these entry
barriers lie depends on exogenous biophysical and market conditions and the fixed or
sunk costs inherent to accessing the more remunerative option. In places with good
market access and favorable agroecological endowments, we hypothesize that poverty
traps are less acute, trapping fewer people. Some of these factors are endogenous at the
level of communities or nation states, as in the case of cooperatives that can permit
smallholder producers to enjoy better output/input price ratios due to larger scale
transactions or national-level institutions that ensure property rights, contract
enforcement, and reasonably equal opportunities to all residents (North 1990,
Acemoglu et al. 2001, 2002, Barrett and Swallow 2003). Others are exogenously
determined by geography.
DEVELOPMENT POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Perhaps the most fundamental lesson of the past quarter century’s research on
rural poverty is the need to distinguish transitory from chronic poverty. Because the
transitorily poor need no direct assistance in order to recover from and exit poverty, the
necessary activism of donors and government in combating poverty depends inversely
on the extent to which poverty is transitory. One must balance attention to the inherent
18

An incomplete list of especially exciting work in this area includes Zeller et al. (1997), Morduch (1999) and
DeJanvry et al. (2003).

21

upward bias in estimates of transitory poverty caused by measurement error with the
caution not to interpret all poverty as demanding costly – and potentially injurious –
external intervention. A central task for researchers is to help policymakers strike this
balance effectively through careful empirical research.
The fundamental distinction between transitory and chronic poverty arises from
the existence of threshold effects associated with multiple dynamic equilibria and
poverty traps. Threshold points are likely to prove heterogeneous, varying with
geography and perhaps individual and community attributes (e.g., gender, age, density
of social solidarity networks) and they will certainly be endogenous to policies that
change the incentives to switch livelihood strategies. This complicates the analytical
task facing those of us in the research community. The existence of thresholds
nonetheless makes necessary a fundamental distinction between safety nets set above
the threshold to keep people from becoming chronically poor in the wake of adverse
shocks and cargo nets intended to facilitate the chronically poor’s exit from poverty.
This also implies a central role for effective targeting, in order that the appropriate
policies are applied to the right subpopulations.
There are many different methods for targeting interventions.19 Three in
particular merit comment: geographic, indicator, and self-targeting. Geographic
targeting is the perhaps the least expensive means of targeting and can be highly
appropriate in areas of nearly universal chronic poverty, as in much of the drylands of
Ethiopia, Kenya and Madagascar, where more than 80 percent of the population falls
below low national poverty lines. Geographic targeting can likewise be appropriate for
short-term, safety net interventions such as food aid distribution in the wake of natural
disasters in order that short-term disruptions to incomes and food availability do not
cause long-term injury for affected populations.
But because variation in incomes tends to be at least as much within regions (and
even within villages) as between them (Jayne et al. 2003), geographic targeting alone
will necessarily miss many, if not most of the poor. Beyond areas of intense,
widespread poverty, donors, NGOs and governments need to identify thresholds
measurable in readily observable units (e.g., landholdings, herd size, educational
attainment) and to target the chronic poor who fall below those thresholds for
assistance. Hence the importance of indicator targeting. It must be borne in mind,
19

Barrett (2002) reviews and assesses the strengths and weaknesses of alternative targeting modalities.

22

however, that indicator targeting only works well at combating chronic poverty if the
indicators used are strongly and causally associated with lower measures of well-being.
Identifying appropriate indicators often requires the sort of empirical analysis described
earlier, else stylized associations such as gender, ethnicity or age will typically be used,
often with little or no correlation with actual need, resulting in ineffective assistance
(Clay et al. 1999).
Self-targeting mechanisms can be especially useful for safety nets. These
instruments take advantage of the character of the transfer – e.g., a low-wage work
requirement associated with public employment schemes, inferior subsidized foods or
significant queuing for food, clothing or cash – to try to induce the non-poor to selfselect out of the beneficiary pool. When set up as standing policies that kick in
automatically in response to income and other shocks that imperil vulnerable
populations – which may include seasonal cycles of shortage that can preclude
investment by smallholders (Barrett et al. 2001a) – then self-targeting programs such as
food-for-work or other public employment schemes can be valuable tools for providing
safety nets in response to quickly developing emergencies. Significant experience in
south Asia, southern Africa and Argentina, in particular, have demonstrated the
potential of this approach (Ravallion 1991, von Braun 1995). Absent an indicator
targeting entry hurdle, self-targeting transfer schemes are often ineffective, however, in
addressing chronic poverty, especially where land and credit markets both fail, causing
considerable interhousehold variation in marginal returns to labor, or when agencies
try to accomplish multiple goals with self-targeting transfers (Barrett et al.
forthcoming).
An important corollary of targeting is the need for triage in transfer programs.
The literature is surprisingly silent on the value of directing certain transfers away from
not only the non-poor but also away from a subpopulation of the poor who are unlikely
to benefit significantly from the transfers. Consider, for example, the implications of
Figure 1 for herd restocking projects. Such transfers provide an excellent safety net
intervention for those hitting the threshold at which they might become involuntarily
sedentarized, enabling them to get back out onto the open range as viable pastoralists.
But providing one or two cattle to a herder who has just lost his entire herd is unlikely
to enable resumption of extensive pastoralism. Rather, he is likely to lose one of the
animals in short order as he settles into a new, lower, sedentarized equilibrium; he may

23

benefit more from skills training to improve his prospects in the labor market (McPeak
and Barrett 2001, Lybbert et al. 2002). Policymakers need to think through carefully
when triage might be necessary in safety net programs and which assets will be most
helpful to which poor people. Researchers need to help identify appropriate triage
points and rules of thumb on different means of assistance. Ethical considerations may
make assistance imperative, but the form of the assistance needs to pay attention to
likely effectiveness, hence the need for triage with respect to form-specific transfers.
Targeting concerns revolve not just around who to assist, where, or when, but
equally how and with what. The “how” and “what” questions of targeting receive too
little attention from researchers and policymakers but are of particular importance in
addressing chronic poverty. The reason is straightforward: in order to enable the
chronically poor to begin accumulating productive assets, one must know what factors
currently most limit their choices. Is the problem chiefly due to an insufficiently
productive asset stock, implying a need for improved technologies to boost yields or
better market access to improve the terms of trade for the goods and services sold by
the chronically poor? Decades of government interference in rural markets and global
market distortions due to wealthy countries’ domestic farm subsidies often play a
significant role here. Or is the problem more an insufficient stock of productive assets,
and, if so, of which type? Land, implying a possible rationale for progressive land
reform? Human capital, implying a rationale for greater public investment in
education, health and nutrition, perhaps especially for young children? Or is the need
chiefly for deeper and broader access to financial services so as to free more households
to undertake additional investment appropriate to their particular circumstances and
talents?
These are the familiar pillars of decades of rural development strategies. There is
little new to offer other than the simple observation that each case is different. Simple,
blanket prescriptions rarely work. Effective policies to combat chronic poverty depend
on careful, empirical policy research customized to local conditions. We in the research
community have an obligation to develop tools and information that can provide
policymakers with accurate and timely information on the who, what, where, when and
how targeting questions that are the essence of poverty reduction strategies.

24

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J.A. Robinson (2001), “Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91 (5): 13691401.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J.A. Robinson (2002), “Reversal of Fortune: Geography
and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1231-94.
Albarran, P. and O. Attanasio (forthcoming), “Do public transfers crowd out private transfers?
Evidence from a randomized experiment in Mexico,” in S. Dercon, ed., Insurance Against
Poverty (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Alderman, H., J.R. Behrman, H.-P. Kohler, J.A. Maluccio, and S.C. Watkins (2000),
“Attrition in Longitudinal Household Survey Data: Some Tests for Three
Developing-Country Samples,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2447.
Azariadis, C. and A. Drazen (1990), “Threshold externalities and economic
development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, 3: 501-26.
Banerjee, A.V. and A.F. Newman (1993), “Occupational choice and the process of
development,” Journal of Political Economy 101 (2): 274-98.
Bardhan, P., S. Bowles and H. Gintis (2000), “Wealth Inequality, Wealth Constraints and
Economic Performance,” in A. B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon, eds., Handbook of
Income Distribution, Volume 1 (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science).
Barrett, C.B. (2002), “Food Security and Food Assistance Programs,” in B. Gardner and
G. Rausser, eds., Handbook of Agricultural Economics, volume 2B (Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science).
Barrett, C.B., M. Bezuneh, D.C. Clay and T. Reardon (2000), “Heterogeneous
Constraints, Incentives and Income Diversification Strategies in Rural Africa,”
Cornell University working paper.
Barrett, C.B., M. Bezuneh, and A.A. Aboud (2001a), “Income Diversification, Poverty Traps
and Policy Shocks in Côte d’Ivoire and Kenya,” Food Policy 26, 4: 367-384.
Barrett, C.B. and L.E. Blume (2003), “Technology Choice and Poverty Traps,” Cornell
University working paper in preparation.
Barrett, C.B. and M.R. Carter (2001), “Can’t Get Ahead For Falling Behind: New
Directions for Development Policy To Escape Poverty and Relief Traps,” Choices 16,
4: 35-38.
Barrett, C.B., S. Holden, and D.C. Clay (forthcoming), “Can Food-For-Work Programs
Reduce Vulnerability?” in S. Dercon, ed., Insurance Against Poverty (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
Barrett, C.B., T. Reardon and P. Webb, eds. (2001b), “Nonfarm Income Diversification and
Household Livelihood Strategies in Rural Africa: Concepts, Dynamics and Policy
Implications,” Food Policy 26, 4.
Barrett, C.B., S.M. Sherlund and A.A. Adesina (2003), “"Macroeconomic shocks, human
capital and productive efficiency: Evidence from West African farmers," Cornell
University working paper.

25

Barrett, C.B. and B.M. Swallow (2003), “Fractal Poverty Traps,” Cornell University
working paper in preparation.
Basu, K. (1999), “Child Labor: Cause, Consequence, and Cure, with Remarks on
International Labor Standards,” Journal of Economic Literature 37, 2: 1083-1119.
Baulch, B. and J. Hoddinott, eds. (2000), Economic Mobility and Poverty Dynamics in
Developing Countries. London: Frank Cass.
Bloom, D.E. and J.D. Sachs (1998), “Geography, Demography and Economic Growth in
Africa,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998, 2: 207-273.
Bourguignon, F. and S.R. Chakravarty (2002), “The measurement of multidimensional
poverty,” DELTA working paper.
Carter, M.R. and J. May (1999), “Poverty, Livelihood and Class in Rural South Africa,”
World Development 27, 1: 1-20.
Carter, M.R. and J. May (2001). “One Kind of Freedom: The Dynamics of Poverty in
Post-Apartheid South Africa,” World Development 29, 12: 1987-2006.
Carter, M.R. and F. Zimmerman (2000). “The Dynamic Costs and Persistence of Asset
Inequality in An Agrarian Economy,” Journal of Development Economics 63(2): 265302.
Clay, D.C., D. Molla and D. Habtewold (1999), “Food Aid Targeting in Ethiopia: A
Study of Who Needs It and Who Gets It,” Food Policy 24, 3: 391-409.
Cox, D. and E. Jimenez (1992), “Social Security and Private Transfers in Developing
Countries: The Case of Peru,” World Bank Economic Review 6, 1: 155-169.
DeJanvry, A., E. Sadoulet, C. McIntosh, B. Wydick, M. Valdivia, A. Trigueros, G.
Gordillo and D. Karlan (2003), “Up the Lending Ladder: Extending Financial
Services for the Rural Poor through Credit-Reporting Bureaus,” University of
Wisconsin-Madison BASIS Brief no. 16.
Dercon, S. (1998), “Wealth, risk and activity choice: cattle in Western Tanzania,” Journal
of Development Economics, 55, 1: 1–42.
Dercon, S. (2000), “The impact of economic reforms on households in rural Ethiopia,”
University of Oxford Centre for the Study of African Economies working paper.
Dercon, S., ed. (2003), Insurance Against Poverty (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Dercon, S. and P. Krishnan (1996), “Income Portfolios in Rural Ethiopia and Tanzania:
Choices and Constraints,” Journal of Development Studies 32, 6: 850-875.
Dercon, S. and P. Krishnan (2003), “ Risk sharing and public transfers,” Economic Journal
113: C86-C94.
Duclos, J.-Y., D. Sahn and S.D. Younger (2003), “Robust Multidimensional Poverty
Comparisons,” Université Laval working paper.
Easterly, W. (2001), The Elusive Quest for Growth. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Elbers, C., J.W. Gunning and B. Kinsey (2002), “Convergence, Shocks and Poverty:
Micro Evidence on Growth under Uncertainty,” Tinbergen Institute working
paper.

26

Elbers, C., J.O. Lanjouw and P. Lanjouw (2001), “Welfare in Villages and Towns: MicroLevel Estimation of Poverty and Inequality,” Vrije Universiteit working paper.
Falaris, E.M. (2003), “The effect of survey attrition in longitudinal surveys: Evidence
from Peru, Côte d’Ivoire and Vietnam,” Journal of Development Economics 70, 1: 133157.
Gallup, J.L. and J.D. Sachs (1998), ‘Geography and Economic Growth’, in B. Pleskovic
and J.E. Stiglitz, eds., Proceedings of the Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics, Washington: World Bank.
Galor, O. and J. Zeira (1993), “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of
Economic Studies 60, 1: 35-52.
Gertler, P. and J. Gruber (2002), “Insuring Consumption Against Illness,” American Economic
Review 1: 51-70.
Glewwe, P. and G. Hall (1998) "Are some groups more vulnerable to macroeconomic
shocks than others? Hypotheses tests based on panel data from Peru", Journal of
Development Economics 56, 1:181-206.
Grootaert, C. and R. Kanbur (1995), “The Lucky Few amidst Economic Decline:
Distributional Change in Côte d'Ivoire as Seen through Panel Data Sets, 1985-88,”
Journal of Development Studies 31, 4: 603-19.
Gunning, J.W., J. Hoddinott, B. Kinsey and T. Owens (2000), “Revisiting Forever
Gained: Income Dynamics in the Resettlement Areas of Zimbabwe, 1983-96,” in B.
Baulch and J. Hoddinott, eds., Economic Mobility and Poverty Dynamics in Developing
Countries. London: Frank Cass.
Haddad, L. and A. Ahmed (2003), “Chronic and Transitory Poverty: Evidence from
Egypt, 1997-99”, World Development 31, 1: 71-85.
Hentschel, J., J.O. Lanjouw, P. Lanjouw, and J. Poggi (2000), “Combining Census and
Survey Data to Study Spatial Dimensions of Poverty: A Case Study of Ecuador,”
World Bank Economic Review 14, 1: 147-166.
Hoddinott, J. and B. Kinsey (2001), “Child growth in the time of drought,” Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 63, 4: 409-436.
Hulme, D. and A. Shepherd, eds. (2003), “Chronic Poverty and Development Policy,”
World Development, 31, 3: 399-665.
Jalan, J. and M. Ravallion (2002), “Geographic Poverty Traps? A Micro Model of
Consumption Growth in Rural China” Journal of Applied Econometrics 17, 4: 329-346.
Jayne, T.S., T. Yamano, M.T. Weber, D. Tschirley, R. Benfica, A. Chapoto and B. Zulu
(2003), “Smallholder income and land distribution in Africa: Implications for
poverty reduction strategies,” Food Policy 28, 2: 253-275.
Kanbur, R., ed. (2003), Q-Squared: Combining Qualitative and Quantitative Methods Of
Poverty Appraisal (Delhi: Permanent Black).
Krugman, P. (1991), “Increasing returns and economic geography,” Journal of Political
Economy 99, 3: 483-99.

27

Levine, D.I. and B. Mazumder (2002), “Choosing the right parents: Changes in the
intergenerational transmission of inequality between 1980 and the early 1990s,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago working paper WP 2002-08.
Loury, G.C. (1981), “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,”
Econometrica 49, 4: 843-867.
Lucas, R. (1988), “On the mechanics of economic development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22, 1: 2-42.
Lucas, R.E.B. and S. Pekkala (2003), “Abilities, Budgets and Age: Inter-Generational
Economic Mobility in Finland,” Boston University Institute for Economic
Development Discussion Paper 130.
Luttmer, E.F.P. (2002), “Measuring Economic Mobility and Inequality: Disentangling
Real Events from Noisy Data,” University of Chicago working paper.
Lybbert, T.J., C.B. Barrett, S.Desta, and D.L. Coppock (2002), “Stochastic Wealth
Dynamics and Risk Management Among A Poor Population,” Cornell University
working paper.
Maluccio, J., L. Haddad, and J. May (2000), “Social Capital and Household Welfare in
South Africa, 1993-98,” in B. Baulch and J. Hoddinott, eds., Economic Mobility and
Poverty Dynamics in Developing Countries. London: Frank Cass.
Mazumder, B. (2001), “Earnings mobility in the US: A new look at intergenerational
inequality,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago working paper WP 2001-18.
McPeak, J.G. and C.B. Barrett (2001), “Differential Risk Exposure and Stochastic Poverty
Traps Among East African Pastoralists,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
83, 3: 674-679.
Mookherjee, D. and D. Ray (2002), “Contractual structure and wealth accumulation,”
American Economic Review 92, 4: 818-49.
Morduch, J. (1999), “The Microfinance Promise,” Journal of Economic Literature 37, 4:
1569-1614.
Moser, C.M. and C.B. Barrett (2003), "The Complex Dynamics of Smallholder
Technology Adoption: The Case of SRI in Madagascar," Cornell University
working paper.
Mude, A.G., C.B. Barrett, J.G. McPeak and C. Doss, “Educational Investments in a
Spatially Varied Economy,” Cornell University working paper, July 2003.
Myrdal, G. (1957), Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions (London: G. Duckworth
& Co.).
North, D.C. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Prasad, K., P. Belli and M. Das Gupta (1999), “Links Between Poverty, Exclusion and
Health,” World Bank background paper for the World Development Report
2000/2001.
Quah, D. (1996), “Twin Peaks: Growth and Convergence In Models of Distribution
Dynamics,” Economic Journal 106, 437: 1045-1055.

28

Ravallion, M. (1991), “Reaching the Rural Poor through Public Employment:
Arguments, Lessons, and Evidence from South Asia,” World Bank Research Observer
6, 1: 153-76.
Ravallion, M. and G. Datt (2002), “Why Has Economic Growth Been More Pro-Poor In
Some States of India Than Others?” Journal of Development Economics 68, 2: 381-400.
Romer, P. (1986), “Increasing returns and long run growth,” Journal of Political Economy
94, 4: 1002-37.
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. (1943), “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and SouthEastern Europe", Economic Journal
Rosenzweig, M.R. (2003), “Payoffs from Panels in Low-Income Countries: Economic
Development and Economic Mobility,” American Economic Review 93, 2: 112-117.
Rosenzweig, M.R. and H. Binswanger (1993), ”Wealth, Weather Risk and the
Composition and Profitability of Agricultural Investments,” Economic Journal 103,
416: 56-78.
Schultz, T.W. (1980), “Nobel Lecture: The Economics of Being Poor,” Journal of Political
Economy 88, 4: 639-651.
Strauss, J. and D. Thomas (1998), “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development”,
Journal of Economic Literature 36, 2: 766-817.
von Braun, J., ed. (1995), Employment for Poverty Reduction and Food Security
(Washington: International Food Policy Research Institute).
Yamano, T. and T.S. Jayne (2002), “Measuring the Impacts of Prime-Age Adult Death on
Rural Households in Kenya,” Tegemeo Institute of Agricultural Policy and
Development working paper 5.
Young, A.A. (1928), “Increasing Returns and Economic Progress,” Economic Journal 38:
527-42.
Zeller, M., G. Schrieder, J. von Braun and F. Heidhues (1997), Rural Finance for Food
Security for the Poor: Implications for Research and Policy. Washington: International
Food Policy Research Institute.
Zimmerman, F.J. and M.R. Carter (2003), “Asset smoothing, consumption smoothing
and the reproduction of inequality under risk and subsistence constraints,” Journal
of Development Economics 71: 233-260.

29

