World Development, Vol. 24, No. 10, pp. 1579-1595,1996
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved
0305-750X/96
$15 .OO+ 0.00

Pergamon

SO305750X(96)00059-9

Male-Female
Productivity:

Differences in Agricultural

Methodological

Issues and Empirical

Evidence

International

AGNES R. QUISUMBING”
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA.

Summary. - Most estimates of male-female differences in technical efficiency from production function studies show that male and female farmers are equally efficient farm managers, controlling for levels of inputs and human capital. There is some evidence, however, of allocative inefficiency within
households. Marginal products of labor depend on the relative scarcities of labor and the gender division
of labor in specific farming systems. Many of these studies, however, are methodologically
flawed.
Greater attention needs to be given to appropriate estimation methods, endogenous input choice, the use
of headship as a stratifying
variable, and the implications
of intrahousehold
resource allocation.
Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd

1. INTRODUCTION
It is often argued that women’s lower levels of
human and physical capital result in lower productivity or inability to respond to economic incentives.’
Much of the evidence cited to support this argument
comes from agriculture. Yet, the measurement of differences in agricultural productivity between men and
women is fraught with conceptual and methodological
difficulties. These arise from the difficulty of defining
appropriate measures of productivity
in different
farming systems, omission of individual characteristics in attempts to measure productivity differences by
sex, and the lack of clarity regarding the measurement
of sex and gender differences ?
An evaluation of male-female productivity differences should ideally be based on estimates of total factor productivity, in which an index of output is divided
by an index of inputs, aggregated over all types of outputs and inputs, respectively. Lack of gender-differentiated data on inputs and outputs, however, has prevented the use of this approach. Existing studies
therefore use partial productivity measures, such as
yield and labor productivity. These partial measures
of productivity are complicated by differences in
farming systems and social and cultural institutions. It
is feasible to estimate technical efficiency differences
between male and female farmers in farming systems
where men and women manage separate plots, as in
many African societies (Boserup, 1970). It is more
difficult to isolate managerial efficiency differences in

agricultural settings where plots are cultivated jointly
by male and female family members and hired laborers. In the latter, found in the “male” farming systems
of Asia and Latin America, the farm manager is usually assumed to be the male head of the household,
regardless of the actual contribution of women to
decision-making and farm labor.7
Despite the volume of attempts to document
male-female productivity differences, relatively few
control for individual characteristics such as education and physical assets. If women systematically had

1519

*This paper draws from research begun while I was with the
Education and Social Policy Department, The World Bank.
Subsequent work at the International Food Policy Research
Institute has been supported by the United States Agency for
International
Development,
Office
of Women
in
Development, Grant No. FAO-0100-G-00-5020-00,
on
Strengthening
Development
Policy
through
Gender
Analysis: An Integrated Multicountry Research Program. I
am grateful to Harold Alderman, Barbara Hem, Hanan
Jacoby, Per Pinstrup-Andersen,
Paul Schultz, Roger Slade,
Daphne Spurling, and Chris Udry for comments and suggestions on previous drafts. I acknowledge insightful comments
from seminar participants
at IFPRI. I also thank Bob
Evenson, Hailu Mekonnen, and Katrine Saito for providing
me with unpublished material from their work in progress.
Two anonymous referees contributed greatly to a better conceptualization of, and distinction between, sex and gender
differences. Jay Willis provided assistance with graphics.
The usual disclaimers apply. Final revision accepted: April
20.1996.

1580

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

lower levels of education and physical assets than
men: which is typical in most agricultural settings,
an approach that did not control for individual stocks
of physical and human capital would tend to overestimate productivity differences due to sex.5 That
is, women farmers would be expected to have lower
productivity simply because they are female, not
because they have fewer resources. Such an error
would be unfortunate because the accurate diagnosis
of sources of productivity differences, if they exist, is
important in order to identify appropriate policy interventions for increasing women’s productivity and
welfare.
The inadequate specification of individual farmer
characteristics
contributes further to the confusion
between “sex” and “gender” as a source of productivity differences. Sex differences are due to innate biological differences between men and women. Gender
differences, on the other hand, arise from the socially
constructed relationship between men and women
(Oakley, 1972). These differences affect the distribution of resources and responsibilities
between men
and women, and are shaped by ideological, religious,
ethnic, economic, and cultural determinants (Moser,
1989, p. 1800). Being socially determined, this distribution can thus be changed through conscious social
action including public policy.
While there are other measures of productivity
such as earnings functions and technological adoption
functions, this paper concentrates on empirical estimates of production functions.6 Production functions
have been widely used to estimate sex differences in
technical efficiency. These studies typically estimate
a pooled regression with a dummy variable for the sex
of the farm manager (or household head). Coefficients
from production functions have also been used to
estimate sex differences in labor productivity. Many
of these studies, however, ignore the simultaneity
bias introduced by ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimation of production functions, particularly the
endogeneity of input choice with respect to farmer
characteristics.
This paper reviews the empirical evidence on sex
differences in agricultural productivity based on production function estimates. It provides a critical
review of the methodological issues underlying the
measurement and empirical estimation of technical
efficiency and labor productivity. In so doing, it aims
to evaluate the current state of the literature and identify the most promising areas for future research.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the meaning and measurement of technical efficiency differences using production functions, and Section 3 presents a critical survey
of empirical studies on technical efficiency and labor
productivity differences by sex. Section 4 discusses
outstanding conceptual and methodological
issues,
and suggests directions for future research.

2. CONCEPTS AND METHODOLOGY
(a) Productionfunctions
A production function is defined in terms of the
maximum output that can be produced from a specified set of inputs, given the existing technology available to firms (Battese, 1992, p. 185). Suppose that the
production frontier is depicted in Figure 1.
The horizontal axis represents the vector of inputs
X associated with producing the output Y. Moreover,
suppose that the observed input-output values come
from a sample of male and female farmers, and that
these are below the production frontier. That is, farmers do not attain the maximum output possible for the
inputs involved, given the technology. Farmers may
lie below the production frontier if different technologies are currently in use. Female farmers, for example,
may be using traditional technologies either due to
lack of knowledge, lack of access to modern inputs
associated with new technologies, or higher costs to
adopting the new technologies. A measure of technical efficiency for male farmers is given by y’/y* at A,
and for female farmers by y2/y* at B, where y* is the
frontier output associated with the level of inputs x.
Given the level of input n, male farmers are more technically efficient than female farmers (they can produce more y with given inputs x).
The primal approach to production analysis estimates directly the parameters of the production function of a farm manager i in householdj:

where Y, is quantity produced, V, is a vector of inputs
used by farm manager i (including land, labor, capital,
and extension advice); Xi is a vector of individual
attributes, including the sex of the farmer; and Z, are
household- and community-level
variables. Correlation of input use with individual and household characteristics can be captured by interaction terms Vi/ix,
and VLZ,. In empirical applications, this involves estimating a single production function from the combined sample of male and female farmers, assuming
that they are producing the same output and use the
same technology, and allowing for sex differences in
technical efficiency by using a dummy variable for the
sex of the farmer.7 Note, however, that the confusion
between “sex” and “gender” could lead to misspecification of the production function if a “gender dummy”
were to capture only the sex of the farmer, omitting
information on physical and human capital. Aside
from the problem of omitted variables, the “gender
dummy” would capture both the biological and
socially determined characteristics of the individual in
the absence of information on physical and human
capital.*
Most of the early empirical work on male-female

MALE-FEMALE

DIFFERENCES

IN AGRICULTURAL

1581

PRODUCTIVITY

Production frontier

Output, Y

Observed input-output
;( A = (x,y’)
Technical efficiency at

1 B = (KY?

0

Technical efficiency
B=y2/y

X

at

Inputs, X

x: inputoutput

values of male farmers

0: input-output

values of female farmers

Figure 1. Technical eficiency of male andfemale farmers.
differences in technical efficiency
Douglas production function:
Y=a,La’

P2

has used the Cobb-

(21

where Y is output, L is labor input (hired or family),
and T is a vector of land, capital, and other conventional inputs. Usually, the equation is estimated by
ordinary least squares (OLS) by taking logarithms on
both sides; a typical form is as follows:
lnY=a,+a,lnL+a,lnT+~lnE+yEXT+
6%X + E

(3)

where Y, L, and Tare as defined above; E is educational attainment or an indicator variable for level of
schooling (of the farm manager, or household head, or
the members of the household); EXT is an index of
extension services; SEX is a dummy variable for the
sex of the household head or farm manager, and E is
the error term. The coefficient
that indicates
male-female differences in technical efficiency is 6,
an intercept shifter. Correlation between the sex of the
farmer and other inputs can be captured by interaction
terms. Estimates of output per unit of land are usually
obtained through yield regressions, where the depen-

dent variable is yield per hectare and the input variables are expressed in terms of inputs per hectare.
Although the Cobb-Douglas functional form is convenient to estimate since it is linear in parameters, it is
an unduly restrictive form to impose on the underlying
production relationship. It assumes strong separability
between inputs and an elasticity of substitution equal to
1.O. Less restrictive approaches using second-order
Taylor’s expansions to approximate the functional form
(for example, the translog, normalized quadratic and
Leontief), while widely used in other applications, have
rarely been used to analyze sex differences in productivity, with the few exceptions discussed below. Even
flexible forms, however, involve a guess about the
underlying functional form. Nonparametric approaches
may have greater potential by not imposing a specific
functional form, so long as the properties of a production function are preserved? The implications of
neglecting endogeneity of input choice, however, may
be more serious than functional form considerations.

(b) Simultaneity considerations and endogenous
input choice
Single-equation

estimation of production functions

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

1582

is problematic because the quantities of output and
variable inputs are simultaneously determined by the
conditions of profit maximization. Moreover, most
studies estimating sex differences in technical efficiency use both farmer characteristics (age, education) and input levels as regressors. Since regressors
are endogenous, they will be correlated with the error
term, and least squares estimates of parameters will be
inconsistent (Greene, 1993, p. 579). This failure of
least squares with endogenous right-hand side variables, or simultaneous-equations
bias, is a feature of
many of these studies.
Solutions to this problem have included the use of
instrumental variables, where a vector of variables, Z,
which is correlated with X but not with the error term,
is used as the regressor, or the use of explicit simultaneous equation methods. Endogeneity of regressors,
however, can also be avoided by estimating profit or
cost functions instead of the production function.
The dual approach to production analysis estimates
profit functions as a function of input and output prices,
and derives the input demand and output supply functions from the restricted profit function.“’ This
approach has its advantages when there are multiple
outputs and inputs, as in a multicrop farming system.
Modeling input choice explicitly also allows for the
possibility that farmer characteristics influence the
choice of conventional inputs. Moreover, this approach
also enables the researcher to distinguish productivity
differences due to differences in access (which assumes
the existence of barriers) or in input choices. The dual
approach has only been recently applied to the analysis
of male-female differences in productivity.

(c) Technical vs. allocative eficiency
Production function approaches focus on technical
rather than allocative efficiency; tests of the latter are
less common in this literature. Resource allocations
within the household are considered Pareto efficient if
no reallocation of resources to different household
members or to different uses could increase total output. An empirical test of this assumption was performed by Udry (1994) using plot-level data from
Burkina Faso. As discussed in section 3(b), the asymmetric distribution of rights, resources, and responsibilities by gender may have more serious implications
for allocative efficiency than sex differences do for
technical efficiency.

3. EMPIRICAL

EVIDENCE

(a) Technical efficiency differences
Results from various studies estimating technical
efficiency differences between male and female farm-

ers are summarized in Table 1. To highlight the
methodological aspects of these studies, the discussion will be organized according to estimation method
rather than by country.
(i) Pooled regression estimates
If the same technology is available to both male and
female farmers, and if they are producing the same
crop, it is appropriate to estimate one production function, and to allow for sex differences by using a sex
dummy and (or) interacting the sex dummy with other
inputs. This approach has been most commonly used
to estimate differences in technical efficiency between
male and female farm managers or household heads.”
An example is Moock’s (1976) study of 152 maize
farmers in Kenya’s VihigaDistrict in the 1970s. Moock
estimated Cobb-Douglas yield functions for all farms,
with a female manager dummy, and for male and
female-managed
farms separately (to be discussed
later). The study found that women, who make up a
third of the sampleare at least as productive as men: the
female farmer dummy, though positive, was not significant by itself in the pooled regression and was dropped
from the final specification. Interactions between the
female farmer dummy and other inputs were used to
test for sex differences in input utilization. Results
show that women benefit less from more densely
planted farms, but tend to make better use of labor on
maize farms than men. The negative (though weakly
significant) interaction between agricultural extension
and the female dummy indicates that exposure to agricultural extension increases technical efficiency of
male farmers relative to female farmers. Female farners with at least primary education have higher yields.
An evaluation of the effects of the training and
visit (T&V) extension system in Kenya also uses
pooled observations from male and female farmers
from a national survey conducted
in 1989-90
(Bindlish and Evenson, 1993). The T&V system,
recently implemented with World Bank support, has
employed a substantial number of women as field
agricultural extension workers, in contrast to home
economics extension where women have traditionally
specialized. The study also finds that female heads are
equally as efficient as male heads (the female dummy
is not significant), and that extension, measured by the
ratio of field extension workers to farm households,
has a positive effect on output and total factor productivity. Interestingly enough, an earlier version of the
paper found that female heads were more productive
when female extension workers were assigned to the
sublocation. When assignment of female extension
workers however, was predicted based on locational
characteristics,
including the percentage of female
farmers in the area, the interaction between female
extension
workers and female farmers became
insignificanti
This suggests that placement of extension workers may be endogenous, and that female

No

No

Log of total value of
crop production at
plot level

Log of total value of
crop production at
farmer level

1.22

0.18

0.126

-0.017

Female head dummy

Male farmer dummy

Male farmer dummy

All plots
No.ofplots=601
Male plots = 4 19
Female plots = 182

All farmers
No. of farmers = 453
Male farmers =306
Female farmers = 147

Saito,
Mekonnen ,
and Spurling
(1994)

a.022

-0.23

Log (In) of crop
production
in 1990

No

No

All farmers
N=675
Male heads = 434
Female heads = 241

1.98

0.167$

Log of maize
output per acre

Bindlish and
Evenson
(1993)

2.15

0.108t

-1.5

-1.85

-0.280*

XI.028

1.29

0.090

Female dummy x log of
area planted in maize
Female dummy x log of
plant population per acre
Female dummy x log of
labor input per acre
Female dummy x primary
school dummy
Female dummy x log of
extension contact index

t-ratio

Endogenous
input
choice

All farmers
N= 152
Males = 101
Females = 5 1

Coefficient

Dependent
variable
definition

in technical efficiency: Gender effectsfrom

Moock (1976)

Sex of farmer
variable

studies with estimates of male-female differences

Sample

I. Productionfunction

Study

Table

Table I continued overleaf

Coefficients of land, capital,
male family labor, female
family labor, extension
dummy, and maize/beans
mixture positive and significant
Formal education and age of
farmer insignificant.

Coefficients of land, capital,
male and female labor, female
hired labor, dummies for
fertilizer and tractor use, maize/
beans dummy, tenure dummy
significant and positive. Formal
education insignificant.
Extension weakly significant.

Coefficients of age of head,
and primary education of
head are negative but
insignificant.

Female dummy, though
positive, was not significant
by itself and was excluded.

Comments

pooled regressions

Korea
Jamison and
Lau (1982)

Mekonnen,
and Spurling
(1994)

saito,

Nigeria

Burkina Faso
Bindlish,
Evenson,
and
Gbetibouo
(1993)

Study

Mechanical farms =
1.3638
(90.2% male heads)

All plots
Total no. of plots = 1,174
Male plots = 885
Female plots = 289

All farmers
No. of farmers = 226
Males = 210
Females = 15

All farmers
N=2,406
Male heads = 2,233
Female heads = 103
Unclear = 70

Sample

Male head dummy

Male farmer dummy

Male farmer dummy

Female head dummy
Proportion of female
extension workers in
division

Sex of farmer
variable

0.95$

0.5597

a.130

-0.146
34.65t

Coefficient

2.33

5.59

0.47

-1.63
2.71

r-ratio

Table 1. Conrinued

Log of value of
agricultural crop
output (won)

Log of total value
of crop production
plot level

Log of total value
of production at
household level

Log (In) of crop
production at the
farm level

Dependent
variable
definition

at

No

No

No

No

Endogenous
input
choice

’

Education measured by the
household average, excluding
the household head, is
significant and positive.
Education of household average
has stronger effect than
education of household head.
Land, labor, animal and
mechanical power, and fertilizer
have significant and positive
coefficients.

Coefficients for land, capital,
male and female family labor,
male and female hired labor,
insecticide use were positive
and significant. Dummy for
l-8 years of education and age
of head were negative and
significant.

Coefficients of land, female
family and hired labor,
insecticide use dummy, and age
of household were positive
and significant.

Logarithm of total area cropped
and the number of parcels
have positive and significant
coefficients.

Comments

rt
$

tSigniftcant
&Significant
*Significant
BCoefficients
~Coefficients

Thailand
Jamison
and Lau
(1982)

Korea
Jamison
and Lau
(1982)

with highest R**.
with highest R**.

Male head dummy

Nonchemical farms =
1848
(99.5% male heads)

at 1%.
at 5%.
at 10%.
are reported from regressions
are reported from regressions

Male head dummy

Male head dummy

Chemical farms = 918
(97.8% male heads)

Nonmechanical farms
= 541g
(87.6% male heads)

0.269

0.076

0.059

1.05

0.28

0.87

Log of output (kg.)

Log of output (kg.)

Log of value of
agricultural crop
output (won)

No

No

No

In highest R*2 regression (not
reported here), maximum education
of head has a positive and
statistically significant rate of return
of 2.4%. A dummy for four years of
education is significant and positive;
extension significant and positive;
labor, land, and coefftcients positive
and significant.

In highest R** regression (not
reported here), maximum education
of household head has a positive and
statistically significant rate of return
of 3%. Dummy variables for
educational levels positive but not
significant, extension negative but
insignificant, labor and land
coefficients positive and significant.

Education measured by the
household average, excluding the
household head, is significant and
positive. Education of household
head insignificant and not included.
Land, capital, labor, animal
power, and fertilizer are positive
and significant.

1586

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

extension workers may in fact be assigned to areas
where they can be more productive, i.e. where female
farmers are predominant.
Burkina Faso offers an interesting contrast to the
above results (Bindlish, Evenson and Gbetibouo,
1993). Regression results show that female heads of
households are less productive than men in most crops
and have total values of output that are about 15%
lower, although this coefficient is only weakly significant. The proportion of female field extension workers, however, has a significant and positive effect on
output.
The negative female farmer dummy may be due to
cultural, religious, and ethnic differences between
Burkina Faso and Kenya, rather than to differences in
the extension system, which has now shifted over to
the T&V system. Fewer farm households are headed
by women in Burkina Faso. Moreover, a woman
comes under the authority of another male family
member when her husband is away. The significant
proportion of plots managed by women - especially
those planted to food crops, sorghum, and millet may partly explain, however, why the proportion of
female extension workers has a positive and significant effect on output. As farmers and plot managers,
women benefit from interaction with female extension
workers.
The two Asian countries included in the Jamison
and Lau (1982) study of farmer education and farm
efficiency offer some counterpoint to the studies on
African farming systems. Although the study was primarily intended to measure returns to schooling in an
agricultural setting, it also provides some evidence on
sex differences (or lack thereof) in technical efficiency in the rice-based “male” farming systems of
Thailand and Korea. In contrast to the high percentage of female-headed households or female-managed
farms in Africa, only 10.5% of the Korean farms are
managed by women, and an even lower 1 .l% of
farms in the Thai sample are managed by women.r3
Since the study does not focus on differential productivity of male and female farmers, only a dummy for
the male household head is the indicator of sex differences in technical efficiency. Results show that the
sex of the household head does not significantly
affect output in both countries, except in Korean
mechanical farms, where men have a 9.5% advantage. (No such advantage exists in nonmechanical
farms.) While this finding is quite robust across alternative specifications, Jamison and Lau (1982) do not
offer any explanation except for a conjecture that
there may be possible skill or strength requirements
in the use of mechanical power. This explanation may
be specific to the type of mechanical traction used,
since, in other countries in East Asia (for example,
Japan), women have been able to make use of smallscale machines, especially in transplanting and harvesting.

(ii) Separate regressions by sex offarmer
Several studies have also estimated production
functions separately to allow for different input coefficients for male and female farmers. For example,
Moock’s (1976) results from separate regressions for
male- and female-managed
farms indicate that primary education has a positive and significant effect on
yields for women, but a negative and significant effect
for men. Extension contact tends however, to benefit
men but not women.r4
This approach implicitly assumes that male and
female farmers do not share the same technology. If
these equations were estimated for monocrop farmers
however, as in Moock’s sample of maize farmers, the
underlying technologies would have been identical. A
better test of differences in input utilization by sex
would have been to interact the sex dummy with all
input variables, as was performed in the pooled
regression. Alternatively, the assumption of different
technologies could have been tested explicitly by performing a Chow test on the separate regressions.
(iii) Separate regressions by plot
Yet another approach to estimating sex differences
in technical efficiency involves performing regressions on plot-level observations, either for the pooled
sample of male- and female-managed
plots, or for
male and female plots separately (Saito, Mekonnen
and Spurling, 1994). In this study, based on a survey
conducted in three districts in Kenya, Cobb-Douglas
production functions with the gross value of maize,
beans, and cowpeas per hectare as the dependent variable were estimated using plot-level observations, further disaggregated by the sex of the plot manager.
Although a farm-level regression more appropriately
captures male-female differences in managerial efficiency, plot-level regressions
were used to take
advantage of more degrees of freedom.
The regression for all plots shows that, while positive, the male plot manager dummy is insignificant. In
separate regressions, capital (value of farm tools and
equipment) is a positive and significant determinant of
the gross value of output per hectare for male plots but
is insignificant for female plots. A tenure dummy,
which proxies full exercise of land rights, is not significant for either male or female plots. This may
reflect lack of variation in tenure across plots. While
the effect of extension is positive and highly significant for male plots, it is insignificant for female plots.
This may indicate better use of extension services by
men.
The authors perform similar analyses for Oyo
State, Nigeria, using both farm-level and plot-level
regressions. The male farmer dummy is insignificant
at the farm level; coefficients for land, capital, hired
and family labor (both disaggregated by sex), and
insecticide use (an endogenous variable) are positive
and significant. At the plot level, the male farmer

MALE-FEMALE

DIFFERENCES IN AGRICULTURAL

dummy was positive and significant. But the dummy
for one to eight years of schooling and the age of the
household head was negative and significant, a surprising result which seems to indicate negative returns
to schooling and experience (if age is a proxy for
experience).r5
These results should be viewed with caution due to
methodological problems. First, this study alternates
between plot-level and farm-level analyses, generally
using the same Cobb-Douglas form. If plot output is
Cobb-Douglas, however, then farm output will not be
Cobb-Douglas in labor and other inputsI Second, the
pooling of all plot-level observations
without an
appropriate fixed or random effects estimation procedure is likely to result in inefficient estimates. Farmlevel unobservables
would be common to plots
farmed by a single farmer, and error terms across plots
could be correlated. If there is unobserved heterogeneity across plots controlled by an individual, which is
correlated with inputs, then pooling plot observations
without taking into account fixed effects would be
inconsistent. Finally, the computation of gross value
of output based on the value of subsistence crops is
flawed. Tree crops were not included because their
lengthy gestation period makes the assumption of a
common production technology unrealistic. Gross
value of output based on food crops alone, however, is
a poor indicator of managerial efficiency, especially if
men are more likely to cultivate tree crops.
Alternatively, since women are traditionally involved
in the cultivation of food crops, they could have developed, over time, a comparative advantage in food crop
cultivation.”
(iv) Simulations
Coefficients estimated from the above studies have
been used to simulate the gains from increasing
women’s levels of physical and human capital.‘8
Estimates of potential productivity gains simulated
from the Moock coefficients
range from yield
increases of 7% (if female maize farmers were given
sample mean characteristics and input levels) to 9%
(if they were given men’s input levels and other characteristics). Giving all women at least a year of primary education would raise yields by 24%, reflecting
the gains to providing primary education in a setting
where women have very low educational levels.
Simulations with the Saito, Mekonnen, and Spurling
(1994) coefficients
suggest a 22% increase in
women’s yields on maize, beans, and cowpea plots if
women farmers were given the human capital and
input levels of male farmers.
These simulation results, however, should be interpreted with caution, since they do not reveal how levels of inputs may be raised. To a great extent, differences in input use may be driven by differences in
education, since better-educated
farmers are more
likely to use modem inputs. These differences may

PRODUCTIVITY

1587

also stem from differential access to credit, especially
in the use of modem inputs such as improved seeds
and fertilizer. Moreover, these simulations may also
inaccurately depict the gains if a change in input use
did occur, since the Cobb-Douglas production technology assumes constant elasticities, and presupposes
that changing the level of one input does not change
the elasticities with respect to other inputs.
An alternative approach could have been to perform a Oaxaca decomposition of the yield differential
between male and female farmers (Oaxaca, 1973).
Although this approach has been used to decompose
the wage gap, it can also be applied here:

Q,-Q,=b,(X,-X,)+(b,-b,)X,

(4)

where Q, and Q, represent mean yields of males and
females respectively, and b, and b, are estimated output coefficients of male and female farmers, and X,
and X, are mean levels of endowments and inputs of
male and female farmers. That is, the overall average
male-female yield gap can be decomposed into the
portion due to differences in input endowments, (X,,,Xf) evaluated using male coefficients; the other portion is attributable to differences in the returns, or output elasticities (b,, - bf), that males and females get for
the same endowment or input application.

(b) Allocative ejficiency
A more recent study using detailed agronomic
panel data from Burkina Faso suggests that asymmetric roles and obligations within the household may
have serious implications on allocative efficiency
(Udry, 1994). Under the null hypothesis of Pareto efficiency, conditional on plot size and land quality,
yields on plots planted with the same crop in the same
year should be equal, even if they are controlled by
different members of a household. Rather than estimate production functions, Udry regressed plot yields
on plot characteristics and individual characteristics,
including the gender of the plot manager.19 Plots controlled by women have significantly lower yields than
similar plots within the household planted with the
same crop in the same year, but controlled by men in
the same household. The yield differentials are due to
lower input intensity on female-managed plots: much
less male labor per hectare is devoted to plots controlled by women than to similar plots controlled by
men. Child labor and unpaid exchange labor are also
applied more intensively to plots controlled by men.
Finally, virtually all fertilizer is concentrated in plots
controlled by men, even though the marginal product
of fertilizer diminishes. These differences in input
intensity between male- and female-managed
plots
persist even after land quality, measurement error, or
risk management behavior are taken into account.

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

1588

While Udry’s regressions may suffer from omitted
variables, due to the lack of information on individual
characteristics of farmers (aside from age, sex, and
headship), these results cast doubt on the assumption
of Pareto efficient resource allocations within the
household. Estimates show that a reallocation of currently used factors of production across plots could
increase the value of household output by lo-20%
(Alderman et al., 1995).
In interpreting his results, Udry identifies two
sources of resource misallocation within households:
(i) individuals’ greater incentive to achieve higher
output on their own plots than on others; and (ii)
imperfection in the intrahousehold labor allocation
process. These results and their interpretation are consistent with the argument, previously made in the
anthropoligocal
and feminist economics literature,
that gender differences lead to allocative inefficiencies within the household. Palmer (1992), for example, argues that when culture constrains women to
work within the household production unit, the
monopsonistic position of the male household head
prevents women’s labor from moving to better uses in
the outside labor market. In the African setting (which
is more relevant to Udry’s analysis), while there are
separate “markets” for male and female resources
within the household’s separate economic accounting
units, gender-based market imperfections exist.
Differences in allocative efficiency may remain
even after controlling for individual and agronomic
characteristics. Elson (1995). citing Ongaro’s (1988)
study in Kenya, points out that entitlement differences
by gender may result in differences between male- and
female-headed households. In this study, the introduction of new weeding technology increased yields of
female heads households by 56% and those of male
heads only by 15%. Ongaro argues that female heads
may have a greater incentive to adopt better weeding
practices (traditionally a women’s task) because they
controlled the proceeds of their increased effort.
Moreover, factors of coercion and threats of violence
by men may lead to higher efficiency on farms managed by men because they may be able to extract labor
with greater ease from women and children than
women farmers can?O

(c) Labor productivity

diflerences

Coefficients estimated from production functions
have been used to measure sex differences in labor productivity?r Output elasticities with respect to male and
female labor are used to compute marginal products,
usually evaluated at the sample mean. The validity of
this approach depends on the assumptions embodied in
the underlying production function, particularly those
regarding the separability of the factors of production,
as well as those regarding endogeneity of inputs.

Some studies have used rather restrictive production technologies, for example, a Cobb-Douglas production function with male and female labor further
disaggregated
into family and hired labor (Saito,
Mekonnen, and Spurling, 1994). The conclusions
regarding the relative productivity of male and female
labor are suspect, however, because the CobbDouglas technology imposes additive separability on
the production function.
Other studies have used flexible functional forms
and tested explicitly for separability of the production
function?* Such flexible functional forms allow marginal rates of substitution between inputs to vary
depending on the levels of other inputs, and shed light
on the substitutability of male and female labor. They
provide insights into the gender division of labor by
crop and by task in farming systems. I discuss studies
using flexible forms more extensively in this review.
(i) Separability and the gender division of labor
Kumar and Hot&kiss (1988) estimate translog
production functions for various crops and test for
separability between male and female labor in Nepal.
Separability implies that the marginal rates of substitution between pairs of factors in the separated group
(for example, male and female labor) are independent
of the levels of factors outside that group (in their
specification, land). The separability test indicates
that, except for the dry season crops, men’s and
women’s labor are weakly separable; that is, they have
different marginal rates of substitution with land. This
suggests that, at least for some crops, there is little justification for aggregating men’s and women’s labor.
Laufer (1985) uses ICRISAT data from six villages in India over a three-year period to estimate generalized quadratic production functions for three
major crops with farm-level fixed effects to control for
unobserved farm-specific factors. Weak separability
of labor inputs with respect to all other nonlabor
inputs was tested by imposing restrictions on the coefficients .
Likelihood ratio tests indicate that male and female
labor are not (weakly) separable in the production of
sorghum and rice. Male and female labor are good
complements in sorghum and rice, but male labor is
more substitutable for animal power and land. Male
labor is complementary with machines (mainly irrigation pumps), while female labor is substitutable. In
contrast, male and female labor are found to be good
substitutes in legumes, and equally complementary
with animal power. In all crops, male and female labor
are combined in relatively fixed proportions with
land. Male and female labor could be complementary
in sorghum and rice, but substitutable in legumes
because of the different nature of tasks required to
grow the different crops, and the traditional gender
division of labor by task.
Jacoby’s (1991) study of the households in the

MALE-FEMALE DIFFERENCES IN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY

Peruvian Sierra uses both Cobb-Douglas and sequentially restricted translog production functions to estimate marginal products and test for the substitutability
of male and female labor. First, he estimated two
Cobb-Douglas
production functions for crops and
livestock, respectively.
He finds that while adult
female labor does not have a significantly positive
effect on crop output, it is highly significant in the
livestock equation, with a coefficient almost twice
that of adult males. Adult males have about the same
coefficient in both equations. If peasant households
optimally allocate time across tasks, the evidence suggests a sexual division of labor, with women spending
relatively more of their time than men in livestock
production,
and men specializing
in fieldwork.
Second, Jacoby used a sequentially restricted translog
production function to test for the nonseparability of
male and female labor. A sexual division of labor
implies that labor productivity of men and women will
be differentially affected by the presence of other
inputs; that is, the marginal rate of transformation
between labor of men and women will vary with the
levels of other inputs. Since the marginal rate of transformation from a Cobb-Douglas production function
depends only on the ratio of male and female labor
inputs,
the Cobb-Douglas
production
function
imposes separability.
Rather than do so, Jacoby
sequentially tests for a nonseparable technology. He
first tests for strong separability against the joint alternative of weak separability or nonseparability, then
tests weak separability against nonseparability alone,
through a series of translog regressions.
The conclusion from the sequence of tests is that
only the nonseparabilities
of male and female labor
with respect to land and farm animals are statistically
significant. This is attributable to the sexual division
of labor in agriculture: since men are involved in tasks
such as plowing and transport, farm animal input
would tend to be more substitutable with the hours
men spend on the farm than with women’s hours. The
use of more animals for plowing, for example, would
replace adult male time spent with the foot plow, but
would not cause women to substitute out of weeding.
The strong negative interaction between female labor
and farm size may also be a consequence of the sexual
division of labor: households with little land tend to
supplement their income with nonagricultural activities. In near landless households, men tend to spend
more time in off-farm work, leaving most agricultural
tasks in the hands of women. The elasticity of substitution between male and female labor at the geometric
means of the data equals 1.84, which is higher than
that allowed by the Cobb-Douglas
specification
(namely, one), but does not indicate extremely high
substitutability.
(ii) Marginalproducts of labor
The above studies also computed

the marginal

1589

product of labor, which is the addition to output due to
an additional unit of labor, differentiated by sex. In the
Nepal study cited above (Kumar and Hotchkiss,
1988), the marginal products of men’s and women’s
labor are found to be independently significant for all
crops except early paddy. For the dry season crops, an
additional unit of women’s labor contributed more to
output than male labor, probably due to competing
activities of fuel and water collection, which impinge
on women’s time for agricultural production.
While marginal products of men and women’s
labor may differ, farmers would be allocating labor
rationally if the ratios of marginal products are equal
to relative wages. Indeed, Laufer (1985) finds that in
India, while the marginal product of male labor is
greater than that of female labor in all crops, the ratios
of marginal products lie within the range of ratios of
observed wages paid in the six villages, suggesting
that farmers rationally equate relative wages to the
ratios of marginal products.
In Jacoby’s (1991) study of the Peruvian Sierra,
the ratio of female-to-male marginal products of 0.64,
which is reasonably close to the relative wage, indicates that men contribute more to total farm output at
the margin than women. This may be due to women’s
tendency to be casual rather than regular farm workers
in the Peruvian Sierra, and to spend more time, on
average, in household and nonfarm business activities
than in farm work. Jacoby argues that women may sort
themselves into these activities because they are
“innately” more productive in them than men, and that
these productivity differences are accentuated by the
acquisition of sector-specific human capital by both
men and women. But since the same agricultural tasks
(for example, land preparation) are performed by
women in other farming systems, it may not be valid
to use the findings from the static measurement of a
production technology to generalize about a division
of labor whose roots may be cultural. An alternative
explanation proposes that there could be a premium
related to body size in some agricultural operations
that would then be reflected in higher productivity of
men relative to women.
(iii) Women’s productivity and polygyny
Another study by Jacoby analyzes women’s agricultural productivity as a factor influencing men’s
demand for wives in C&e d’Ivoire, where polygyny is
common (Jacoby. 1995). He estimates a conditional
profit function as a function of input prices, capital
inputs, and male and female family labor inputs.
Although the profit function is Cobb-Douglas, it is
modified to allow the labor productivity parameters to
depend on permanent farm characteristics, including
crop composition. Ordinary least squares estimates
show that female labor seems to contribute a larger
share to farm profit than male labor, though this difference decreases with first-differenced
OLS esti-

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

1590

mates. After accounting for heterogeneity of labor
inputs and using instruments thereof, however, men
contribute more to farm profit than do women. When
crop composition is taken into account, the contribution of female labor to profit is negatively related with
cocoa, coffee, cotton, rice and maize. Crops traditionally grown by women, such as tubers, interact positively (or only weakly negatively) with female labor.
While the results seem to support specialization by
crop according to comparative advantage, in the
longer run, crop composition (and the gender division
of labor by crop) is also endogenous. In Africa, for
example, recent evidence suggests that women are
now more involved in cash crop cultivation (Saito,
Makonnen and Spurling ,1994).
(iv) Comparative advantage and the sexual division
of labor
Many of the studies on labor productivity differences appeal to the notion of comparative advantage.
“Comparative advantage” is used to explain specialization of individuals in the activities which they can
perform more efficiently than other individuals with
whom they have an exchange relationship. While this
is a commonly used explanation, it does not adequately explain the sources of the efficiency differences which lead to the gender division of labor and its
subsequent
cultural transmission.
One possible
source, as mentioned earlier, is the premium on body
size in agricultural operations. Body size differences
may be a function of nutritional intakes, however,
which are also biased against females in some cultural
contexts (notably South Asia). Women’s specialization in domestic activities is also attributed to their
lower productivity in agriculture or some other type of
non-home production. It is more likely that the gender
division of labor reflects both biological (body sizerelated) and social factors. In most cultures, women
have a greater responsibilities for childcare and household provisioning; such caring behavior is reinforced
through cultural norms. This may constrain women’s
ability to participate in agricultural tasks which conflict with household responsibilities.

4. SUMMARY

AND METHODOLOGICAL
ISSUES

significant). In this setting, women may be more constrained by cultural factors from having more active
roles, and levels of education and technical development are lower. More recent work on Burkina Faso
indicates that lower input intensities on women’s
plots, which result in lower yields, are due to asymmetric roles and obligations within the household.
This suggests that gender differences may lead to
allocative efficiencies within the household, even if
sex differences do not, for the most part, affect technical efficiency. Further empirical work on this area,
with better information on individual farmer characteristics, should be undertaken.
The neglect of endogenous input choice is a serious defect of this literature. Since relationships
between farmer characteristics and input use are not
considered, most studies have estimated biased coefficients and do not address how actual levels of inputs
use are to be increased. To the extent that better educated farmers are more likely to adopt modem inputs,
these studies underestimate
the consequences
of
underinvestment in women’s education in rural societies. Endogeneity of inputs extends even to those
inputs which are usually assumed fixed in the short
run. Land size, which is usually assumed to be exogenous, is correlated with land quality. Moreover, in
societies where land is allocated to women based on
marriage, land size is unlikely to be exogenous.
Recent studies estimating differences in labor productivity using flexible functional forms provide
interesting insights into the sexual division of labor in
different farming systems. One cannot generalize
whether an additional unit of male or female labor is
more productive, however, because the sexual division of labor varies widely across crops, tasks, and
farming systems. Labor scarcity may result in higher
marginal products of labor: in Nepal, the higher marginal product of women’s labor in dry season crops
was due to time allocated to other household tasks
(Kumar and Hot&kiss, 1988). In other (male-dominated) farming systems, higher marginal products of
male labor may also reflect comparative advantage or
specialization in certain tasks. The extent to which
“comparative
advantage” is the result of cultural
norms, and the possibility that it may change over
time, needs to be recognized.

(a) Summary

(b) Methodological issues

Most of the studies on differences in technical efficiency between male and female farmers found
insignificant dummies for the sex of the farm manager
or household head. That is, female farmers are equally
efficient as male farmers, once individual characteristics and input levels are controlled for. The only
exception was the study on Burkina Faso, where the
female farmer dummy was negative (though weakly

Rigorous measurement of sex differences in agricultural productivity is still a relatively new field of
research. A number of conceptual and methodological
issues should therefore be addressed in future work.
(i) Sex d@erences andpublication bias
The above review has found that when differences
in yields are attributed to differences in individual

MALE-FEMALE

DIFFERENCES

IN AGRICULTURAL

characteristics (human or physical capital) and input
levels, the sex of the farmer is often an insignificant
determinant of agricultural productivity. This may be
surprising to those who expect intrinsic productivity
differences between men and women farmers. Any
review of the comparative literature may be biased,
however, since it is more likely that studies that report
differences
in productivity will be submitted for
publication, and, given that, are more likely to be
accepted (Haddad, Alderman and Hoddinott, 1994).
Such “publication bias” is common to all scientific
disciplines, but has been found to exaggerate the
prevalence of studies that show differences between
cognitive styles of men and women.*’
While this may seem to be philosophical point,
there is a real danger in attributing differences in agricultural productivity solely to the sex of the farmer. In
so doing, researchers and policymakers are not able to
identify whether there are systematic gendered differences in the distribution of underlying variables many of which are subject to policy intervention.
(ii) Sex or gender dummies
Most of the studies estimating sex differences in
technical efficiency use a dummy variable for female
(or male) household head, farmer, or decisionmaker.
But the use of headship as a stratifying variable masks
the details of household composition and intrahousehold decision-making. It does not provide information
on decisions by family members who are not household
heads, such as women who farm their own plots in
male-headed households. In this case, it may be more
appropriate to disaggregate by the sex of the plot manager, rather than by sex of the household head. More
important, female headship, rather than being an exogenous category, is in fact endogenous: it depends upon
the characteristics of the marriage market, as well as the
processes which lead to marital dissolution.24 The
notion that the household is an arena for both cooperation and conflict @en, 1990) has been explored in a
growing body of literature by both feminist economics
(e.g., Folbre, 1986) and collective models of household
behavior (Haddad, Alderman, and Hoddinott, 1994).
(iii) Biases in valuation ofoutput
Insights
into
household
decision-making
processes are limited not only by the lack of genderdisaggregated data, but also by conceptual difficulties
in defining what to measure. Even among carefully
conducted econometric studies, the definition of output can undercount women’s production. With the
exception of the studies of monocrop farmers, the
studies reviewed used gross value of output, either in
absolute terms or per land area. If women grow a
larger share of subsistence crops, it is possible that
regressions on gross value of output may understate
female farmer’s technical efficiency. While this issue
can be avoided
by dealing
exclusively
with

PRODUCTIVITY

1591

monocrops, it is an oversimplification
of the diverse
farming systems in which women operate. One appropriate procedure to use in a multicrop setting would
have been a profit function approach, in which prices
of inputs and outputs are explanatory variables.
Another controversial
issue is the valuation of
home production, which none of the studies mentioned here addresses. It has been argued that since
women attend to domestic chores while performing
agricultural labor, their productivity in agriculture is
lower. This judgment is based however, on a conventional output measure, which disregards the value of
home production. This measurement issue has yet to
be satisfactorily addressed.25
(iv) Simultaneity and selectivity considerations
With a few exceptions,
most of the studies
reviewed do not properly model simultaneous agricultural decisions. The drawbacks of such methods have
already been discussed. Attention to endogenous
input choice should be a priority in further research on
this topic.
(v) Life-cycle implications of intrahousehald
allocations
The above review has not analyzed the processes
that determine the allocation of human and physical
capital to men and women. Educational attainment,
land ownership, and long-term nutritional status of
men and women are the outcomes of their parents’ or
kinship groups’ allocation decisions (Sen, 1990;
Behrman, 1994). Increasing evidence suggests that
these decisions may involve nonunitary preferences. or
even noncooperative behavior within the household.
Whatever processes underlies these decisions, parental
allocation decisions will have long-term implications
on the productivity of children. Underinvestment
in
girls’ education could, for example, lead to lower probabilities for female farmers to adopt new technologies;
inheritance laws which favor boys would imply that
men would have greater inherited landholding sizes;
allocation of nutrients toward boys would have longterm effects on height and productivity.
The importance of addressing intrahousehold allocation issues in policy formulation has been discussed
elsewhere; this point is reiterated here.Zh Further
research should be directed not only toward understanding the results of intrahousehold allocations, but,
more important. to understanding the processes of
decision-making
in agricultural households, by male
and female heads, and family members. Such basic
allocational activities are organized through the “intimate” relationships of marriage, parenthood, and kinship, the traditional
domain of anthropologists
(Kabeer, 1994, p. 96). As relative newcomers to this
field, economists have much to learn from insightful
fieldwork and from contributions of anthropologists
and other social scientists.27

1592

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

NOTES
See,forexample,Boserup
1.
World Bank (1994).

(1970),Gladwin

(1991) and

2.
A feminist critique of the concepts of “productivity”
and “efficiency” is found in Williams (1994).

than male farmers, a “gender dummy” which captured both
biological and socially determined characteristics would be
correlated with residuals from the estimated production function.
9.

Indeed, until Bosetup’s (1970) work and subsequent
3.
work on measuring women’s contribution to agriculture (e.g.
Dixon,
1982; Satilios-Rothschild,
1985; GoldschmidtClermont, 1987), rural women’s productive role was rarely
recognized.
Kabeer (1994) notes that differences
in
male-female responsibilities and control of resources across
farming systems are mirrored in social norms and family
structures.
See Agarwal (1994) on biases against women in land
4.
ownership, and Seager and Olson (1986) on women’s lower
educationa! attainment in rural areas.
I use “physical
and human capital” rather than
5.
“endowments” because the latter are innate (genetically or
biologically determined). The distribution of human capital
(education and training) and physical capital (land and other
assets) between men and women, however, is socially determined, and the product of parents’ differential investment in
children as well as the relative ease of women and men in
acquiring education or wealth.
Other approaches to measuring sex differences in agri6.
cultural productivity rely on estimation of earnings functions
and technological
adoption functions. Earnings or wage
functions are an indirect measure of productivity which take
into account the heterogeneity of agricultural labor, since
individual characteristics
and endowments influence labor
market participation,
earnings, and wages. These studies
often provide evidence on returns to men’s and women’s
schooling.
See,
for example,
Rosenzweig
(1980).
Mukhopadyay (1994)) Behrman and Lanzona ( 1989). Sahn
and Alderman (1988), and Khandker (1990) for estimates of
returns to schooling for rural men and women. Technological
adoption studies, on the other hand, estimate the probability
of adoption as a function of individual, household, and community characteristics,
including the sex of the farmer.
Examples are Appleton et al. (1990) and Bindlish and
Evenson (1993). These studies are discussed in Quisumbing
(1994).
7.
Up until the late 1960s most studies used least squares
methods to estimate production functions, which Battese
(1992, p. 186) argues are more appropriately described as
response (or average) functions. Newer approaches using
stochastic frontier production functions define the production “frontier” from within the data set. This frontier is the
locus of output generated from “best practice” techniques,
and technical inefficiency for each firm is the distance that
each lies from the frontier. We follow the conventional terminology here, noting we are discussing direct least squares
estimates of the production technology.
This has implications aside from those related to omit8.
ted variable bias. If, for example, female farmers are less able
to command resources (e.g., labor from men and children)

See, for example, Goldman and Ruud (1993).

10. For a thorough discussion and empirical applications
of duality approaches in production, see Fuss, McFadden,
andMundlak(1978).
11. The distinction between farm manager and household
head may be important in households where the husband
may be the titular head but the majority of farm decisions is
made by the wife. This is especially true if the husband is
absent for prolonged periods due to seasonal migration for
wage work, or if the wife in a polygamous marriage has her
own farm, both of which are common in sub-Saharan Africa.
12.

Personal communication

with R. Evenson.

13. The Korean sample was divided into mechanical and
nonmechanical farms based on the use of farm machinery.
Only 9.8 and 12.4% of mechanical and nonmechanical farms
were headed by women, respectively. Similarly, the Thai
sample was divided into chemical and nonchemical farms
based on the application
of inorganic chemicals. Even
smaller numbers, 2.2% of chemical farms, and 0.5% of nonchemical farms, were headed by women.
14. These results differ from those of Bindlish and
Evenson (1993), presumably because in the early 197Os,
women rarely received extension advice.
15. An alternative explanation for the negative coefficient
on age would be declining physical strength, but one would
expect this to have a nonlinear effect.
16. If plot output is Cobb-Douglas
(Y,p = pF, Lp,J then
farm output Y = x Y,,,will not be Cobb-Douglas in L, = IL,
and T, =ZT,.
17. The issue of comparative advantage and the sexual
division of labor is discussed more fully in Kabeer (1994).
especially Chapter 5.
18. See, for example, Saito,
(1994) and World Bank (1994).
19. Udry specifically
farmer” dummy.

Mekonnen

uses a “gender,”

and Spurling

not a “sex of

20.
An oft-cited example is from rice farmers in northern
Cameroon: “married women are expected to work in their
husbands’ fields if they are not working on their own. If they
refuse
they risk a beating!” (Jones, 1986, p. 11). But
women may be able to resist such threats of violence covertly
or overtly. Forms of covert resistance include the “use of
trusted allies
to conduct businesses on women’s behalf,
secret lending and borrowing of money, and negotiations
around the meaning of gender ideologies of purdah and
motherhood” (Kabeer, 1994, p. 129).

MALE-FEMALE

DIFFERENCES

IN AGRICULTURAL

2 1. Other approaches to measure gender differences in
labor productivity have included the number of women of
working age (or the proportion of women in the household
labor force) in regressions on output as one of the explanatory variables in the production function. This is not a good
proxy, however, for women’s share of labor input in agricull
tural production if some crops are more intensive in women’s
time than others; if the returns to crops grown by males and
females vary; and if the value of home production is not measured correctly. Expressing the number of women in adult
equivalent units is faulty, because these units are usually
based on a food energy consumption measure, not in terms ot
labor input by task. Examples of the above include Jamison
and Moock (I 984), von Braun, Puetz and Webb (1989),and
von Braun, de Haen and Blanken ( 199 1).
22.
These functional forms use second-order
Taylor’s
expansions; examples are the translog, the generalized quadratic, and the Leontif production functions.
23.
On publication bias, see Begg and Berlin (1988). On
publication bias in studies of cognitive differences between
men and women, see Fausto-Sterling (1992).
24.
In cooperative bargaining models of marriage, whether
an individual remains in a union depends on her utility outside that union. This “reservation utility” or “threat point” is
a function of individual characteristics, especially nonlabor
income and education, and social or institutional factors

PRODUCTIVITY

which affect the attractiveness
example, McElroy ( 1990).

1593

of being married.

See. for

25.
Among the few studies that estimate the productivity
of women’s work at home is Singh and Morey (1987).
Regarding the difficulty of valuing women’s work, Beneria
(1992) points out that the very different contexts under which
home and market production take place make their comparability difficult. In some economies, no equivalent to some
goods and services produced in the household may exist in
the market (although this problem disappears are the economy shifts from subsistence to market production). In addition, no standard of productivity exists for domestic production. Even the choice of imputation method for valuing labor
time has its advantages and disadvantages (Beneria. 1992,
pp. 1553-1554).
26.
See Haddad.
review.

Alderman

and Hoddinott

(1994) for a

27.
While feminist economics has been more rapid in
incorporating anthropological
approaches, the recent development of collective models of household behavior (including, but not limited to, bargaining models) has also drawn on
the rich anthropological
literature, particularly
in Africa
(e.g., Dey, 1985). These developments are complementary to
Marxist-influenced
structural approaches to cooperation and
conflict within the family (Folbre, 1986).

REFERENCES
Aganval, Bina, A Field of One’s Own: Gender and Land
Rights in South Asia (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1994).
Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott, Lawrence Haddad and
Christopher Udry, “Gender differentials in farm productivity: Implications for household efficiency and agricultural policy,” Food Consumption and Nutrition Division
Paper No. 7 (Washington, DC: International Food Policy
Research Institute, 1995).
Appleton, Simon, David L. Bevan, Kees Burger, Paul
Collier, Jan Willem Gunning, Lawrence Haddad and
John Hoddinott,
Public Services
and Household
Allocation in Africa: Does Gender Matter? (Oxford:
Oxford University, Center for African Studies, 1991).
Battese, George E., “Frontier production functions and technical efficiency: A survey of empirical applications in
agricultural economics,” Agricultural Economics, Vol.
7, Nos. 3 and 4 (October 1992), pp. 185-208.
Begg, Colin B. and Jesse A. Berlin,“Publication
bias: A problem in interpreting medical data,” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, Vol. 151 .No. 3 (1988),pp. 419463.
Behrman, Jere R., “Intrahousehold distribution and the family,” in Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark (Eds.),
Handbook
of Population
and Family Economicr
(Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1994).
Behrman, Jere R. and Leonardo Lanzona, “The impact of
land tenure on time use and on modem agricultural technology use in the rural Philippines,” Paper presented at a
conference on the Family, Gender Differences,
and
Development (New Haven: Yale University, September
&6,1989).

Beneria, Lourdes. “Accounting
for women’s work: The
progress of two decades,” World Development. Vol. 20,
No. 11 (November 1992). pp. 1547-1560.
Bindlish, Vishva and Robert Evenson. “Evaluation of the
performance of T&V extension in Kenya,” World Bank
Technical Paper No. 208, Africa Technical Department
Series (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993).
Bindlish, Vishva, Robert Evenson and Mathurin Gbetibouo,
“Evaluation of T&V-based extension in Burkina Faso,”
World Bank Technical Paper No. 226, Africa Technical
Department Series (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1993).
Boserup, Ester, Women’s role in economic development
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1970).
Braun, Joachim van, Hartwig de Haen and Juergen Blanken,
“Commercialization
of agriculture
under population
pressure: Effects on production, consumption, and nutrition in Rwanda,” Research Report No. 85. (Washington,
DC: International Food Policy Research Institute, 1991).
Braun, Joachim von, Detlev Puetz and Patrick Webb,
“Irrigation technology and commercialization
of rice in
The Gambia: Effects on income and nutrition,” Research
Report No. 7.5 (Washington,
DC: International Food
Policy Research Institute, 1989).
Dey, Jennie, “Women in African rice farming systems,” In
Women in Rice Farming: Proceedings of a Conference
on Women in Rice Farming Systems (Brookfield, T:
Gower. 1985).
Dixon, Ruth B., “Women in agriculture: Counting the labor
force in developing
countries,”
Population
and
Development Review,, Vol. 8, No. 3 (September 1982),
pp. 5X9-565.

1594

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Elson, Diane, “Gender awareness in modeling structural
adjustment,”
World Development,
Vol. 23, No. 11
(November 1995),pp. 1851-1868.
Fausto-Sterling.
Anne. Myths of Gender(New York Basic
Books, 1992).
Folbre, Nancy, “Hearts and spades: Paradigms of household
economics,”
World Development,
Vol. 14, No. 2
(February 1986), pp. 245-255.
Fuss, Melvin, Daniel McFadden and Yair Mundlak, “A survey of functional forms in the economic analysis of production,” in Melvin Fuss and Daniel McFadden (Eds.),
Production Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory and
Applications, Vol. 1 (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1978).
Gladwin, Christina H. (Ed.), Structural adjustment and
African womenfarmers,
(Gainesville, FL: University of
Florida Press, 199 1).
Goldman, Steven and Paul Ruud, “Nonparametric multivariate regression subject to monotonicity
and convexity
Mimeo
(Palo
Alto,
CA:
Stanford
constraints,”
University, 1993).
Goldschmidt-Clermont,
L., Economic Evaluation of Unpaid
Work in the Household: Africa, Asia, Latin America and
Oceania. Women, Work and Development Series No. 14
(Geneva: International Labour Office, 1987).
Greene, William H. Econometric Analysis, Second edition
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993).
Haddad, Lawrence, Harold Alderman and John Hoddinott,
“lntrahousehold
resource allocation:
An overview,”
Policy Research Working Paper 1225 (Washington, DC:
World Bank, 1994).
Jacoby, Hanan, “Productivity of men and women and the
sexual division of labor in peasant agriculture of the
Peruvian Sierra,” Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 37, Nos. 1 and 2 (November 1991) pp. 265-287.
Jacoby, Hanan, “The economics of polygyny in Sub-Saharan
Africa: Female productivity and the demand for wives in
C&e d’lvoire,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 103,
No. 5 (October 1995), pp. 938-971.
Jamison, Dean and Lawrence Lau, Farmer Education and
Farm Eficiency
(Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press for the World Bank, 1982).
Jamison, Dean and Peter Moock, “Farmer education and
farm efficiency in Nepal: The role of schooling, extension services, and cognitive skills,” World Development,
Vol. 12, No. 1 (January 1984),pp. 67-86.
Kabeer, Naila, Reversed Realities: Gender Hierarchies in
Development Thought (London and New York: Verso,
1994).
Khandker, Shahidur R., “Labor market participation, returns
to education, and male-female
wage differences
in
Peru,” Working Paper 461, Policy Research and External
Affairs (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1990).
Kumar, Shubh and David Hot&kiss,
“Consequences
of
deforestation for women’s time allocation, agricultural
production,
and nutrition in hill areas of Nepal,”
Research Report 69 (Washington,
DC: International
Food Policy Research Institute, 1988).
Jones, Christine, “lntrahousehold
bargaining in response to
the introduction
of new crops:- A case study from
Northern
Cameroon,”
in Joyce L. Moock (Ed.),
Understanding Africa’s Rural Households and Farming
Systems (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1986).
Laufer, Leslie, “The substitution between male and female
labor in rural Indian agricultural production,” Discussion

Paper 472, Economic Growth Center (New Haven, CT:
Yale University, 1985).
McElroy, Marjorie B., “The empirical content of Nash-bargained
household
behavior,”
Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 25, No. 4 (Fall 1990), pp. 559-583.
Moock, Peter, “The efficiency of women as farm managers:
Kenya,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
Vol. 58,No. 5 (December 1976),pp. 831-835.
Moser, Caroline, “Gender planning in the Third World:
Meeting practical and strategic gender needs,” World
Development, Vol. 17, No. 11 (November 1989), pp.
1799-1825.
Mukhopadhyay,
Sudhin, “Adapting household behavior to
agricultural technology in West Bengal, India: Wage
labor, fertility
and child schooling
determinants”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 43,
No. 1 (October 1994),pp.91-115.
Oakley, A., Sex, Gender, and Society (London: Temple
Smith, 1972).
Oaxaca, Ronald, “Male-female
differentials in urban labor
markets,” International Economic Review, Vol. 14, No. 3
(October 1973), pp. 693-709.
Ongaro, W. A., “Adoption of new farming technology: A
case study of maize production in Western Kenya,” PhD
dissertation
(Gothenberg:
University of Gothenberg,
1988).
Palmer, lngrid, “Gender equity and economic efficiency in
adjustment programmes,” In Halef Ashfar and Carolyne
Dennis (Eds.), Women and Adjustment Policies in the
Third World (London: Mcmillan, 1992). pp. 69-83.
Quisumbing, Agnes R. “Gender differences in agricultural
productivity:
A survey
of empirical
evidence,”
Education
and Social Policy Discussion
Paper 36
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 1994).
Rosenzweig, Mark, “Neoclassical theory and the optimizing
peasant: An econometric analysis of market family labor
supply in a developing country”, Quarferly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 94, No. 1 (February 1980), pp. 31-56.
Safilios-Rothschild,
Constantina,
“The persistence
of
women’s invisibility in agriculture: Theoretical and policy lessons from Lesotho and Sierra Leone” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 33, No. 2
(January 1985), pp. 299-317.
Sahn, David and Harold Alderman, “The effects of human
capital on wages, and the determinants of labor supply in
a developing
country,”
Journal
of Development
Economics, Vol. 29, No. 2 (September
1988). pp.
157-183.
Saito, Katrine, Hailu Mekonnen and Daphne Spurling,
“Raising the productivity of women farmers in SubSaharan Africa,” Discussion Paper 230 (Washington,
DC: World Bank, 1994).
Seager, Juri and Ann Olson, Women in the World: An
International Atlas (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1986).
Sen, Amartya K., “Gender and cooperative conflicts,” in
Irene Tinker (Ed.), Persistent Znequalities (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990). pp. 195-223.
Singh, Ram and M. J. Money, “The value of work-at-home
and contributions of wives’ household service in polygynous families:
Evidence
from an African LDC,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 35,
No. 4 (July 1987), pp. 743-765.
Udry, Christopher, “Gender, agricultural production, and the

MALE-FEMALE

DIFFERENCES

IN AGRICULTURAL

theory of the household,”
Mimeo (Evanston,
IL:
Northwestern University, 1994).
Williams, Marjorie W ., “Gender productivity and macroeconomic policies in the context of structural adjustment
and change,” in Isabella Bakker (Ed.), The Strategic

PRODUCTIVITY

1595

Silence: Gender and Economic Policy (London: Zed
Books, 1994).
World
Bank,
Enhancing
Women’s
f’arriciparion
in
Economic Development, A World Bank Policy Paper
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 1994).

