Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

Rural employment in industrialised countries$
John Brydena,*, Ray Bollmanb
a

The Arkleton Centre, St. Mary's, Kings College, University of Aberdeen, Old Aberdeen, AB24 2UF Scotland, UK
b
Statistics Canada, Ottawa, Ont., Canada, K1A OT6
Received 26 January 1999; received in revised form 12 October 1999; accepted 13 November 1999

Abstract
This paper assesses the recent changes in rural employment in the OECD countries, highlighting the growing role of
employment in services and, in some cases, manufacturing activity. In many, but not all, rural areas the secular decline in
agricultural employment has been more than counterbalanced by growing employment in these other sectors. However, the
diversity of employment growth within and between rural areas is stressed, as are the implications of this diversity for policy.
A range of explanations for the relative economic success of some rural areas is explored. These include the impacts of
globalisation; restructuring of the labour market; new `consumption' demands on the rural areas; and human mobility. The
paper concludes that traditional theories do not explain the diversity of outcomes in rural areas. New approaches are needed.
Recent analyses under the banner of `the new economic geography' has advanced our understanding of the pre-conditions for
rural development to occur, but understanding the diverse pattern of rural employment outcomes within the same kind of
geography remains a challenge which needs to be addressed by inter-disciplinary approaches and methods. # 2000 Elsevier
Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Rural employment; Rural development; OECD countries

1. Introduction
This paper was inspired by a collection of papers
which, as editors and contributors, we put together in a
book, Rural Employment: An International Perspective, recently published by CAB International (Bollman and Bryden, 1997). The papers were presented at
a conference held in the rural town of Coaticook,
$

Based on a paper presented at the Rural Employment
Symposium at the IAAE XXIII Conference, Sacramento, 10±16
August 1997.
*
Corresponding author. Tel.: ‡44-1224-273-901; fax: ‡441224-273-902.

Quebec, in October 1995, and seven of the 30 chapters
report comparative research undertaken within the
OECD rural development programme. For the ®rst
time, albeit only for the OECD countries, a reasonably
comprehensive body of comparable data analysing
the trends and patterns in rural employment is
available. This marks a considerable step forward
from the usual focus on agricultural employment,
and the generally gloomy prognostications about the
impact of declining agricultural employment on rural
economies.
Although we obviously acknowledge the work of
our colleagues at the Coaticook conference and the
bene®t of the stimulating discussions there, we have

0169-5150/00/$ ± see front matter # 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 9 9 ) 0 0 0 5 3 - 5

186

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

tried to go beyond the scope of the book and ask what
explanations might underpin observed changes in
rural employment.
1.1. The changing context for rural development
The attention given to rural development in OECD
countries has steadily increased over the past decade, a
period of considerable change at both global and
European levels. Liberalisation and globalisation are
driving global trade and capital movements and the
global division of labour and signi®cant market adjustments follow from this. Partly linked with these trends,
major changes in policy frameworks affecting rural
areas are occurring. These market and policy changes
mean major challenges, as well as some new opportunities, for rural populations. The capacity of rural
people to respond to potential opportunities and
threats by creating new sources of income and
employment to replace declining employment in agriculture, other primary industries, some services (e.g.
banking, telecommunications, wholesaling) and manufacturing is a critical issue both for rural people and
for policy makers and rural development agencies.
The evidence of the recent past in OECD countries
is that some rural areas are 'better placed' than others
to adapt to these processes of `opening up' and the
consequential exposure to external forces, although
the causal factors are not obvious. Amongst the
explanations of rural success we can ®nd those focusing on factor endowments, factor prices, entrepreneurial capacities, good luck, `social' capital, amenities,
proximity to wealthy urban populations with increasing lifestyle demands on rural areas, etc.
Rural areas differ markedly in their economic
structure and activity, their natural and human
resources, the peripherality of their location (and
hence market potential and transport costs), their
demographic and social circumstances, in other
words, their general 'initial conditions'. Therefore,
they are affected in different ways, and to differing
extents, by the external forces with which they interact. Policies and support structures for rural areas must
increasingly recognise this diversity of conditions and
outcomes. It follows that knowledge and understanding of the processes involved, and local responses to
them, becomes a crucial element in the improvement
of policy and local action.

Increasingly, rural areas are expected to develop
their own analyses of their strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats, and evolve their own strategies and action plans to deal with them. This is a
general tendency, caused by the lack of detailed
knowledge and solutions at the `centre' as well as
by ®scal constraints. A critical question for local
actors is the dual one: how can they best minimise
adverse effects of globalisation and how can they best
take advantage of new opportunities? A related question is what room for manoeuvre do they have in an era
where the big levers often seem to be beyond their
control?
2. Trends in rural employment
2.1. Introduction
In order to identify and analyse trends in rural
development, the OECD established a territorial
scheme in which 2000 regions, covering the entire
territory of the OECD countries, are identi®ed. These
regions are grouped into three types according to their
share of population living in rural communities:
 Predominantly rural regions: over 50%
 Significantly ruralor `intermediate'regions: 15±50%
 Predominantly urbanised regions: below 15%
By grouping regions in this way, each type of region
contains some rural and some urban communities,
although to different degrees (Meyer, 1997). It is this
OECD classi®cation which is used throughout this
paper.
2.2. General trends
The declining relative importance of agriculture in
rural areas is continuing largely due to adoption of
new technology and the growth of other sectors. The
OECD work on territorial indicators of rural employment showed that in only three OECD countries did
agriculture account for over 25% of the labour force in
predominantly rural regions in 1990. By contrast,
industry accounted for more than 25% of employment
in such regions in seventeen countries, whilst services
accounted for more than 25% of employment in all of
them, and over 50% in 18 (OECD, 1996, p. 46).

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

187

Table 1
Employment change in dynamic and lagging labour markets, Canadaa
Number of regions

Employment 1991 (%)

Employment change 1981±1991

266
209
68
141
38
21
17
19
12
7

100
30
11
19
23
14
8
47
21
26

116.5
114.1
129.3
107.0
126.0
138.6
109.2
113.9
129.6
104.0

Total 1981 ˆ 100
National
Predominantly rural regions
Dynamic
Lagging
Significantly rural regions
Dynamic
Lagging
Predominantly urban regions
Dynamic
Lagging
a

Difference to national
0.0
À2.4
12.8
À9.5
9.5
22.1
À7.3
À2.6
13.1
À12.5

Source: von Meyer (1997) Table 2.2.

The same OECD studies also showed that between
1980 and 1990 the rates of growth of employment in
predominantly rural regions exceeded those in predominantly urbanised regions in three of the 15 countries for which data was available (Huillet, 1997, p.
342). More recent work which disaggregates these
rural regions shows clearly that even amongst the most
`rural' types of rural region, some have experienced
growing employment whilst others have experienced
declining employment (and sometimes population).
For example, Cunningham and Bollman (1997) show
that `there is a wide variation in employment growth
among the different regions of Canada, independent of
their degree of rurality', with rates of employment
growth in predominantly rural regions ranging from
À20 to 70% (p. 57). Schindegger and Krajasits (1997)
show a similar pattern of growth in Austria, where
rates of employment growth range from À19 to 14%
in the rural regions (p. 174). Table 1 summarises the
data for Canada, which is not atypical.
Although this evidence is both surprising and
encouraging, two caveats are required. First, it
remains true in most countries that employment has
grown faster in predominantly urban regions than in
predominately rural regions, and that, in general, it is
the signi®cantly rural regions which have experienced
the most rapid employment growth. In the rural
regions only the urban communities are growing Ð
rural communities are losing both population and
employment. According to Irmen (1997)
``rural communities within predominantly rural
regions are the losers in spatial development F F F

These rural communities lose population and
employment, whereas the rural communities in
other types of regions (predominantly urban and
intermediate) gain in national importance'' (p. 28).
In urbanised regions, `rural' communities are growing
because they are situated in an urbanising environment
and benefit from it. Second, there has also been a
continuing employment deficit in many rural areas of
the richer countries Ð reflected in a net commuting
balance with urban areas. Rural areas often continue to
be net suppliers of labour to urban areas (Schindegger
and Krajasits, 1997, p. 168).
Other labour market changes worth brie¯y commenting on include: a fall in annual hours worked per
person; an increase in self-employment and part-time
work especially among women; a rise in long-term
and youth unemployment; and the feminisation of the
labour force Ð women are playing an ever larger role
in the labour force. Although general trends, they are
also evident in rural areas.
The main points to note at this stage are:
1. We cannot generalise about the development or
growth experience of rural regions. We cannot
assume that they will inevitably experience
declining employment and population Ð the
evidence is that some will prosper and others will
even grow faster than the fastest growing urban
region. Peripheries are not doomed to be perpetually lagging areas in economic terms, nor are
centres destined to be perpetually in the lead.
2. Differential outcomes within broad regions are not

188

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

generally attributable to policy differences Ð in
many cases the same policy regime produces very
different outcomes in different localities Ð real
processes of economic, technical and social
change are involved which are often independent
of policy or even in spite of policy (for example, in
the EU the growth of farm household pluriactivity
in the 1980s was not encouraged by policy). That
is not to say that policy changes and implementation are insigni®cant factors, especially when they
are coherently combined with market and community forces and are ¯exible enough to cope with
varied rural conditions.
3. Some rural areas demonstrate considerable capacity to adapt to rapidly changing external conditions, despite well-known handicaps.
4. At least in terms of direct employment, rural
people now work in the manufacturing and the
service sectors in almost all of the EU. However,
some areas may `depend' on agriculture (the
major export base) even though few are directly
employed in it.
In Europe, restructuring is occurring in agriculture,
agri-food and food retailing and distribution sectors.
There is also a general shift to a service-based economy in which the information and knowledge based
industries play an increasing role. Linked with this is a
de-materialisation of production (i.e. any good one
buys has a higher `services' component than in earlier
decades), a de-linking of economic growth from consumption of raw materials, a dissociation of ®nancial
sphere from the `real economy', and an internationalisation of savings-investment ¯ows and of relations in
commercial and knowledge spheres. Although many
of these are not new features of rural economies (for
example, rural areas have always been open to savings/investment ¯ows to cities), new elements concern
the globalisation of these ¯ows, the reduced power of
regions and nation states to in¯uence them and the
intensifying internationalisation of relations in commercial and knowledge spheres which both threatens
many local commercial and knowledge based activities and provides them with new (non-local) opportunities.
De-materialised production (in the sense that consumer demand is shifting from goods consumption to
services consumption) in the form of tourism and

recreational industries have been particularly important in the richer countries and much of this is based on
new `consumption' uses of the countryside. However,
this is not to argue that production activities do not
remain important both in terms of their economic
signi®cance and in terms of perceptions of rural
people.
2.3. There is a steady and long term decline in
agricultural employment
The long term and generalised decline in agricultural employment is well documented. In the 1980s
annual rates of decline were between 3 and 4% in
Japan, Finland, and Austria. In the EU, agricultural
employment has declined by around 2±3% per annum
over the past decade (Post and Terluin, 1997, p. 310).
In 1990, agricultural employment was less than
10% of total employment in all EU countries except
Greece (23%), Portugal (20%), Ireland (15%) and
Spain (11%) (op. cit., p. 308). Furthermore, in all
countries the extent of agricultural employment is
exaggerated because the ®gures include pluriactive
farmers and farm families for whom agriculture may
provide but a small portion of household income.
In the EU-12, a sample of 7000 farm households
indicated that just under half of all farm households
earned more than half of their household income
from agriculture in 1987 (Bryden et al., 1994).
Nevertheless, it is clear from differential productivity
data that there is still considerable room for further
labour savings in agriculture even without major
reforms to the CAP. Moreover, in the 10 Central
and Eastern European Countries (CEECs) which
have applied to join the EU, a quarter of the labour
force is still engaged in agriculture (9.5 million people) generating only 8% of GDP: if the CEECs
approach the average productivity of the present
EU-15, then about 3 million people would leave
agriculture over a period of years. It is not beyond
the bounds of possibility, based on past experience,
that in East, West and Central Europe as a whole more
than 6 million people could leave agriculture in the
next decade.
The purpose of stating this is to raise the question, if
not in farming, where are the jobs in rural areas going
to come from; and how might policy best assist in the
process of change?

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197
Table 2
Employment in tourism compared to agriculture as percentage of
total employment, 1990a
Country

Germany
Austria
Canada
US
Finland
France
UK
Switzerland

Employment
in tourism (%)

Employment in
agriculture (%)

P.R.b

S.Rc

Alld

P.R.

S.R.

All

5.2
17.7
9.3
10.5
11.0
6.5
9.8
18.7

4.4
21.0
9.3
11.3
4.2
7.4
4.9
11.7

4.0
21.8
9.7
11.2
8.3
7.9
8.3
14.9

1.5
13.3
10.9
5.9
16.0
10.8
10.3
9.5

1.5
4.1
3.3
2.4
5.3
5.5
4.2
6.3

1.0
6.2
4.6
3.3
8.5
5.7
2.4
4.1

a

Source: OECD, 1996.
Predominantly rural regions.
c
Significantly rural regions.
d
All regions.
b

2.4. Employment in rural tourism has been
increasing
In several OECD countries, employment in tourism
exceeds that in agriculture in all types of region. This
is the case in the predominantly rural regions of
Austria, US, Germany and Switzerland (see Table
2). Moreover, tourism employment has been growing
in all types of rural region (with the exception of
Finland) throughout the 1980s; annual growth rates of
3% or higher were recorded in Germany, Spain and
Switzerland (Bontron and Lasnier, 1997, p. 436).
2.5. Mixed experience with other services
In all OECD countries employment in services has
been growing. This trend is re¯ected in the predominantly rural regions where most employment growth
during the 1980s was due to net increases in the
service sector (Meyer, 1997). In all rural regions the
growth of most services parallels that at national
levels. The main exception is business services
(including knowledge and information based services); this tends to be the high value-added, highwage element of the service sector, and is heavily
under-represented in rural areas (Cunningham and
Bollman, 1997). Some observers expect such services
to dominate all employment after 2000; for example,
projections in Finland in 1995 suggested that by the
year 2000, 93% of all work would be `information

189

work' (Bryden, 1997 p. 448). However, questions
remain about the linkages between this type of work
with other sectors, and about its precise de®nition.
Public services, including education, health and
public administration, are important employers in
many rural areas. These sectors grew rapidly during
the 1980s, but that growth appears to have been
curtailed or even reversed in many regions in the
1990s. Employment trends in other consumer services, especially retailing and personal services, tend
to be linked to population levels and changes.
A critical question is whether rural areas can participate in the growth in employment in services. In
principal this should be facilitated by the rapidly
increasing access to, and signi®cant cost reductions
in, digital telecommunications, linked in turn to the
`Information Highway'. However, evidence on the
adoption of these technologies by rural actors, and
especially of the content and impacts of their use, is
rather scarce. Bryden (1997) identi®es a number of
cases where investment in Information and Communications Technology (ICT) has created employment
opportunities in rural areas. The emphasis is placed
upon opportunities rather than job creation per se as it
is the impact of ICT on the competitiveness of rural
enterprises in general and the impacts on employment
of ICT adoption and use which is important for the
future of rural areas. A main point seems to be that
signi®cant employment losses as well as gains can be
linked to ICT and, at least in some cases, gains may
exceed losses. Public policies at both national and
local levels can make a difference to the direction of
these net effects. For example, the intervention of the
Highlands and Islands Development Board (HIDB)
and later the Highlands and Islands Enterprise (which
succeeded HIDB) in investments in digitalising the
telecom network, and targeting new types of enterprise which could utilise the network, appears to have
had positive impacts (see Sproull et al., 1996). This
supports evidence of pro®table relocation of telecommunications-intensive enterprises in rural America
(Salant and Marx, 1995).
3. Explanations of rural employment changes
The changes in rural employment in OECD countries are of more than passing interest. They are the

190

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

opposite of what was expected, if not in terms of
agricultural employment, then certainly in terms of
growth in manufacturing and services employment in
many areas. Moreover, there has been a surprising
variability in outcomes. They are not consistent with
the predictions of core-periphery models or, indeed,
neo-classical models, of development dynamics. The
`New Economic Geography' models have generated
scenarios where rural development will take place
(Krugman, 1993, 1999; Kilkenny, 1993, 1998,
1999) but the problematique remains Ð how to
explain differential economic performance among
rural localities with similar features of geography,
settlement and peripherality with respect to metropoles. Although Kilkenny's recent work in particular
opens up important new questions, new information,
and theory, is needed to explain the loss of competitive
advantage in some rural areas, and its accretion in
others.
Some of the key explanatory chapters in the book
deal with issues such as education levels, niche markets, networks and lifestyle choices as a means of
exploring the differential performance of rural
regions. In many cases, the ®ndings are similar and
point to the need to view rural employment changes
both within a set of global and national changes,
commonly termed `restructuring', which have speci®c
rural impacts and with reference to micro-regional
characteristics. For example, in their work McGranahan and Kassel (1997) conclude that, despite the long
standing emphasis put upon workforce education as a
key to economic advancement, high regional education levels offer a limited advantage. Economic development may be just as dependent upon local
circumstances such as proximity to industrial districts
or expanding urban centres, favourable climate and
amenities as local education levels. Through examining lifestyle choices and rural job creation, Persson
et al. (1997) identify three factors which lead to
increasing differentiation: internationalization and
organization of economic activity; diversity of lifestyles and mobility patterns among people; and policy
formation and practices (p. 146).
Basically there are three main groups of explanations of rural employment change. The ®rst group
relates to the impacts of globalisation and restructuring, and the second to new `consumption' functions of
the countryside in the richer countries. These two

groups both relate to external demand forces. The
third group of factors is the local `swift-footedness'
(either public or private entrepreneurship) in some
communities that is not well understood or measured.
Clemenson and Lane (1997) identify the establishment of niche markets as a means of exploiting the
potential bene®ts of each of these groups. Niche
markets can both respond to the external demand
forces, encouraging a re-examination of the opportunities offered by any one locality and utilise local
entrepreneurship to create a successful marketing
strategy.
3.1. Impacts of globalisation
Although the internationalisation of economic
activity has been occurring for centuries, globalisation1 is a recent phenomenon which has intensi®ed
during the 1980s and '90s. Whereas internationalisation refers mainly to trade in goods and services the
production of which was organised within national
economies, globalisation involves `functional integration between internationally dispersed economic
activities' (Dicken, 1992). Although much attention
has been paid to the globalisation of manufacturing
activities, it is evident that globalisation has also
occurred in important business services such as
banking, insurance, advertising and communications.
Globalisation is marked in part by the reduction
of the cost of space due to the reduction in the cost
of transportation and communication. Before the
onset of globalisation, high transportation and communication costs protected some rural workers from
competition, and similarly were protected from competing in metropolitan markets by the same high costs.
New technology has caused signi®cant reductions in
the costs of transportation and communication.
Although technological change is not new, it is the
focus on transportation and communications that
makes globalisation impact signi®cantly on rural
areas.
While internationalisation was greatly boosted in
the late 19th century by the development of transport
technology (steam ships, railways, refrigeration), globalisation has been facilitated by the reduction in
1

This section draws in part on Chapter 1 in Bor et al. (1997).

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

average tariffs and other trade barriers after the Second
World War2, by the development of ICT, and linked
with the growth in trans-national corporations (TNCs).
These changes mean that capital can, in principle at
least, be assembled wherever the costs of production
are the lowest and where social and environmental
restrictions are least. The component parts of a product (or service) can increasingly be manufactured in
different international locations and assembled at one
spot, either through the growth in TNCs or by outsourcing and `just-in-time' techniques of the new
production system and forms of `¯exible specialisation' (Piore and Sabel, 1984). Although such economic links are established and maintained in many
and various ways, the essential features of global
economic restructuring are considered to be its
`post-Fordist' nature, ¯exibilisation, and the international scale of the production and manufacturing
processes (Gertler, 1988; Bernat, 1993; Cappellin,
1994).
A second and to some extent related feature of
economic life today is the rapidity of change and
associated turbulence and uncertainty, although western Europe has gone for more than 50 years without a
major war. Sources of turbulence and uncertainty
include the separation of the `real economy' from
the `symbol economy' of international ®nancial
¯ows and transactions3; the dramatic changes in the
USSR and Eastern Europe which have altered the
nature of European space; political instability in
the Middle East and Africa; changes in the global
environment linked to atmospheric pollution and the
`greenhouse effect'; and continuing trade disputes
(Dicken, 1992).

2
In 1940, the average tariff (taxes levied on imports) on goods
was about 40%; after the GATT Uruguay round of trade talks
(1986±92) it was about 5%. There has at the same time been a
growth in non-tariff barriers to trade such as quotas, import
licences, and various regulatory devices.
3
According to Drucker (1986) both visible (goods) and invisible
(services) trade are much larger than ever before Ð US$ 2.5 to
US$ 3 trillion a year `But the London Eurodollar market F F F. Turns
over US$ 300 billion each working day, or US$ 75 trillion a year, a
volume at least 25 times that of world trade. In addition there are
the foreign exchange transactions in the world's main money
centres, in which one currency is traded against another. These run
at around US$ 150 billion a day F F F 12 times the world-wide trade
in goods and services'.

191

3.2. Why does globalisation matter for rural areas
and people?
Why does this matter for rural areas? First and
foremost because it has implications for employment
and enterprise. Because capital is increasingly mobile
internationally, while labour remains relatively immobile and tied to place, at least two tendencies can be
observed. First of all, there is downward pressure on
real wage rates, especially in low-skill segments of the
economy which tend to be over-represented in rural
areas. Secondly, there is a relative shortage of investment capital in high cost producing countries and
regions which are unable to maintain their competitive
edge internationally. Thus, some rural areas are increasingly being seen as sources of labour; labour that is low
cost, reliable and unorganised (Glasmeier, 1993), whilst
some industrial labour markets such as those concentrated in early industrialised regions are being by-passed
by the current processes of production (Urry, 1984).
The processes of globalisation and restructuring
have impacted on almost all areas of economic life,
public and private, and are generally recognised in the
downsizing, re-structuring and rationalisation of businesses, institutions and organisations in recent years
Ð and changing labour market conditions have followed from this.
3.3. Restructuring of the labour market
The restructuring of the labour market has had
common effects in most industrial nations, although
the impact on rural areas has been differentiated by
greater dependence on ®shing, forestry, mining or
agriculture and the degree to which capital had already
penetrated the local economy. Common elements
include the rise of unemployment and the changing
nature of work (Pahl, 1984). An increasing number of
jobs are contract-based, short-term, and casual, such
that an increasing proportion of the workforce has two
or more income-earning activities that are part-time
and provide limited social bene®ts. As heavy industry
declines and information-based activities expand, the
nature of work is changing, with a distinct rise in
employment opportunities in the service sector, even
in rural areas, and a decline in manual labour. Despite
this, manufacturing is still important in terms of local
employment. Much deskilling has taken place and

192

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

where reskilling has occurred it has been selective and
particular to favoured locations (Newby, 1987). In this
massive shift in labour market structures the participation of women has generally increased which,
together with the growth of feminism, has contributed
to an important shift in gender relations and household
maintenance (Barthez, 1982; Whatmore, 1990). For
most aspects of labour market change, there is an
equivalent effect in rural areas.
3.4. The changing role of the state
Globalisation is also changing the role of the nation
State. National borders are less relevant in a world of
international ®nance and global liberalisation of trade,
the laws of which are determined collectively at the
international level rather than by single countries.
Governments are increasingly called upon to ensure
participation in world affairs by upgrading communications and transportation infrastructures, agreeing
to international environmental accords and programs,
and reconciling legal and technical dif®culties between trading partners. The pressure to remain `competitive' in the global economy has led to pressure to
reduce taxes and other burdens on the corporate sector,
and new demands for increased human capital investment. Governments appear to be shifting some of their
responsibilities while shedding others, in an effort to
balance the budget in a time of ®scal crisis (OECD,
1993). The ageing of the population and high levels of
unemployment have added to pressures on public
budgets in many OECD countries. Common responses
involve the restructuring of defence, social welfare,
health and education, as well as efforts to move away
from granting permanent subsidies to declining sectors (agriculture, heavy industry) towards an `investment approach' through which people, sectors and
regions can be assisted to improve their competitive
position. The role of governments is increasingly to
facilitate development rather than to direct it, to
collaborate with other nations for trade purposes,
and to initiate partnerships with local groups, including local government and private enterprise, to stimulate economic development that is locally driven and
cost-shared. The scope for centralised, uniform policies and rural development measures is limited. Rural
community development can no longer (if it ever
could) be produced as a standardised item of mass

production. Policy must be ¯exible to complement and
stimulate local capacities and entrepreneurship.
3.5. The pervasive impacts of globalisation and
restructuring
Changes due to globalisation and economic restructuring, either causal or responsive, are evident in all
sectors of the economy and in most walks of life. Most
corporations, institutions, state bodies, and non-governmental organisations are being restructured in some
way. Both the rapidity of change and its unpredictability and complexity lead to turbulence and uncertainty. We do not know whether to consider global
restructuring in all its manifestations as a disjunctive
or a quantum leap in the progress of capitalism (Drucker,
1986; Campanella, 1990). Some contemporary philosophers liken it to romanticism, a stage in communal
lifewhich integrates both traditional values and progress
(Hall and Jarvie, 1992). To Giddens (1991) globalisation
is a form of advanced modernism, while others, such as
Gellner, suggest that it may be post-modern (Gellner,
1988; Harvey, 1989). Whatever one's view of the nature
and signi®cance of global restructuring, it comprises a
set of external factors which seem likely to go on
in¯uencing developments in rural areas and opportunities for rural people for some time to come.
3.6. Summary of globalisation impacts
The most important general impacts of globalisation can therefore be summarised brie¯y as:
 the impact on employment and work;
 the shrinking of distance through lower costs, and
increasing efficiency, of transfer and communications, counterbalanced by increased consciousness
of cultural groups and communities4;
4
Robertson (1992) refers to this aspect of globalisation as both
the compression of the world and the intensification of consciousness of the world as a whole,' but points out that globalisation is not
simply a world of converging societies. Accelerated globalisation is
counterbalanced by increased consciousness of cultural groups and
communities, which is one of the main contradictions of
restructuring. The notion of `global culture' advanced by Featherstone (1990) involves increased global consciousness, but
heightened awareness of the individuality of culture groups,
reflecting the notion of the `global village' forecast by McLuhan
and advanced by Sachs (1993) as `cosmopolitan localism'.

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

 the changing role of the nation state;
 the new role for communities and localities;
 the stress on competitiveness and `flexibilisation'
as main features of entrepreneurial and policy
responses.
3.7. Rural impacts of globalisation
Particular impacts of globalisation on people in
rural and peripheral areas include:
 global movements of capital and finance, leading to
a shortage of external investment capital;
 the decline in agricultural employment and in the
relative economic importance of food production,
accompanied by structural changes in the farming
industry;
 increasingly global penetration of local markets
and increased opportunity for local producers to
penetrate global (niche) markets, exposure to
increased competition, and the related restructuring
of capitalism;
 growing inter-dependence between areas and activities which are physically distant from each other;
 increasing efforts to internationalise the terms
under which trade takes place, and remove economic and other barriers to trade, including most
notably agricultural production subsidies, for
example through the GATT and now the WTO;
 the standardisation of many (mass market) products, harmonisation of regulations and standards
(ISO 9000 etc.), lowering of trade barriers;
 the introduction and spread of new technologies,
especially ICT and biotechnology;
 global cultural flows (e.g. through mass media),
evident in mass consumer products;
 demographic changes including increased personal
mobility;
 a new international division of labour in which
many unskilled jobs and associated production are
moving to the Newly Industrialised Countries.
It is not so much the nature of globalisation forces
driving change or their general consequences which
distinguishes rural from urban areas, but rather the
speci®c forms which these forces take in areas we
perceive as `rural'. We focus on them because rural
areas have become progressively less self-suf®cient

193

and self-contained, and ever more open to the wider
forces (economic, social, political) shaping European
and global development.
3.8. Public goods and new demands on the countryside
A second major explanatory factor for rural
employment changes is the emergence of new perceptions of the countryside in rich countries with a high
population density (e.g. northern European countries),
and the emergence of new uses and functions which
are linked to these new perceptions.
The economy is comprised of both private (market)
and public (non-market) goods and services. For
example, food products and pharmaceuticals are private goods of the agricultural sector while pleasant
landscapes, clean water (also now a private good) and
air, biodiversity and culture are all public goods.
Public goods are those which cannot be directly traded
as it is dif®cult or impossible to exclude non-payers
from their bene®ts. However, a further feature concerns the important of public perception of `rurality'
and the social construction of the countryside in
general Ð Newby's `village in the mind'.
In many cases public goods are critical resources in
creating indirect trading activities, for example, they
underpin the development of tourism and recreation,
and the perceived desirability of rural living. They are
also vital for human welfare in both rural and urban
areas. The fact that public goods such as a pristine
environment or beautiful landscape cannot be traded
directly creates the dif®culty of valuing tradable versus non-tradable goods which, in the end, places heavy
demands on political processes. If a good cannot be
traded, should it be protected or preserved merely as a
natural amenity? Since non-tradable goods cannot be
de-localised, how important are they in (indirectly)
establishing local competitive advantages? Who
should pay for their maintenance and enhancement,
and how should it be ®nanced?
Because of the strong link between public goods
and new urban consumption demands on rural space in
richer regions/countries with high population densities, they are a vital in¯uence on both the nature and
extent of new rural economic activities. For example,
urban consumers increasingly see rural areas as important for rest and recreation, for fresh air and clean
water, as offering lifestyles with advantages over those

194

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

in urban areas, as having cheaper and more spacious
housing, with positive features of culture and heritage
which are worth preserving, and so on. Thus, public
goods have an increasingly important in¯uence on
the relative competitiveness of different rural areas
and offer scope for local action in a range of diversi®ed economic, social, cultural and environmental
activities.
3.9. Human mobility
Movements of people are a key aspect of rural
change and development. In-migration, out-migration,
retirement, the retention or loss of young people, the
return of diaspora, commuting, recreation and tourism
are all dimensions of this movement. So too are issues
of personal and public transport, the location of services (increasingly centralised), the location of
employment and housing need, provision and cost.
Both out-migration and in-migration have consequences for local people, local societies, local economies, local politics and local cultures. In-migration
can offer both threats and opportunities.
The movement of people (and indeed enterprises)
into rural areas is not only determined by the availability of work and other economic opportunities, but
also by the new values placed on rural space Ð clean
environment, community life, space for leisure, pleasant landscapes, healthy 'lifestyles', rural culture, etc.,
as well as, in some cases, availability of redundant
buildings and lower cost housing.
Previous studies have indicated two types of migration from urban to rural areas: job related migration
and residential migration. Much of the literature on
urban to rural migration has assumed that these two
types of migration are closely related and that occupational change implies a change in residence. Blanc and
Tahar (1997) suggest that there are different factors
in¯uencing job related and residential migration and
the two types of migration should be looked at separately. Drawing on a 1985 INSEE survey, they assess
the relationship between occupational and residential
migration and indicate that the two types of migration
are not interrelated. The analysis suggests a one-way
correlation between occupational and residential
mobility: i.e. although occupational mobility in¯uences residential mobility, the reverse is unlikely to
be true.

Lower population densities in rural areas mean that
it is dif®cult for people moving to a new location to
®nd work and people starting a new job to ®nd
housing. However, the rural housing market is in
general easier to access than the rural labour market.
Three reasons are given for this:
 building one's own house is easier than creating a
paid job for oneself;
 vacant houses are not uncommon in the countryside
after the long period of rural exodus;
 a person's skills are more specific than housing
preferences, and finding a match when there is a
shortage is easier on the real estate market than on
the job market.
This argument is substantiated by Persson et al.
(1997) who focus on the decreasing in¯uence of rural
employment availability on individuals' decisions to
move to rural areas. They suggest that lifestyle choices
are increasingly important in maintaining rural populations, both in encouraging people to move to rural
areas and in creating jobs in the area in which they live.
A survey of in-migrants in rural Sweden illustrated
that employment was not the main reason for their
move, and reasons such as moving back to their roots,
searching for a sense of community and a non-metropolitan lifestyle were identi®ed. A survey in southern
Canada indicated a large proportion of families having
diversi®ed their sources of income to maintain particular lifestyle choices such as taking holidays, to bene®t children or to sustain family consumption patterns.
Persson et al. use the concept of the `Arena Society'
to illustrate the diverse nature of rural labour markets,
the increasing importance of lifestyles in rural areas,
and the supply of entrepreneurs able to work at home,
provide business, education and health services. They
also develop the concept of `reach' Ð broadly de®ned
as `the capacity to compromise the surrounding world
in one's sphere of in¯uence' (p. 155). For example,
physical reach in the form of links with larger population centres is important in rural development, but also
important are the dimensions of social reach, time
reach, knowledge reach and economic reach in understanding the differences between rural households,
and the effects of new technologies. In essence, this
concept highlights the importance of different kinds of
`networks' in transcending the boundaries of local
space and local markets.

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

Contemporary lifestyles are in¯uenced by global
trends and the pluralistic characteristics of `footloose'
labour markets. Persson et al. make the point that more
individualistic lifestyles are developed through a better educated workforce and the emergence of knowledge and information based small production units
with ¯exible working conditions. It is increasingly
possible to make choices about where to live and work
based on considerations other than just employment
opportunities. They predict that the search for quality
of life will have a signi®cant impact on settlement
patterns.
Persson et al. go on to suggest that the place given to
employment creation in rural planning is of less
importance today, and that planning at local level is
the most appropriate way to assist rural communities
to develop their own advantages. `Public policy should
pay as much attention to micro-regional character as is
paid to expensive job-creation programmes' (op. cit.
p.161).
Errington (1997) also observes that opportunities
for rural employment are no longer the essential
mandate in keeping populations in rural areas. The
concern of policy in rural areas to counteract depopulation has to a certain extent been superseded by a
growing out¯ux of populations from urban to rural
areas. However, Errington argues that there is still a
case for government intervention in rural employment
because of the contribution that local employment
opportunities make to achieving balanced (i.e. sustainable) rural communities. He illustrates this point
through his study of the village of Lambourn in
Berkshire, England, focusing attention on the extent
of car use in and around the village. Errington's survey
indicated that levels of car ownership were similar for
those who worked in the village and those who
commuted, but the weekly distance travelled by commuters was two and a half times greater than those
who worked in the village. He suggests that more local
employment opportunities would reduce the environmental and social costs of commuting, thereby contributing to a more sustainable rural society. This is, of
course, an intermediate rural area, close to the southeast England metropolitan area.
Other elements explaining employment changes
include:
 neo-classical arguments relating to factor prices;

195

 impacts of new technology (distance-shrinking
effects);
 human capital (not just education, but also lower
labour force turnover, loyalty etc.);
 `social capital' (Putnam, 1993), including institutional effectiveness and propensity of local actors
to co-operate;
 flexible networks, linked to previous co-operative
structures in agriculture (Piore and Sabel, 1984;
Zacchia, 1986; Beccatini, 1990).
The scope for local actors to encourage activities
based on these factors is largely beyond the scope of
this paper. However, it is clearly in¯uenced by a set of
less `tangible' resources or capacities which may be
more, or less, present in local societies. They include
effective `governance' and propensities of local actors
in private, public and voluntary spheres to co-operate,
as well as material conditions, in¯uence over other
`public goods', resource markets such as those for land
and minerals, labour and knowledge, as well as a range
of networks and the relationship between these and
communications infrastructure. This suggests a new
®eld for cross-disciplinary research which can penetrate the reasons for wide differences between the
medium and long term performance of rural localities
in similar policy and geographical locations. These
issues are further explored in Dawe and Bryden (1999)
and Bryden and Dawe (1998).
4. Conclusion
There are many different forces at work leading to a
restructuring of rural economy, society and labour
markets. What is surprising in a sense is the consistency of many rural employment changes Ð the
inexorable decline in agricultural employment, the
increase in services employment, especially that
linked to tourism and recreation Ð and their coherence with changes in urban labour markets (feminisation, shift to part-time and casual work etc.). However,
it is clear that rural labour markets are still biased by
low-skill, low paid work, that they face tremendous
potential changes as the growth in knowledge and
information work begins to dominate the labour market, and that new technology and its creative use in
rural contexts, as well as human resource development

196

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197

and attention to less `tangible' resources including
`social capital' in its various guises will be very
important in future transformations.
Existing theories, either of the neo-classical or coreperiphery school, are of little help in terms of understanding differential economic performance between
rural areas, even those in geographical peripheries.
They do not account for the differential performance
within such peripheries, nor do they consider important aspects of social or environmental capital or the
new `consumption' demand on rural space. We suggest that a new ®eld of cross-disciplinary research is
opened up, dealing with the multi-faceted factors
which appear important for such explanations. In
developing new methods for examining the phenomenon of differential performance between rural areas,
more attention needs to be paid to the residual term (R)
in the production function. An unpacking of `R'
necessarily involves paying attention to less `tangible'
and hence less easily measurable factors such as
institutional performance and culture, and thus implies
the need for inter-disciplinary approaches and methods.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for comments at the IAAE
Symposium and especially to Albert Valdez and Alan
de Janvry. Jackie Cornish is also gratefully acknowledged for her editing assistance in preparing this paper
for publication. Two anonymous referees also provided helpful comments.
References
Barthez, A., 1982. Famille, Travail et Agriculture. Economica,
Paris.
Beccatini, G., 1990. In: Pyke, F., Beccatini, G., Sengenberger, W.
(Eds.), The Marshallian Industrial District as a Socio-Economic
Notion. Industrial Districts and Inter-firm Co-operation in Italy,
ILO, Geneva.
Bernat, A.G., 1993. Manufacturing restructuring in nonmetropolitan U.S. In: Fuller, A.M., Rounds, R.C. (Eds.), Stimulating
Rural Economies for the 2000's: the Challenge for Rural
Manufacturing and Tradeable Services. Proceedings of the 4th
Annual ARRG Conference, Goderich, Ontario. ARRG Working
Paper Series No. 4, Rural Development Institute, Brandon
University, MB, pp. 35±41.

Blanc, M., Tahar, G., 1997. The relationships between occupational
and residential urban-to-rural migration. In: Bollman, R.D.,
Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural Employment: An International
Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp. 177±192.
Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), 1997. Rural Employment: an
International Perspective. CAB International, Wallingford.
Bontron, J., Lasnier, N., 1997. Tourism: a potential source of rural
employment. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural
Employment: an International Perspective, CAB International,
Wallingford, pp. 427±446.
Bor, van den W., Bryden, J.M., Fuller, A.M., 1997. Rethinking
Rural Human Resource Management: the Impact of Globalisation and Rural Restructuring on Rural Education and Training
in Western Europe. ManSholt Studies 10, Wageningen
Agricultural University, The Netherlands.
Bryden, J., 1997. Rural employment and the information highway.
In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural Employment: an
International Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp.
447±459.
Bryden, J.M., Dawe, S.P., 1998. Development strategies for remote
rural regions: what do we know so far? OECD International
Conference on Remote Rural Areas - Developing Through Natural
and Cultural Assets, AlbarracõÂn, Spain, 5±6 November 1998.
Bryden, J.M., Bell, C., Gilliatt, J., Hawkins, E., MacKinnon, N.,
1994. Farm household adjustment in Western Europe 1987±91.
Final Report of the Research Programme: Rural Change in
Europe, Farm Structures and Household Pluriactivity, European
Commission.
Campanella, M.L., 1990. Globalization: process and interpretations. World Futures 30, 1±16.
Cappellin, R., 1994. The internationalization of regional economies
and the role of interregional cooperation in Europe: changing
spatial advantages of rural areas. In: Reid, J.N., Mazie, S.M.
(Eds.), Conceptual Frameworks for Understanding Rural
Development: an International Dialogue, The Aspen Institute,
Queenstown, Maryland, pp. 105±118.
Clemenson, H.A., Lane, B., 1997. Niche markets, niche marketing
and rural employment. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.),
Rural Employment: an International Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp. 410±426.
Cunningham, R., Bollman, R.D., 1997. Structure and trends of
rural employment: Canada in the context of OECD countries.
In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural Employment: an
International Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp.
36±58.
Dawe, S., Bryden, J., 1999. Competitive advantage in the rural
periphery: re-defining the global-local nexus. In Lithwick, H
and Gradws, Y. (1999). Urban Development in Frontier
Regions Kluwer Academic Publishers. The Netherlands.
Dicken, P., 1992. Society and Nature. Temple University Press,
Philadelphia.
Drucker, P.F., 1986. The Changed World Economy. Foreign
Affairs, March, pp. 768±791.
Errington, A., 1997. The vitality of small and medium enterprises
(smes) in rural QueÂbec. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.),
Rural Employment: an International Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp. 255±266.

J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 185±197
Featherstone, M. (Ed.), 1990. Global Culture: Nationalism,
Globalization and Modernity. Sage, London.
Gellner, E., 1988. Plough, Sword and Book: The Structure of
Human History. Collins Harvill, London.
Gertler, M.S., 1988. The limits to flexibility: comments on the
post-fordist vision of production and its geography. Trans. Inst.
Brit. Geog. 13, 419±432.
Giddens, A., 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity. Polity Press,
Cambridge.
Glasmeier, A., 1993. Global stakes: peripheral regions in an era of
globalization. In: Fuller, A.M., Rounds, R.C. (Eds.), Stimulating Rural Economies for the 2000's: the Challenge for Rural
Manufacturing and Tradeable Services. Proceedings of the 4th
Annual ARRG Conference, Goderich, Ontario. ARRG Working
Paper Series No. 4, Rural Development Institute, Brandon
University, MB, pp. 51±57.
Hall, J.A., Jarvie, I.C. (Eds.), 1992. Transition to Modernity.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Harvey, D., 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity. Blackwell,
Oxford.
Huillet, C., 1997. Trends in rural policy: the employment issue. In:
Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural Employment: an
International Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp.
338±345.
Irmen, E., 1997. Employment and population dynamics in OECD
countries: an intraregional approach. In: Bollman, R.D.,
Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural Employment: an International
Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp. 22±35.
Kilkenny, M., 1993. Rural/urban effects of terminating farm
subsidies. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 75, 968±980.
Kilkenny, M., 1998. Transport costs and rural development. J.
Regional Sci. 38(2), 293±312.
Kilkenny, M., 1999. Explicitly spatial rural-urban computable
general equilibrium. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 81, 647±652.
Krugman, P., 1993. First nature, second nature and metropolitan
location. J. Regional Sci. 33(2), 129±144.
Krugman, P., 1999. The role of geography in development. Int.
Regional Sci. Rev. 22(2), 142±161.
McGranahan, D.A., Kassel, K., 1997. Education and regional
employment in the 1980s: comparisons among OECD member
countries. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural
Employment: an International Perspective, CAB International,
Wallingford, pp. 74±84.
Meyer, von, H., 1997. Rural employment in OECD countries:
structure and dynamics of regional labour markets. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural Employment: an
International Perspective, CAB International, Wallingford, pp.
3±21.

197

Newby, H., 1987. Economic restructuring and rural labour markets
in Europe: current policy options. In: Summers, G.F. (Ed.),
Agriculture and Beyond: Rural Economic Development,
Proceedings of Seminar, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
pp. 41±54.
OECD, 1993. Creating Rural Indicators - Framework, Figures,
Findings. C/RUR/(93) 11. OECD, Paris.
OECD, 1996. Territorial Indicators of Employment: Focusing on
Rural Development. OECD, Paris.
Pahl, R.E., 1984. Divisions of Labour. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Persson, L.O., Westholm, E., Fuller, T., 1997. Two contexts, one
outcome: the importance of lifestyle choice in creating rural
jobs in Canada and Sweden. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M.
(Eds.), Rural Employment: an International Perspective. CAB
International, Wallingford, pp. 136±163.
Piore, M.J., Sabel, C.F., 1984. The Second Industrial Divide:
Possibilities for Prosperity. Basic Books, New York.
Post, J., Terluin, I., 1997. The changing role of agriculture in rural
employment. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M. (Eds.), Rural
Employment: an International Perspective, CAB International,
Wallingford, pp. 305±326.
Putnam, R.D., 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in
Modern Italy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Robertson, R., 1992. Globalization: Social Theory and Global
Culture. Sage, London.
Sachs, W., 1993. Global Ecology: a New Arena of Political
Conflict. Zed Books, London.
Salant, P., Marx, J., 1995. Shifting Tides: Trends and Opportunities
in Rural Development. Northwest Report, 2/95. The Aspen
Institute, Washington, DC.
Schindegger, F., Krajasits, C., 1997. Commuting: its importance for
rural employment analysis. In: Bollman, R.D., Bryden, J.M.
(Eds.), Rural Employment: an International Perspective. CAB
International, Wallingford, pp. 164±176.
Sproull, A., Bryden, J.M., Black, S., 1996. Telematics, rural
economic development and SMEs: some demand-side evidence. Informationen zur Raumentwicklung, LaÈndliche RaÈume:
LaÈndliche Entwicklung im internationalen Vergleich, Heft 11/
12, pp. 755±775.
Urry, J., 1984. Capitalist restructuring, recomposition and the
regions. In: Bradley, T., Lowe, P. (Eds.), Locality and Rurality:
Economy and Society in Rural Regions. Geobooks, Norwich.
Whatmore, S., 1990. Farming Women: Gender, Work and Family
Enterprise. Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Zacchia, C., 1986. The possibilities and constraints of endogenous
industrial development. In: Bassand, M., Brugger, E., Bryden,
J.M., Freidmann, J., Stuckey, B. (Eds.), Self-Reliant Development in Europe, Gower, Aldershot.

