Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

Links between economic liberalization and rural resource
degradation in the developing regions
Edward B. Barbier∗,1
Department of Environment, Centre for Environment and Development Economics, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK

Abstract
This paper examines evidence of the effects of economic liberalization and globalization on rural resource degradation in
developing countries. The principal resource effects of concern are processes of land use change leading to forestland conversion, degradation and deforestation. The main trends in globalization of interest are trade liberalization and economy-wide
reforms in developing countries that have ‘opened up’ the agroindustrial sectors, thus increasing their export-orientation. Such
reforms have clearly spurred agroindustrialization, rural development and economic growth, but there is also concern that
there may be direct and indirect impacts on rural resource degradation. The direct impacts may occur as increased agricultural
activity leads to conversion of forests and increased land degradation from ‘unsustainable’ production methods. However,
there may also be indirect effects if agroindustrial development displaces landless, near-landless and rural poor generally,
who then migrate to marginal agricultural lands and forest frontier regions. This paper explores these direct and indirect
effects of globalization and agroindustrialization on rural resource degradation both generally, plus through examining case
study evidence. The paper focuses in particular on the examples of structural adjustment, trade liberalization and agricultural
development in Ghana, and maize sector liberalization in Mexico under North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: O1; Q0
Keywords: Deforestation; Economic liberalization; Ghana; Mexico; Rural resource degradation; Structural adjustment

1. Introduction
Since their initial implementation in the early 1980s,
an important long-term objective of economy-wide
and trade liberalization reforms in developing countries has been to reallocate resources to key sector,
such as agriculture and manufacturing, to make them
more productive and export-oriented (Kahn, 1987; Lal
∗ Tel.: +44-1904-434-060; fax: +44-1904-432-998.
E-mail address: eb9@york.ac.uk (E.B. Barbier).
1 Present address: Department of Economics and Finance, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071-3985, USA. Tel.:
+1-307-766-2178; fax: +1-307-766-5090.

and Rajapatirana, 1987). A critical element of this
reform strategy has been the elimination of policy
distortions that constrain productive investment and
technological change as sources of long-term agricultural growth and agroindustrialization (Stiglitz, 1987;
Jaeger, 1992). Increasing ‘globalization’ of agriculture
in developing countries has also occurred.
Such economic liberalization reforms have clearly
benefited many developing countries through promoting rural development, agricultural exports and economic growth. However, many developing regions also
suffer from a ‘cumulative causation’ link between rural
poverty, land degradation and deforestation: poor rural households abandoning degraded land for ‘frontier’

0169-5150/00/$ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 0 9 1 - 8

300

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

forested lands, deforestation and cropping of poor soils
lead to further degradation, which in turn leads to
land abandonment and additional forestland conversion, and so on (Barbier, 1997). 2 An important issue
is whether the economic liberalization reforms implemented in developing countries have further increased
such processes of rural resource degradation. On the
one hand, there is evidence that unintended environmental damage, including land degradation and forest
conversion, can occur when economy-wide reforms in
developing countries are undertaken while other policy, market and institutional failures that in particular
affect poor rural smallholders are ignored (Reed, 1992;
Munasinghe and Cruz, 1995). On the other hand, a statistical analysis of 53 tropical countries has indicated
that forest clearing increases with population, but declines with income per capita and agricultural yields,
suggesting that improved agricultural performance and
development may help reduce rural resource degradation (Barbier and Burgess, 1997). This would suggests
that a more productive and competitive agricultural
sector, as well as better economic growth performance
generally, should reduce pressures for greater forest
conversion for agricultural expansion.
If the increased agricultural activity arising through
economic liberalization reforms in developing countries has led to increased rural resource degradation,
particularly additional forest conversion, it may have
done so both directly and indirectly. The direct impacts may have occurred as increased agricultural activity results in the expansion of cultivated area, thus
leading to further deforestation. That is, the effects of
greater globalization and agroindustrialization on the
agricultural sector make it increasingly profitable for
farming households to convert more forestland to cultivation. However, there may also be indirect effects
on deforestation if agroindustrial development dis2 In Africa, this poverty–degradation linkage appears to be directly related to the low productivity and input use of African
smallholder agriculture generally, which in turn leads to land
degradation, stagnant or declining yields and extensive use of
land (Reardon et al., 1999). In Latin America, land abandonment
and frontier agricultural expansion are characteristic of the ‘nutrient mining’ process, whereby road building and insecure property
rights make land in frontier forests artificially cheap and available
to landless and near-landless migrants to the frontier (Schneider,
1994; Southgate, 1994). Proximity to cities and roads may also be
factors explaining rapid land use changes (Mamingi et al., 1996).

places rural households dependent on farm labour and
unskilled workers in redundant agroindustries. If these
displaced households migrate to marginal agricultural
lands and forest frontier regions to seek new land to
cultivate, then the result is greater deforestation.
This paper aims to explore these possible direct and
indirect effects of economic liberalization and globalization on rural resource degradation. Although the
main focus will be on the price effects arising from the
macroeconomic and sectoral policy reforms generally
characterized as ‘economic liberalization’, the findings
could be generalized to other ‘price shocks’ that arise
through processes of globalization and agroindustrialization. These would include the emergence or reorganization of processing industries, loss of traditional
export markets, competition from imported substitutes
and greater exposure to global market fluctuations.
The outline of the paper is as follows. The first
half develops a basic model of aggregate agricultural
smallholder production that is dependent either on
land expansion or yield improvement. The purpose
of the model is to demonstrate how input and output price changes may influence the rate of land use
change, as well as the demand for land in agricultural production. Such relationships are important, as
economic liberalization reforms inevitably influence
prices in the agricultural sector, thus impacting on the
incentives for agricultural land expansion. By drawing
on previously published material on two case studies, the remainder of the paper focuses on empirical
evidence of the way in which economic reforms and
price changes impact on the demand for agricultural
land. The two examples are structural adjustment,
trade liberalization and agricultural development in
Ghana, and maize sector liberalization in Mexico
under the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA). Finally, Section 6 summarizes the principal findings and discusses their implications for the
wider issues of agroindustrialization, globalization
and development in developing countries.

2. A model of land use decisions in a rural
economy
The purpose of the following model is to illustrate
how changing input and output prices can influence
the land use decisions of rural households in the

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

agricultural sector of a developing country. To focus
on these price effects, the model of land use choice
is highly stylized, and some aspects of the impacts
of price shocks on the extensification of agricultural
systems in developing countries have been ignored.
The model developed here is broadly similar to
recent approaches that model the agricultural production behaviour of a representative rural household
with access to a stock of non-agricultural land (e.g.
a forested area) to determine the derived demand
by the household for converted land (Panayotou and
Sungsuwan, 1994; López, 1997, 1998; Cropper et
al., 1999). However, in this literature, varying assumptions have been employed about the ‘supply’ of
converted land available to the rural household. For
example, both Cropper et al. (1999) and Panayotou
and Sungsuwan (1994) employ a similar agricultural
household model, but whereas the former assume that
a marketed supply of converted land is available to
households, the latter assume that rural households
convert land under open access conditions. In contrast, López (1997) develops a model of bush-fallow
(or shifting) cultivation, in which the household converts land from the commonly managed pool of
forested land available to a village. Such a model
has been extended to examine the competing uses of
land and labour by the household for agricultural production as opposed to products (e.g. fuelwood, poles
and fodder) derived from the common forested land
(López, 1998). The model developed here follows
Panayotou and Sungsuwan (1994) and López (1997)
in assuming that the ‘pool’ of non-agricultural land
available to the household is non-marketed and freely
accessible, but other uses of labour and the common
land are ignored (e.g. as in López, 1998). Although
this is clearly a simplification of household land and
labour decisions, it does allow the focus to be on the
influence of input and output price changes on land
conversion, in common with other household land use
models developed for this purpose (López, 1997).
Assume a representative rural household that is a
price taker in all markets for the commodities that
it both consumes and produces. Thus the profit and
utility maximizing decisions of the household are
determined recursively, and thus optimal household
production is determined first and independently of
consumption and leisure choices (Singh et al., 1986).
It will be convenient to decompose the agricultural

301

production, Y, of this household into the stock of
arable land (e.g. measured in hectares, ha), N, multiplied by agricultural productivity or yield per hectare,
q. The latter is assumed to be determined by the
amount of purchased inputs, X, and household labour
allocated to agriculture, LA . Thus the basic agricultural production technology is
Y = Nq(X, LA ),
qX > 0, qXX < 0, qL > 0, qLL < 0.

(1)

However, the stock of agricultural land is not constant
but grows by the amount of new land brought into
production, i.e. n(L), through allocating some household labour, L, to convert forest and other available
non-agricultural land. It is also assumed that a proportion of agricultural land is taken out of production,
or ‘fallowed’, each time period at a constant rate, a.
The net expansion in agricultural land is therefore
dN
= N˙ = n(L) − aN,
dt
nL > 0, nLL < 0, N(0) = N0 .

(2)

Thus, the total endowment of (household and hired)
labour, T, is used either for agricultural production,
LA , or land conversion, L. Given an aggregate output
price, p, input price, w, and cost of converting land,
c(L), aggregate profits, Π, for the household are
Π = pY − wX − c(L),

cL > 0, cLL > 0.

(3)

Denoting r as the rate of discount, the objective
function of maximizing aggregate profits of the agricultural sector can be written as
∞

Max J =

Π e−rt dt

(4)

0

subject to Eqs. (1)–(3). The Hamiltonian for the above
intertemporal maximization problem is
H = pNq(X, T − L) − wX − c(L)
+λ[n(L) − aN].

(5)

The controls of the problem are X and L. The state
variable is N, with the corresponding co-state variable

302

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

λ, which also represents the shadow value of land in
terms of additional agricultural profits. 3
The above problem can be easily solved for the
optimal path to a steady-state equilibrium. However,
the objective here is not to portray this solution but
to show how prices and other factors influence both
the rate of rural land use change (i.e. dN/dt) and
the demand for land (i.e. N) along the optimal path.
For example, substituting the first-order condition for
optimal purchased input allocation, pNqX = w, into
(2) yields
aw
,
N˙ = n(L) −
pqX
aw
dN˙
> 0,
= 2
dp
p qX

a
dN˙
=−
< 0,
dw
pqX
dN˙
a
=−
< 0.
d(w/p)
qX

(6)

Thus Eq. (6) indicates that the rate of land use
change will increase as a result of higher agricultural
returns (i.e. an increase in p/w or p). The optimal path
for agricultural land use, N(t), could be increasing or
declining towards its long run steady-state level. If optimal rural land use is falling over time (dN/dt < 0),
then an increase in relative returns to agriculture will
flatten the curve, and the rate of decline in rural land
use is slowed down over time. If optimal land use is
rising (dN/dt > 0), then an increase in p/w or p will
steepen this path, and land expansion will therefore be
more rapid over time.
3

Assuming an interior solution, the first-order conditions of (5)

are
pNqX = w,

λnL = cL + pNqL ,

λ˙ = (r + a)λ − pq(X),

lim e−rt λ(t)N(t) = 0,

t→∞

as well as Eq. (2). The first equation is the standard condition
indicating that purchased inputs are applied up to the point where
their value marginal product equals their cost. The second equation
governs the optimal allocation of household labour, which occurs
where the marginal benefits of bringing additional land into cultivation, λnL , equals the marginal costs of conversion, cL + pNqL .
These costs consist of the direct conversion costs plus the opportunity costs of allocating any labour from agricultural production.
The third equation determines the rate of bringing new land into
production (i.e. the amount of hectare converted per time period),
as reflected in changes in the shadow value of the land over time,
dλ/dt. This rate of conversion is influenced by the relative cost
and benefit of holding on to an additional unit of (converted) land
today. The final equation is the standard transversality condition.

An equation for the optimal level of land use in
each period, N (t), can be derived by differentiating
the first-order condition pNqX = w with respect to
time, and assuming dL/dt = 0. 4 Substituting this
expression for dN/dt in (2) and rearranging
wqXX ˙
1
n(L) +
X ,
a
p(qX )2
qXX ˙
dN
X
0 if X˙
0.
=
d(w/p)
(qX )2

N (t) =

(7)

Expression (7) indicates that the current amount of
land used in agriculture, i.e. the ‘demand’ for land,
depends not just on the rate of land conversion, n(L),
and fallowing, a, but also on the level of agricultural
returns, p/w, the rate of change in the marginal productivity of purchased inputs, qXX /qX , and the rate
of input use over time, dX/dt. The latter is also important in determining the impacts of an increase in
agricultural returns on land use, dN/d(p/w). That is,
if the application of inputs is growing over time, i.e.
dX/dt > 0, then agricultural land use will increase
with a rise in agricultural returns, dN/d(p/w) > 0. If
input use is falling, then dN/d(p/w) < 0.
The above result suggests that the level of input use
may therefore have important implications for the incentive effects of increasing agricultural returns on the
demand for land. For instance, if farming is currently
characterized by low input use, then one would expect
future levels of input application to be higher than current levels, i.e. dX/dt > 0. Under such conditions, the
incentive effects of an increase in agricultural returns
would be to increase land use, i.e. agricultural production is more land extensive. In contrast, if cultivation
already involves a high level of input application, then
4 The latter assumption that the amount of labour allocated to
land conversion does not grow over time helps to simplify the
subsequent analysis and resulting conditions. It is not essential to
the overall outcome. However, the assumption is not unrealistic.
As T is fixed, then it follows that dL/dt = −dLA /dt. Thus if the
labour used for land conversion is not growing over time, then
the labour allocated to agricultural production is not falling. This
is equivalent to assuming that, from time period to time period,
the household allocates essentially the same amount of labour for
routine production tasks, such as weeding, planting, harvesting,
etc., and also has roughly the same amount of remaining labour
‘left over’ to bring new land into cultivation. Of course, the optimal
allocation of labour requires that, at any time t, the household
allocates labour at the margin between the two tasks, according
to the first-order conditions indicated in the previous note.

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

future levels of input use are unlikely to grow significantly or may even decline, and consequently, land
use will tend not to increase with rising returns to
agriculture, i.e. agricultural production is more land
intensive. Thus whether price incentive effects lead to
more land conversion to agriculture will in turn be influenced by whether rural households depend mainly
on land or purchased inputs to expand production.
This outcome illustrates a common problem identified in the rural poverty and resource degradation
literature. Namely, poor rural households often have
limited access to credit and purchased inputs, and
such constraints may exacerbate rural resource degradation. For example, Reardon et al. (1999) use the
term ‘capital-deficient intensification’ to describe
the process whereby a farmer depends inordinately
on labour — unassisted by improved technologies
— to increase productivity. This involves cropping
more densely, weeding and harvesting assiduously,
and so forth. Over time, this type of intensification is ‘unsustainable’ as it depletes soil nutrients
and cannot be sustained without shifting toward
‘capital-led’ investments such as inorganic fertilizers. Of course, the alternative to such investments is
to bring new land into cultivation, which is the link
to forest and marginal land conversion described in
this paper. Although Reardon et al. (1999) suggest
that ‘capital-deficient intensification’ is widespread
particularly in Africa, it is clear that such low input
agricultural production is characteristic of many poor
rural smallholders throughout the developing world
(Barbier, 1997).

3. Implications for economic liberalization and
land expansion
The above insights into the relationships between
changing agricultural returns, price incentive effects
and land use suggest that economic liberalization policies, through influencing both agricultural input and
output prices, may have important implications for the
rural resource impacts of agricultural development. If
such reforms increase the agricultural returns faced by
farmers, the consequences in terms of greater land use
may be more pronounced for low input as opposed to
high input agriculture.

303

However, such a stylized model of land use choice
is necessarily very simplistic, and will undoubtedly
fail to capture some of the key transmission processes
through which economic liberalization and other price
shocks may affect the intensification and extensification decisions of poor farmers. For example, an important aspect missing from the model is the allocation of
household labour to off-farm work. As Reardon and
Barrett (1999) have argued, labour freed from agricultural production on existing lands will generally not
be allocated to bringing more land into cultivation if
off-farm work pays more than farm work at the margin, or if non-agricultural income is weakly covariate with farm income, making labour diversification
across sectors an appealing strategy for smoothing income in a highly stochastic environment. Second, the
model assumes a representative household, yet there
may be instances where structural heterogeneity across
households may be great and significantly influence
the impact of policy reforms. For example, De Janvry
et al. (1995) concluded that the agricultural households
most at risk from the impacts of the NAFTA reforms
in Mexico are non-diversified maize sellers who depend heavily on the price of maize for their welfare.
In addition, the exogenous effects of price shocks are
not as self-evident as implied by the above model. Evidence from Ghana of the effects of economy-wide
reforms on the price-adjustment process in local markets suggests that price responsiveness and volatility
in outlying markets will depend on their degree of interdependence with the main central markets in which
the price reforms are initiated (Badiane and Shively,
1998). Finally, the model abstracts from the choice of
product mixes and technology available to the farming household. As Reardon et al. (1999) have pointed
out, this choice set available to the household is one
of the key factors influencing its abilities to respond to
the economic incentives arising out of policy reforms.
Incorporating all these possible influences on would
of course require a much broader conceptual model
of rural resource household behaviour than the one
adopted here (see, e.g., Reardon and Vosti, 1995; Reardon et al., 1999). Nevertheless, by focussing on how
input use and price incentive effects may affect land
conversion by households, the above model does illustrate an important transmission process identified in
the literature. To demonstrate further the importance
of this process, the remainder of the paper discusses

304

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

recent empirical evidence of the influence of price
shocks on the land expansion decisions of agricultural
households.
Although Eq. (7) provides useful insights into how
input use and price impacts influence the demand for
land, this equation cannot itself be estimated empirically. However, solution of the first-order conditions
of the above model should also yield the derived demand for agricultural land use as a function of input and output prices and the other parameters of the
model. 5 For example, if the model was extended to,
say, two competing land-using activities, then the derived demand for land by one activity would now be
influenced by the agricultural returns of that activity,
by the returns of the competing activity and by any
exogenous factors affecting this demand. Specifically,
the demand for land for use in agricultural activity i
would be
N i = N i (P i , W i , P j , W j , Z)
Pi Pj
,
,Z ,
Ni = Ni
Wi Wj

or
(8)

where Ni is the demand for land by agricultural activity i, Pi the price of output produced by that activity
and Wi the price of inputs used by that activity, Pj the
price of output of the competing agricultural activity
j and Wj the price of inputs used by that activity. The
variable Z represents exogenous factors that may also
influence the demand for land, such as population,
income per capita, roads and specific government programmes and subsidies. The latter factors are important to include in any demand for land estimation. For
example, as noted in Section 1, it is through these effects that the ‘indirect’ impacts of trade liberalization
and economy-wide reforms on labour ‘displacement’,
economic growth and targeted public investments
may influence land expansion in agriculture.
The remainder of this paper is concerned with specific applications of Eq. (8) to estimate land expansion
in developing countries, to illustrate the potential direct and indirect impacts of economic liberalization
on this expansion. The first case study is for Mexico,
5 Benhin and Barbier (1998) show how this is done with a
similar model involving competing land using activities, and then
estimate specific forms of the resulting demand relationships to
determine the influence of prices and other exogenous factors. A
similar approach can be applied to the model of this paper.

and is based on the analysis by Barbier and Burgess
(1996), who estimate the demand for planted agricultural area for the period 1970–1985 leading up to the
economy-wide and maize sector liberalization reforms
implemented as part of the NAFTA. The estimated results for agricultural land expansion serve as the basis
of discussing how the NAFTA reforms may influence this relationship, through the ‘direct’ impacts on
prices and returns and the ‘indirect’ impacts of population displacement and other economic factors. The
second case study is for Ghana, and is based largely
on the analysis by Benhin and Barbier (1998), who
employ a piecewise linear regression to capture the effects of structural adjustment policies on the demand
for maize and cocoa land over the 1965–1995 period.

4. A case study of Mexico
Current estimates of the rate of deforestation in
Mexico range from 0.4 to 1.5 million ha per year. However, all estimates suggest that deforestation is much
higher in the tropical than temperate areas (Masera
et al., 1992). A major cause of this deforestation has
been the increase in land under rainfed agricultural
production. Road building and timber extraction may
also have contributed through ‘opening up’ new areas
of forest for encroachment by other activities (Barbier
et al., 1993). 6 Rural poverty also appears to be a significant factor in explaining land use change across
Mexico (Deininger and Minten, 1999). Approximately
70% of the land in Mexico is owned by ejidos (communal landowners), 25% is owned by individuals and
5% by Amerindian communities (World Bank, 1989).
Barbier and Burgess (1996) have employed panel
analysis to estimate a relationship similar to Eq. (8)
above for agricultural planted area at the state level in
Mexico over 1970–1985 to determine the main factors affecting forestland conversion in the pre-NAFTA
period in Mexico. The estimated relationship was
6 Rapid expansion of livestock production and the demand for
pastureland have contributed substantially to tropical forest loss.
In some areas, poorly managed timber extraction and forest fires
have led to degradation and loss of forests (Barbier et al., 1993).
The study by Barbier and Burgess (1996) also includes an analysis of the expansion in livestock numbers. However, due to space
considerations, the latter analysis is not discussed here. The interested reader is referred to the original study.

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

then used by Barbier and Burgess to examine the
effects on deforestation of economy-wide reforms
implemented during the post-NAFTA period. The results of the analysis showed that maize and fertilizer
prices appear to have been the main influences on the
expansion of planted area. For example, a 10% increase in the maize–fertilizer price ratio would cause
a 3.2% increase in agricultural area planted. Population growth also affected agricultural activities.
Thus the estimated relationship indicated that, prior
to the NAFTA reforms, the comparative returns to
agricultural production in Mexico had a major impact
on agricultural land expansion activities, and thus on
overall forest conversion. Following the insights of
the theoretical model, this suggests that the majority
of agricultural production in Mexico was essentially
low input and extensive in land use, which conforms
to the general impression of ejido-based crop cultivation by the majority of rural smallholders in Mexico
(World Bank, 1989; Masera et al., 1992; Barbier et al.,
1993).
These estimated relationships were used by Barbier
and Burgess (1996) to examine the price incentive
effects on land expansion of economic liberalization reforms in Mexico resulting from NAFTA. Of
particular interest to this paper are the maize sector
reforms that affect the maize–fertilizer price ratio
faced by farmers. It was estimated that, due to the
Government of Mexico’s policy of supporting the
rural producer price well above the world price of
maize, complete liberalization of the maize market
would cause the price to fall considerably, possibly as much as 50% (Levy and van Wijnbergen,
1992a). The price elasticities estimated by Barbier
and Burgess indicate that a 10–50% drop in real maize
prices should cause a 3–16% decrease in agricultural
planted area. Over the period 1989–1991 Mexico
also reduced substantially its subsidies in fertilizer.
For example, country-level real prices for urea, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulphate increased
by 58, 74 and 60%, respectively. As a result, the
price of fertilizer to farmers rose sharply. The elasticities estimated by Barbier and Burgess suggest that
fertilizer price increases of around 50–70% should
cause agricultural planted area to decrease by around
10–13%.
The potential impacts of these maize sector reforms
on the expansion of planted area and livestock num-

305

bers are good examples of the ‘first-order’, or direct, effects of changes in pricing on the incentives
for frontier expansion and forest conversion by rural households. However, there are also likely to be
some ‘second-order’, or indirect, effects resulting from
economy-wide and sectoral reforms that may produce
opposite incentive effects, potentially even outweighing the first-order impacts. In particular, rural migration to forested areas may increase as a result of the
impacts of economic reform on the returns and value
of existing agricultural land.
For example, as a result of all of the liberalization
reforms and structural changes undertaken recently,
Mexico is expected to undergo a long transition to
sustained economic growth accompanied by substantial return migration to rural areas (Levy and van Wijnbergen, 1992b). The positive inducement to convert
forestland, based on increases in the rural labour force
and falling rural wages, may outweigh the incentives
to reduce agricultural expansion due to increasing real
GDP per capita or a falling maize–fertilizer price ratio (Barbier and Burgess, 1996). The author’s overall
findings are that the pursuit of an open development
strategy combining high economic growth and liberalization appears to mitigate agricultural area expansion
more than reliance on liberalization alone. However,
if Mexico is subject to substantial return migration to
rural areas and undergoes a long transition to sustained
economic growth, then increases in the labour force
and falling rural wages may more significantly induce
greater deforestation. Thus the ability of the Mexican
economy and rural labour market to adapt to an open
development strategy may also be a key determinant
of the overall impacts on deforestation of trade liberalization and agroindustrialization.
The maize sector reforms are also likely to impact
on land conversion indirectly through affecting the
supply of labour, the value of land holdings, and the
distributional impacts of welfare changes on different
income groups. For example, as noted above, the effect of the substantial reduction in the producer price
of maize in Mexico as a result of market liberalization is expected to lead to a reduction in output and
thus planted area. This may also provoke a large fall in
land values for rainfed land to nearly one-quarter that
of irrigated land, thereby making subsistence farmers, rainfed farmers who are net sellers of maize, and
landless rural workers worse off (Levy and van Wijn-

306

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

bergen, 1992a). 7 Although subsistence farmers will
benefit from lower consumer prices, they will be doubly affected by the loss in value of their rainfed land
and in employment opportunities as day labourers. The
overall lack of employment and income opportunities
could induce rural workers and subsistence farmers to
migrate towards frontier forest areas, or to convert remaining forestland that is available to them locally.
These ‘second-order’ effects of trade liberalization on
deforestation could outweigh the initial impacts of the
reduction in the maize–fertilizer price ratio on planted
agricultural area (Barbier and Burgess, 1996).
An investment programme in land improvements
to increase the productivity of rainfed land could potentially mitigate the negative distributional implications of NAFTA on the maize subsector (Levy and
van Wijnbergen, 1992b; Barbier and Burgess, 1996).
Such a programme could involve investments not only
in irrigation infrastructure for 1.1 million ha of rainfed land but also in drainage, land levelling, ditch
clearing and soil conservation. The distributional impacts of maize liberalization in Mexico are particularly reduced if the land improvement programme
is combined with greater access by Mexican farmers
to the US fruit and vegetable market (Levy and van
Wijnbergen, 1992b). Consequently, expansion of rural farm employment opportunities on existing agricultural land, or off-farm employment opportunities
generally, could be an important mitigating factor in
reducing deforestation. This suggests that a land improvement investment programme for existing rainfed
farmers, particularly in States and regions prone to
high deforestation rates, could provide indirect incentives for controlling deforestation by increasing the
demand for rural labour.
7 The evidence presented by De Janvry et al. (1995) suggests
that the agricultural households most at risk from the impacts of
the NAFTA reforms in Mexico are nondiversified maize sellers
who depend heavily on the price of maize for their welfare. At
the time of the reforms, maize accounted for over half the crop
area harvested in Mexico and employs approximately one-third
of rural workers (World Bank, 1989). In 1989, out of a total
production of 12.8 million t, 8.8 million t were produced by rainfed
farmers, and rural own consumption accounted for 3.6 million t.
At most only 15% of all producers were net sellers, consisting of
250 000 large-scale producers on irrigated land and 80 000 rainfed
farmers. The remaining 1.92 million producers were subsistence
maize farmers located on rainfed lands (Levy and van Wijnbergen,
1992a).

5. A case study of Ghana
The annual rate of deforestation in Ghana has remained fairly constant in recent years, around 1.3%
over 1990–1995 (FAO, 1997). 8 The most important
causes of forest loss have been unrestricted logging
and land conversion for farming (ITTO, 1993). The
main problem has been the opening up and conversion
of marginal forested lands for crop cultivation. Expansion of agricultural land is currently estimated at a
rate of 2.5% annually (Benhin and Barbier, 1998). The
productivity of land and labour in agriculture is very
low due largely to the extensive use of traditional technology and methods of cultivation, and in the absence
of intensive production methods, increasing cultivated
area is the main driving force in boosting the production of tree crops, such as cocoa, and food crops, such
as maize.
Since 1983, Ghana has undertaken a series of comprehensive macroeconomic and structural adjustment
reforms aimed at reversing the economic decline of
previous decades. Under the Structural Adjustment
Programme (SAP), improved prices for cocoa and
maize and improved credit facilities have been an incentive to expand production (ISSER, 1992). In addition, subsidies have been removed on inputs to cocoa
production such as insecticides, and on key fertilizers in maize farming such as ammonium sulphates. A
critical issue is how these price impacts of the SAP
have affected the expansion of agricultural land and
thus deforestation. To examine these effects, Benhin
and Barbier (1998) have analysed the influence of
the economy-wide reforms on the demand for cocoa
and maize land over the 1965–1995 period. By using
piecewise linear regressions, the authors were also able
to differentiate the price effects in the pre-adjustment
versus the post-adjustment period, through estimating
equations similar to Eq. (8) above.
The analysis indicated that the price of maize was
not an important factor in maize farmers’ demand
for land during the pre-adjustment period, and any
8 The forest reserves of Ghana now contain most of the country’s
remaining tropical moist forest, most of which exist in isolated
fragments. The total area of forest reserves is 2.6 million ha, which
comprise 11% of total land area. In contrast, unreserved forests
comprise only 500 000 ha. Annual crops and tree crops account
for 1.2 and 1.7 million ha, respectively.

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

increases in the price of ammonium sulphate fertilizers actually led to greater land expansion. 9 However,
for the post-adjustment period, a 1% increase in the
lagged price of maize led to a 0.23% increase in
the demand for maize land in the current year. With
the removal of guaranteed or controlled prices under the adjustment programme, the price of maize
became more market-determined, and thus a significant consideration in maize land decision making in
this era. Even though input prices have increased in
the post-adjustment period with the removal of subsidies on farm inputs such as ammonium sulphate,
the increased availability of the fertilizer to farmers
and the relative higher returns to maize production,
as compared to the pre-adjustment period, has meant
that maize farmers have started to increase their
fertilizer use. Thus fertilizer and land have become
complements in the post-adjustment period, and a 1%
increase in the price of ammonium sulphate was estimated to cause a 0.05% fall in the demand for maize
land. Nevertheless, input use is still relatively low
for most maize subsistence farmers in Ghana, and so
increased production is still largely low input and dependent on land expansion. Finally, a 1% increase in
population density led to a 1.2% increase in harvested
maize land in both the pre- and post-adjustment periods. This suggests that population increases in Ghana
lead to increasing demand for maize and therefore
maize land. This is not surprising given the importance of maize as a food crop in Ghana. It also
provides some evidence that any ‘displacement’ of
labour due to globalization and agroindustrialization
in Ghana could lead to greater maize land expansion,
if this displaced labour is absorbed through increased
subsistence maize production.

9 Benhin and Barbier (1998) argue that the lack of a price effect
on land expansion was expected, as the relatively low and stagnant
guaranteed price paid to farmers in the pre-adjustment era offered
little incentive for farmers to expand production. Moreover, the
poor storage facilities and the government’s inability to purchase
all maize produce at the guaranteed price meant that any excess
supply of maize was a cost to the farmer, who had to dispose
of it at a relatively lower price in the open market. The results
also indicate that land and fertilizers were substitute inputs in the
pre-adjustment period. Given the poor returns to maize during this
era, maize farmers could not afford higher prices for fertilizer and
therefore tended to substitute land for fertilizer in production as
the price of this input rose.

307

Overall, and returning to the insights of the theoretical model of this paper, the above price effects suggest that maize production in Ghana is essentially still
low input and extensive in land use. This is expected,
as Reardon et al. (1999) suggest that ‘capital-deficient
intensification’ is widespread, particularly for food
crop production, across Africa. Thus there is evidence
that the increasing returns to maize production accompanying the economy-wide reforms in Ghana may
have resulted in greater land expansion and deforestation. Also, the reforms may lead to an ‘indirect’ deforestation impact if they lead to a larger rural population
dependent on subsistence maize production.
Because their analysis of forest loss indicated that
maize land expansion was not significantly correlated
with deforestation in Ghana over the 1965–1995 period, Benhin and Barbier were unable to estimate explicitly the impacts of the above maize price changes
on forest loss. 10 However, their deforestation analysis did indicate that forest loss was highly correlated
with cocoa land expansion. Because of the latter result, the authors were therefore able to estimate the
effects of price changes over the 1965–1995 period
on cocoa land expansion, and then calculate how
these price changes in turn affected deforestation. The
resulting elasticity estimates indicate strongly that either a rise in the producer price of cocoa or a fall in
input prices (represented by the price of insecticide)
leads to greater forest loss. Thus, cocoa production in
Ghana has also tended to be low input and extensive
in land use. The results also conform to the theoretical insights of Eq. (6). That is, over the 1965–1995
period, cocoa land expansion was generally increas10 The lack of evidence of a direct causal relationship between
maize land expansion and deforestation in Ghana over 1965–1995
was somewhat surprising. However, one possible explanation is that
the industrial roundwood explanatory variable in the deforestation
analysis might have captured much of the effects of changes in
maize land on forest loss. There is substantial evidence that logging
increases the expansion of agricultural activity in the tropical forest
area by providing access to previously inaccessible areas. Amelung
and Diehl (1992) found that more than 70% of the primary forest
areas brought under cultivation are first degraded by commercial
logging. Deforestation rates due to agricultural conversion are
reported to be eight times greater in logged-over forests than
undisturbed forests (Benhin and Barbier, 1998). Barbier (1994)
also reports that in many African countries, around half of the
area that is initially logged is subsequently deforested, while there
is little if any deforestation of previously unlogged forestlands.

308

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

ing, and thus forest loss occurring (i.e. dN/dt > 0),
and any increase in the returns to cocoa led to a more
rapid rates of land expansion and forest loss.
However, there is considerable difference in the
magnitude of the price effects in the pre- and
post-adjustment periods. Before the SAP, a 10% rise
in the rate of change in the producer price of cocoa
led to about 0.03% increase in forest loss, whereas the
same level of an increase in the post-adjustment period
would yield a 0.12% rise in forest loss. It is possible
that, because of the rapid rise in producer prices in the
post-adjustment period, the rate of impact was less
strong than in the pre-adjustment period, when producer prices were kept artificially low. Also, there is
evidence that during the SAP farmers have tended to
invest in existing cocoa lands because of expectations
of higher prices, suggesting that cocoa farmers have
at least shifted partially from converting forests to
investing in existing cocoa land in response to rising
output prices. Similarly, in the pre-adjustment period
a 10% increase in the price of insecticides led to a
0.4% fall in the rate of forest loss, whereas during the
SAP era, the same level of increase in the price of insecticides produces a 0.004% fall in the rate of forest
loss. The high level of subsidies for insecticide use in
the pre-SAP era may have encouraged more insecticide use for cocoa production, including facilitating
bringing new land into cultivation, and any increase in
the price of insecticide would have had a large impact
on overall returns, thus reducing the rates of cocoa
land expansion and deforestation. Because of the removal of subsidies and the rise in input prices, cocoa
farmers may have been using much less insecticide
for most of the SAP era, and an increase in the price
of insecticide might have had much less of an impact
on overall cocoa farm returns and deforestation.
Finally, the above impacts of the SAP on the demand for agricultural land in Ghana are aggregated. As
agriculture in Ghana is highly regionalized and very
diverse, economic liberalization may have different
impacts on the traditional, regional agricultural sectors
of Ghana. One such sector is the predominantly shifting cultivation agricultural systems of Western Ghana.
López (1997) has been able to estimate the key determinants of both agricultural output and the demand for
cultivated land by individual farming households in
this region. First, it was estimated that biomass, measured in terms of the proportion of land under forest

cover, contributes 15–20% of the value of agricultural
output in the bush-fallow systems. Second, a decrease
in the wage rate or an increase in agricultural prices
faced by farmers in Western Ghana will lead to an
increase in the area of land that they will cultivate.
Through a general equilibrium model, López (1997) is
able to confirm that the overall price impacts of trade
liberalization will on an average cause a 2.5–4.4% decline in biomass in Western Ghana as a result of farmers increasing cultivated area. Thus although reducing
trade distortions may increase overall income in the
national economy, in Western Ghana poor smallholders dependent on low input and extensive bush-fallow
cropping systems could lose through greater land conversion and degradation. 11

6. Conclusion
This paper has explored the likely effects of
economy-wide reforms leading to greater globalization in developing countries on rural resource degradation. The principal issue of concern has been the
expansion of agricultural land and forest conversion.
Two potential impacts of economic liberalization on
this process have been identified. First, if such reforms
aim to improve the productivity and export-orientation
of agriculture, they will do so through influencing
both agricultural input and output prices, thus affecting the returns faced by farmers. Any resulting
increase in these returns may therefore induce rural
households to convert more forestland to agricultural production. Second, economy-wide reforms and
accompanying agroindustrialization may also affect
11 One caveat to the analysis by L´
opez is that it is often very
difficult to predict how economy-wide price reforms in Ghana,
which are targeted mainly on centralized agricultural markets, will
affect more localized, outlying markets such as those in Western
Ghana. A recent study in Ghana of the effects of economy-wide
reforms on the price-adjustment process in local markets suggests
that price responsiveness and volatility in outlying markets will
depend on their degree of interdependence with the main central
markets in which the price reforms are initiated (Badiane and
Shively, 1998). The implication is that the price transmission
process from central to outlying markets that occurs after, e.g.,
trade liberalization may not lead to the anticipated changes in
local prices, thus making it difficult to predict the impacts of an
economy-wide reform on the land management decisions of poor
smallholders in remote and marginal farming areas.

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

land conversion indirectly through affecting the supply of rural labour and the welfare of different income
groups. If this leads to increased ‘displacement’ of
households, who are then absorbed in subsistence
agricultural sectors, then greater land degradation
and conversion may also result. Most importantly, if
agricultural production is characterized by low input
and extensive land use, then higher returns are likely
to increase the demand for more land to be brought
under cultivation. As this type of production typifies
much of rural smallholder farming in the developing
world (Barbier, 1997; Reardon et al., 1999), then it is
possible that any improved agricultural returns from
increased globalization and agroindustrialization may
result in greater, rather than less, pressures on rural
resource degradation — at least over the short and
medium term while agricultural development makes
the transition from low input and extensive to more
high input and intensive use of land production.
Evidence of the direct and indirect impacts of economic liberalization on land use and forest conversion
were also explored through examining case study evidence from Mexico and Ghana. Up to the implementation of the reforms, agriculture in both Mexico and
Ghana was largely low input and extensive in its use
of land. Consequently, both case studies indicate that
both direct and indirect rural resource degradation effects can unintentionally result from structural adjustment and trade liberalization policies. However, the
empirical evidence also suggests that any increased
pressures on land degradation and conversion arising
from liberalizing reforms can be mitigated somewhat,
provided that greater investments and efforts are targeted at improving the input use and productivity of
existing agricultural areas. The key is again ensuring a transition in these areas to greater input and
land-intensive production. Once such a transition is
made, farmers may begin responding to increased agricultural returns not by expanding cultivated area but
by investing in greater land improvements and more
sustainable production. Moreover, as the Mexico case
study in particular has shown, increased public and
private investments in existing farming areas can create employment opportunities and improve the welfare
of various rural income groups, including the landless
and near-landless. The result may be to reduce any
‘second-order’ impacts of globalization and agroindustrialization on rural resource degradation.

309

Although the analysis of the paper has focussed on
the price shocks arising from economic liberalization
and policy reforms, the results should hold generally for any widespread changes in the agricultural
sector of developing economies. That is, other rapid
processes of change associated with globalization
and agroindustrialization, such as the emergence or
reorganization of processing industries, loss of traditional export markets, competition from imported
substitutes and greater exposure to global market
fluctuations, may also influence significantly the returns faced by rural producers, thus affecting their
land use decisions. As this paper has pointed out, the
direct or ‘first-order’ impacts on land degradation are
likely to depend on whether production by agricultural households is characterized by low input and
extensive land use, or whether the agricultural sector
has already made the transition to more high input
and intensive use. However, equally important are the
‘second-order’ effects, which usually occur through
affecting the supply of labour, the value of land holdings, and the distributional impacts of welfare changes
on different income groups.

Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to the comments and assistance provided by Chris Barrett, Susmita Dasgupta,
Tom Reardon and Scott Swinton, as well as the four
referees. The usual caveats apply, however.

References
Amelung, T., Diehl, M., 1992. Deforestation of tropical rainforests:
economic causes and impact on development. Kieler Studien
241. Tubingen, Mohr, Germany.
Badiane, O., Shively, G.E., 1998. Spatial integration, transport
costs, and the response of local prices to policy changes in
Ghana. J. Dev. Econ. 56, 411–431.
Barbier, E.B., 1994. The environmental effect of trade in the
forestry sector. In: OECD, The Environmental Effects of
Trade. Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), Paris.
Barbier, E.B., 1997. The economic determinants of land
degradation in developing countries. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Ser.
B 352, 891–899.
Barbier, E.B., Burgess, J.C., 1996. Economic analysis of
deforestation in Mexico. Environ. Dev. Econ. 1 (2), 203–240.

310

E.B. Barbier / Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 299–310

Barbier, E.B., Burgess, J.C., 1997. The economics of tropical
forestland use options. Land Econ. 73 (2), 174–195.
Barbier, E.B., Burgess, J.C., Collins, M., Clancy, C., 1993.
Mexico — forestry and conservation sector review sub-study of
economic issues for implementation of the new forestry policy.
Latin American and the Caribbean Country Department, The
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Benhin, J.K., Barbier, E.B., 1998. The effects of the structural
adjustment programme on deforestation in Ghana. In:
Paper presented at the World Congress of Environmental
and Resource Economists, Venice, Italy, June 25–27.
http://www.worldcongress.feem.it/gnee/libr.html.
Cropper, M., Griffiths, C., Mani, M., 1999. Roads, population
pressures, and deforestation in Thailand, 1976–1989. Land
Econ. 75 (1), 58–73.
Deininger, K.W., Minten, B., 1999. Poverty, policies and
deforestation: the case of Mexico. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change
47 (2), 313–344.
De Janvry, A., Sadoulet, E., Gordillo de Anda, G., 1995. NAFTA
and Mexico’s maize producers. World Dev. 23 (8), 1349–1362.
FAO, 1997. State of the World’s Forests 1997. Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
ISSER, 1992. The state of the Ghanaian economy in 1991. ISSER,
University of Ghana, Legon.
ITTO, 1993. Study of incentives for the sustainable management
of the tropical high forest of Ghana. A Report Prepared by the
International Institute for Environment and Development and
the Forestry Department of Ghana for the ITTO. International
Tropical Timber Organization, Yokohama.
Jaeger, W.K., 1992. The effects of economic policies on African
agriculture. World Bank Discussion Papers. African Technical
Department Series No. 147. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kahn, M.S., 1987. A macroeconomic adjustment in developing
countries: a policy perspective. World Bank Res. Observer 2 (1),
23–42.
Lal, D., Rajapatirana, S., 1987. Foreign trade regimes and
economic growth in developing countries. World Bank Res.
Observer 2 (2), 189–218.
Levy, S., van Wijnbergen, S., 1992a. Maize and the free trade
agreement between Mexico and the United States. World Bank
Econ. Rev. 6 (3), 481–502.
Levy, S., van Wijnbergen, S., 1992b. Transition problems in
economic reform: agriculture in the Mexico–US free trade
agreement. Policy Research Working Paper No. 967. The World
Bank, Washington, DC.
López, R., 1997. Environmental externalities in traditional
agriculture and the impact of trade liberalization: the case of
Ghana. J. Dev. Econ. 53, 17–39.

López, R., 1998. Agricultural intensification, common property
resources and the farm-household. Environ. Resour. Econ.
11 (3–4), 443–458.
Mamingi, N., Chomitz, K.M., Gray, D.A., Lambin, E., 1996.
Spatial patterns of deforestation in Cameroon and Zaire.
Poverty–Growth–Environment Working Paper No. 8. The World
Bank, Washington, DC.
Masera, O., Ordóñez, M., Dirzo, R., 1992. Carbon Emissions
and Sequestration in the Forests: Case Studies from Seven
Developing Countries. Vol. 4: Mexico. Climate Change
Division, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC.
Munasinghe, M., Cruz, W., 1995. Economy-wide policies and
the environment: lessons from experience. World Bank
Environment Paper No. 10. The World Bank, Washington,
DC.
Panayotou, T., Sungsuwan, S., 1994. An econometric analysis
of the census of tropical deforestation: the case of northeast
Thailand. In: Brown, K., Pearce, D.W. (Eds.). The Census
of Tropical Deforestation. University College, London Press,
London.
Reardon, T., Barrett, C.B., 1999. The ambiguous effects of
policy reforms on sustainable agricultural intensification in
Africa: renewed threats to fragile margins? In: Angelsen, A.,
Kaimowitz, D. (Eds.), Agricultural Technologies and Tropical
Deforestation. CABI, Wallingford, UK.
Reardon, T., Vosti, S., 1995. Links between rural poverty and
the environment in developing countries: asset categories and
investment poverty. World Dev. 23 (9), 1495–1506.
Reardon, T., Barrett, C.B., Kelly, V., Savadogo, K., 1999. Policy
reforms and sustainable agricultural intensification in Africa.
Dev. Policy Rev. 17, 293–313.
Reed, D. (Ed.), 1992. Structural Adjustment and the Environment.
Earthscan Publications, London.
Schneider, R.R., 1994. Government and the economy on the
Amazon frontier. Regional Studies Program Report No. 34.
Latin America and the Caribbean Technical Department, The
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Singh, I., Squire, L., Strauss, J. (Eds.), 1986. Agricultural
Household Models: Extensions, Applications and Policy. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Southgate, D., 1994. Tropical deforestation and agricultural
development in Latin America. In: Brown, K., Pearce, D.W.
(Eds.), The Causes of Tropical Deforestation. University
College London Press, London.
Stiglitz, J.E., 1987. Some theoretical aspects of agricultural
policies. World Bank Res. Observer 2 (1), 43–60.
World Bank, 1989. Mexico — agricultural sector report. The World
Bank, Washington, DC.

