183

Agricultural Economics, 9 (1993) 183-201
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam

Analysis of the technical efficiency of state rubber
farms in Vietnam
Tran Vo Hung Son

a,

Tim Coelli

b

and Euan Fleming

c

School of Economics, Hochiminh University, Hochiminh City, VietNam
b Department of Econometrics and c Department of Agricultural Economics and Business
Management, University of New England, Armidale, N.S. W, Australia
a

(Accepted 18 November 1992)

ABSTRACT
This study entails an analysis of the technical efficiency of natural rubber production by
state farms in Vietnam. A time-varying stochastic frontier production function model for
unbalanced data is estimated for 33 farms. Individual farm technical efficiencies are
reported and discussed. One of the main results concerns the bimodal distribution of
technical efficiency indices. A few farms operate near the production frontier while the bulk
operate well away from the frontier. Some implications are drawn from the results as a
guide to future policy research work in the rubber industry in light of recent moves by the
Vietnamese government towards economic reform.

RESEARCH PROBLEM

In recent years, the Vietnamese government has undertaken considerable economic reforms, and is considering yet further reforms. The agricultural sector is seen as a potentially leading sector in these reforms because
of its important contributions to both employment and output. Existing
organisation structures in agriculture are largely based on socialist tenets of
public ownership of the means of production and reliance for technical aid
on the former USSR and East European countries. Their potential to
contribute to a reformed agricultural sector is coming under increasing
scrutiny.
The rubber industry comprises predominantly state farms at present,
although private owners are being encouraged to increase their area of
Correspondence to: Euan Fleming, Department of Agricultural Economics and Business
Management, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W. 2351, Australia.
0169-5150j93j$06.00 © 1993- Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

184

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

plantings under current reform plans. The state-owned rubber companies
have been the beneficiary of funds and technical assistance from Eastern
Europe since Vietnamese reunification.
The problem is whether the farms operated by these state-owned companies operate at a level of technical efficiency sufficient to justify their
future survival as an organisational form in the rubber industry. Given the
importance of the rubber industry to the agricultural sector and the
economy as a whole, this is a critical issue. If their level of technical
efficiency is low, it would suggest that agricultural policy makers might
need to consider whether greater technical efficiency can be achieved by
restructuring the industry or increasing the amount of rubber production
under private ownership, either as plantations or smallholdings.
It is difficult to provide an unequivocal answer to this issue without a
comparison of both technical and allocative efficiency of farms in the
Vietnamese rubber industry with those in rubber industries elsewhere in
the world. However, a study of the technical efficiency of state rubber
farms in Vietnam should at least give an idea of how many such farms are
operating near the frontier of technically efficient production under prevailing conditions in Vietnam. Further, it should also be possible to
compare the attributes of those firms operating near the frontier with those
of farms operating far from this frontier.
GOALS AND HYPOTHESES

The general research goal in this study is to measure and compare the
technical efficiency of state rubber farms in Vietnam. The comparison of
technical efficiency takes three forms:
(a) between four selected state-owned rubber companies (Dong-Nai,
Dong-Phu, Dau-Tieng and Tay-Ninh);
(b) specifically, between Dong-Nai Rubber Company, which follows the
French management style and has nine red soil farms (considered more
productive) and six grey soil farms, and the other three companies,
which are in grey soil region and apply an indigenous management style
more in the traditional state farm mode; and
(c) between farms owned by these selected rubber companies in the red
and grey soil regions.
Thirty-four farms owned by these four rubber companies are considered.
Five hypotheses are tested:
(1) There is no difference in technical efficiency between farms within and
between the rubber companies under investigation.
(2) There is no difference in mean technical efficiency between farms from
the different companies.

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

185

(3) There is no difference in mean technical efficiency between farms in
red and grey soil regions.
(4) There is no difference in mean technical efficiency between farms of
Dong-Nai Rubber Company and other companies.
In addition, a fifth hypothesis is tested, to determine whether a stochastic
frontier production is preferred to ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation.
BACKGROUND TO THE RUBBER INDUSTRY IN VIETNAM

The agricultural sector produces nearly half of the gross domestic
product of Vietnam and employs around two-thirds of its labour force.
Natural rubber has been the major cash crop, and has been continuously
exported over the past 30 years. Vietnam currently ranks ninth in the world
production of natural rubber and seventh in area of land under rubber
cultivation.
Natural rubber can be extracted from numerous trees or plants. However, thus far, only Hevea brasiliensis has been used for commercial
production anywhere in the world. Hevea brasiliensis is a tree from which
rubber may be obtained by tapping (i.e., the controlled wounding of the
bark of the trunk).
Organisational structure

The natural rubber sector has three components:
(a) state farms belonging to rubber companies which are under the control
of the Vietnam Rubber Corporation (VNRC);
(b) state farms under the control of local rubber companies; and
(c) smallholdings (private ownership).
The smallholdings constitute a small proportion of the total rubber area,
with a total planted area of 10 000 ha in 1989 (Thiet, 1991). According to
the economic reform policies and the Vietnam Rubber Project for the year
2000 (VNRC, 1991), private owners will be encouraged to increase this
area of plantings by 90 000 ha, and occupy 20% of the total potential
rubber area.
VNRC owns 87.5% of the total rubber area. It comprises 18 state-owned
rubber companies of which fourteen have been created since 1985, and are
still in the establishment stage with no area of old trees. Eleven are local
rubber companies (at the province or district level) created since 1987 and
hence also still in the establishment stage.
These companies are located in six provinces: Dong-Nai (1), Song-Be (6),
Tay-Ninh (2), Dak-Lak (2), Gialai-Kontum (6), and Thua-Thien (1). Each

186

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

company has a number of farms according to its land size. The largest is
the Dong-Nai Rubber Company, which has fifteen farms, while the TayNinh Rubber Company has only three farms. Besides owning farms which
are responsible for planting rubber trees and collecting latex, these companies also own one or two factories which process latex into dried rubber.
The company pays salaries and wages to managers and workers and
calculates total revenue, total costs and profit of the company as a whole.
Meanwhile, the farms only calculate their costs incurred in collecting latex
and planting, and try to save input costs while producing maximum output.
The company has a strong degree of control over its farms. It gives awards
to them and provides technical advice on tree planting and latex collection.
The farms are permitted to modify these instructions marginally to suit
their local conditions.
There are also some other industrial rubber firms, located in the city,
which produce rubber products such as gloves and sandals. These firms are
either privately owned, run by local government or under VNRC ownership.
Institutions within VNRC serve all rubber companies in the development of their production. They include a specialised bank for rubber, a
rubber import-export company (Rubximco) and a rubber research institute
(RRIV). Only a small proportion (10%) of rubber production is now
consumed domestically.
Production

Rubber latex is a milk liquid that comes out of the rubber tree. It is
unstable and must be processed soon after collection. In the field, a
quantity of ammonia liquor is added to the tanks containing latex to
prevent coagulation. These tanks are then driven to the factory by trucks or
tractors. A sample of latex in each tank is taken out to weigh, and it is then
put into a small span under fire. This latex becomes a piece of dried rubber
which is weighed again. A conversion factor is drawn from this job. All
latex collected from the field is converted into dried rubber which is
recorded as the standard output of the farm. This is the dependent variable
used in our analysis.
Overall, the quantity of dried rubber output has increased steadily.
However, yield per hectare has not followed a consistent trend. It decreased continuously from 1986 to 1990, then increased slightly in 1990.
The decrease is most probably due to the large areas of new trees coming
into production during this period. The yield in new tapping areas is low
because trees coming to tap are very young; it shouid increase as trees
become more mature. Tapping areas also should continue to increase.

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

187

MODEL FORMULATION

Survey description

A survey was conducted by the senior author during August and September 1991 in three provinces: Dong-Nai, Song-Be, and Tay-Ninh. Of the 34
farms surveyed, fifteen belonged to Dong-Nai Rubber Company, four to
Dong-Phu Rubber Company, eleven to Dau-Tieng Rubber Company, and
three to Tay-Ninh Rubber Company. All are located in three neighbouring
provinces in the south-east region. They are big companies which produced
60% of total rubber production in 1990. Farms of other companies are
smaller and mostly in the establishment stage. With little output, they were
considered unsuitable for estimating technical efficiency.
Details of the survey method and individual company and farm characteristics are provided by Tran (1992, pp. 40-45). A brief coverage of some
pertinent attributes of the companies and their farms follows.
Dong-Nai Rubber Company farms are located 70 km east of Hochiminh
City. Its farm sizes are generally larger than those of other companies. This
company was created and developed by a French company whose owner
left Vietnam in 1975. After the nationalisation of this plantation, all its
previous managers, staff members and workers were retained. Hence, the
French management style has been continuously applied. During the war,
this company suffered less damage than others.
This company is considered the leading rubber producer in Vietnam. It
has a high proportion of skilled labourers and experienced managers and
tapping labourers, and has utilised computerised accounting and record
keeping since the early 1970s. Also, it is the major producer of rubber for
export, supplying almost one-half of total exports in 1990 (Dong-Nai
Rubber Company, 1991). Indeed, in the past, farms from other companies
have usually sent their staff members and workers to Dong-Nai Rubber
Company to learn technology and production management.
Dong-Phu Rubber Company (five farms) and Dau-Tieng Rubber Company (eleven farms) are in Song-Be province which is located 70 km
north-west of Hochiminh City. They were established after 1975 with new
staff and new workers. Within their areas, there are three farms with old
trees which were abandoned due to lack of security before 1975. Tay-Ninh
Rubber Company comprises three farms located in the Tay-Ninh province
which is 70 km south-west of Hochiminh City.
All farms of these three companies are in the grey soil region. Because
they are new companies, with new farms created after the reunification of
Vietnam, the state farm model has been adopted by the managers, most of
whom have come from the north. This model is characterised by a lack of

188

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

experience of staff members in rubber production. Moreover, staff are
accustomed to obeying completely orders from above. Therefore, they
generally lack flexibility in business management. Another feature is a
cumbersome organisational structure with a high proportion of administrative staff members (indirect labour) compared with the total labour of the
farm andjor the company. This proportion is more than 10% compared
with about 3-4% in Dong-Nai Rubber Company.
Selection of variables
In estimating a rubber production function for the 34 farms, panel data
were collected for five consecutive years from 1986 to 1990. Data were
obtained on rubber latex produced in each farm every year (converted to
tonnes of dried rubber). Inputs in the production function tested for
inclusion were area of rubber trees, by number and age; labour, measured
as number of tapping days; chemical fertilizers (urea and potassium);
stimulants; and transportation (measured as litres of gasoline used in latex
collection).
Stochastic frontier production functions
The stochastic frontier production function was independently proposed
by Aigner, Lovell and Schmidt (1977) and Meeusen and Van den Broeck
(1977). This function differs from the traditional (average) production
function in that its disturbance term has two components: one to account
for technical inefficiency and the other to permit random events to affect
production.
This model was viewed as a significant improvement over two alternative
models existing at that time. The first of these alternatives was the
traditional function, which is estimated using least squares and thus only
considers the influence of random errors. Second, deterministic functions,
such as that proposed by Aigner and Chu (1968), use mathematical programming to construct production frontiers. They permit technical inefficiency to affect production but take no account of random effects. The
stochastic frontier allows consideration of both sources of variability in its
disturbance.
Many authors have altered and generalised the original specification of
the stochastic frontier production function. Schmidt (1986), Bauer (1990)
and Battese (1992) provide thorough reviews of this literature, with Battese
(1992) making particular reference to the applications of stochastic frontiers in agricultural economics.

189

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

In this paper, we use the stochastic frontier production function proposed by Battese and Coelli (1992), who followed a model developed by
Aigner et al. (1977). This model is defined for panel data (which need not
be complete) and has an error term which is assumed to be the sum of a
normal random variable and a truncated normal random variable. The
truncated normal random variable, which is assumed to reflect technical
inefficiency, is permitted to have a non-zero mode and be an exponential
function of time. It is defined as follows:
i = 1, ... ,N
t =

(1)

1, ... , T

where ¥; 1 is the production of the ith firm in the tth time period; f( ·) is a
suitable function (in this study, the Cobb-Douglas function); Xu is the
k X 1 vector of input quantities of the ith firm in the tth time period; and
f3 is a vector of unknown parameters. The ll; are assumed to account for
random factors such as luck, weather and measurement error, while the ~
are due to technical inefficiency. A logarithmic transformation provides a
function which is linear in parameters with a normal error term which
immediately lends itself to OLS estimation.
For a Cobb-Douglas function, the equation can be written in logarithmic form as:

i=1,2, ... ,N
t=1,2, ... ,T
T=5
N=34

(2)

where

Eit = ll;l - ~I
The only difference between this frontier production function and the
traditional OLS production function is the presence of the term llr· The
ll;/s are random variables not under the control of the farm and are
assumed to be independent and identically distributed as normal random
variables with mean zero and variance s~. The ~'s are random variables
which are under the control of the ith farm. They are assumed to be
independent and identically distributed non-negative random variables
which are obtained by the truncation at zero of the N(m, s 2 ) distribution.
For the time-varying model, ~~ = ~ exp[ -h(t- T)], where h is an unknown parameter.
Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of this stochastic
frontier model may be obtained using the computer program 'FRONTIER'
(Coelli, 1992). This program uses a grid search followed by an iterative
maximisation process to obtain maximum likelihood estimates. It uses the

190

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

parameterisation of the model suggested by Battese and Carra (1977) to
simplify the grid search. The parameters s~ and s 2 are replaced with:
s2s = s2v + s2
and
G=s 2 /(s~+s 2 )

The parameter G must lie between 0 and 1 and, hence, this range can be
searched to provide a good starting value for an iterative procedure. The
model proposed by Battese and Coelli (1992), which is estimated in this
paper, is a very general model which incorporates many of the specifications used by past authors as special cases. Likelihood ratio tests can be
used to determine whether a less general formulation of this model is
appropriate for these data. A number of restricted forms of the model can
be considered. For example, setting h to be zero provides the time-invariant model set out by Battese, Coelli and Colby (1989). Restricting the
formulation to a full (balanced) panel of data gives the model of Battese
and Coelli (1988). The additional restriction of m equal to zero reduces the
model to model I in Pitt and Lee (1981). A fourth restriction of T = 1
returns the model to the original formulation of Aigner, Lovell and
Schmidt (1977). If all these restrictions except m = 0 are imposed, the
model suggested by Stevenson (1980) results.
MODEL ESTIMATION

Estimation of the stock of rubber trees
One of the most difficult aspects of modelling the production technology
of a perennial crop, such as rubber, is the treatment of the capital input of
tree stock. As mentioned above, the amount of latex produced from a tree
will vary with the age of the tree. Sepien (1978) included a variable 'age of
trees' along with the number of trees in his production function model of
the rubber production of smallholders in Malaysia to account for this
effect. He was able to use this method because most smallholders had trees
of a single age. His approach does not appear practical in our study as each
farm has trees of varying ages, and hence the definitions of a tree age
variable for a particular farm would be difficult.
Instead, we defined a variable 'total weighted trees' which would reflect
the higher production capacity of mature trees relative to the young and
very old trees. To this end, each farm manager was asked to specify the
number of trees being tapped in the following age classes: T 2 = 6 to 12

191

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

years old, T 3 = 13 to 20 years old, T4 = 21 to 30 years old, and T5 = greater
than 30 years old. The total weight of trees variable was then defined as:

for the ith farm in the tth year, where the g's are unknown parameters (or
weights).
Three alternative methods of setting the values of the weights (g 2 , g 3
and g 5 ) were considered, assuming g 4 = 1:
(a) Assume all trees are equally productive, and set g 2 = g 3 = g 5 = 1.
(b) Use experimental estimates of the yield profiles of the two most
popular clones, GT 1 and RRIM 600, as reported by Smit (1984), to
derive values for the weights. The values were calculated as g 2 = 0.45,
g 3 = 0.99 and g 5 = 0.40.
(c) Allow the sample data to determine the weights by estimating a model
in which both the f3's and g's appear as unknown parameters.
The Cobb-Douglas functional form with Hicks-neutral technical change
is assumed in this study. The model in equation (2) may thus expressed as
follows:
ln ~t = f3o

+ /31 ln(gzTzu + g3T3it + T4it + gsTsit)
+ {3 2 ln Lu + {3 3 ln UR it
+ {3 4 ln TRit + f3 5 t + Eu

i = 1, ... '33
t

= 1, ... ,5

(3)

where Lit is labour, measured in days; uRit is kilograms of urea; TRu is
transport, measured in litres of fuel; and all other symbols are as previously
defined. The potassium and stimulant variables were omitted because of
their statistical insignificance in this model.
The model in equation (3) will be linear in parameters under options (a)
and (b), listed above, as they involve fixed values of the g's. Option (c),
however, requires the unrestricted estimation of equation (3), which is not
linear in parameters. The FRONTIER program cannot accommodate a
model which is non-linear in parameters. We therefore used least squares
to estimate this model under options (a) and (b) and used the non-linear
least squares routine in SHAZAM (see White, 1990) to estimate the model
under option (c). As least squares estimation of a stochastic frontier model
provides unbiased estimates of all f3 parameters with the exception of the
intercept term, these estimates should provide a reasonable avenue for
testing between the three alternatives.
The models using the TW T variable defined by options (a) and (b) are
restricted forms of option (c), where the restrictions are upon the values
that the g's may take. These restrictions were tested using an asymptotic
chi-square test.

192

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

Estimation of a stochastic frontier production function
The stochastic frontier production function defined in equation (3)
contains six ,8-parameters and the four additional parameters associated
with the distributions of the v; 1 and [1; 1 random variables. The model is
based on unbalanced panel data with time-varying technical efficiency and
a truncated normal technical efficiency distribution with a non-zero mode.
Estimates of mean and individual technical efficiencies were calculated
according to the expressions presented by Battese and Coelli (1992). An
estimate of technical efficiency was to be calculated for each farm for each
year, and a mean technical efficiency of all farms for each year.
If h is restricted to be zero, technical efficiency is assumed time-invariant. Hence, single estimates of technical efficiency can be calculated for
each firm as well as a single estimate of mean technical efficiency.
The frontier function estimates were used to test five different assumptions about the disturbance terms:
- Model 1.0 assumes all parameters are estimated.
- Model 1.1 assumes that m = 0.
- Model 1.2 assumes that h = 0.
- Model 1.3 assumes that m = h = 0.
- Model 1.4 assumes that G = m = h = 0.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION

Results of the estimated model based on equation (3) are presented in
Table 1. A comparison of alternative specifications of the total weighted
trees variables indicated that the unconstrained model, in which this

TABLE 1
Non-linear least square estimates
Parameter

Coefficient

Standard error

-5.39
0.60
0.26
0.08
0.09
0.02
0.18
0.66
1.14
Adjusted R 2 = 0.936
Log likelihood function= -49.25

0.41
0.08
0.07
0.01
0.05
0.03
0.06
0.37
0.31

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

193

variable was derived from non-linear least squares, is preferred to the two
constrained models. This choice is further supported by the observation
that the unconstrained model has the highest adjusted R 2 and log likelihood values of all three models (see Tran, 1992).
Rejection of the restriction g 2 = g 3 = g 5 = 1 was not unexpected given
that mature trees are more productive than young and very old trees.
Rejection of the second set of weights derived from experimental trials may
be due to the effect of locational factors andjor differences between
experimental and commercial conditions of production.
All estimates with the exception of that of b 0 are unbiased estimates of
the parameters of the frontier model. Estimates of the g's are used to
construct the variable TW Tit to be used as an input in the maximum
likelihood estimations of the frontier model using the program FRONTIER. Thus, we use a two-stage estimation method, with the g 's determined in the first stage and the remaining parameters in the second stage.
Frontier production function analysis
Five models were estimated to enable tests of the different assumptions
about the disturbance terms, listed above. Maximum likelihood estimates
of these five models are presented in Table 2. Tests of hypotheses involving
the parameters of the distributions of the Uit random variables (farm
effects) are obtained by using the generalised likelihood-ratio statistic.
These tests indicate that Model 1.3, with an efficiency distribution that is
half normal (m = 0) and time invariant (h = 0), is preferred.
This model thus rejects the more general truncated-normal distribution
for the firm effects in favour of the simpler half-normal distribution. Such a
result is consistent with results obtained by Battese et al. (1989), but differs
from those obtained by Stevenson (1980) and Battese and Coelli (1988).
This range of results, we believe, provides a strong argument for assuming
the more general specification to begin with, and then allowing the data to
decide whether it is necessary.
The choice of Model 1.3 also involves acceptance of the hypothesis of
time-invariant efficiency. This implies that, on average, the farms are
getting no closer to (nor further away from) the frontier as time progresses
from 1986 to 1990. However, the positive and significant coefficient of the
time trend in the second last column of Table 2 indicates that this frontier
is shifting out each year, thus indicating technical change. Firms are thus,
on average, keeping up with the observed advances in technology.
The total elasticity of this frontier production function is 1.054, slightly
higher than the total output elasticity of 1.03 computed by using OLS. Both
estimates indicate slightly increasing returns to scale. As a comparison, the

194

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

TABLE 2
Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters of the stochastic frontier production
function
Coefficient

f3o

/31
f3z
/33
/34
f3s

szs
G
m

h

Log-likelihood

Model
1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

-5.19
(0.28)
0.74
(0.06)
0.06
(0.07)
0.015
(0.01)
0.27
(0.05)
0.02
(0.02)
0.27
(0.06)
0.89
(0.03)
0.60
(0.21)
0.04
(0.02)
-9.66

-5.10
(0.30)
0.74
(0.06)
0.06
(0.07)
0.015
(0.01)
0.24
(0.05)

-5.25
(0.30)
0.72
(0.07)
0.06
(0.07)
0.014
(0.01)
0.28
(0.05)
0.05
(0.01)
0.29
(0.11)
0.89
(0.04)
0.67
(0.23)
0

-5.16
(0.29)
0.74
(0.07)
0.05
(0.08)
0.014
(0.01)
0.25
(0.05)
0.05
(0.01)
0.64
(0.19)
0.95
(0.02)
0

-5.40
(0.32)
0.60
(0.06)
0.26
(0.07)
0.080
(0.01)
0.09
(0.05)
0.02
(0.02)
0.13

O.Q3

(0.02)
0.54
(0.12)
0.94
(0.01)
0
0.04
(0.04)
-10.49

-10.24

0
0

0

0

-11.47

-49.25

The estimated standard errors are in parentheses.

total elasticities of output computed by Sepien (1978) using OLS for
independent rubber smallholders and smallholders under government support in Malaysia are 1.12 and 0.83, respectively. These figures are lower
than those exceeding 2.0 obtained by Teo (1976, p. 77), also for Malaysia,
estimates approaching 2.0 obtained by Chandrasiri, Carrad, Teo and
Weerasingh (1977, p. 407) on Sri Lankan rubber smallholdings, and around
1.5 for rubber producers in Papua New Guinea, calculated by Whitlam
(1976, p. 8).
Given the specifications of Model 1.3, the technical efficiency indices of
the individual rubber farms were calculated using the predictor defined by
Battese and Coelli (1992). The individual farm technical efficiency indices
obtained, together with the estimated mean technical efficiency, are presented in Table 3.
The frequencies of the predicted values of technical efficiency show a
bimodal distribution, with a group of farms with high technical efficiency

195

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

TABLE 3
Technical efficiency estimates for 33 state rubber farms in Vietnam
Technical efficiency

Farm number

0.38 .
0.33
0.74
0.82
0.53
0.48
0.47
0.38
0.40
0.35
0.59
0.95
0.60
0.48
0.40
0.37
0.50
0.18
0.16
0.51
0.75
0.67
0.80
0.91
0.43
0.93
0.51
0.55
0.89
0.61
0.88
0.52
0.59

1
2

3
4
5
6

7
8
9

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

33
Mean technical efficiency

a

=

0.59

a One farm which has only one year of observation (1990) was removed due to a zero value
for fuel and urea.

and the bulk of the remammg farms with low technical efficiency. 1
Thirty-nine percent of farms have a technical efficiency index below the
mean figure, while another 40% attain technical efficiency of more than
1 This bimodal distribution provides an explanation for the acceptance of the hypothesis
that G = 0 when the mean level of technical efficiency is estimated to be quite low.

196

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

average but less than 0.8. Only 21% of farms attain a high level of technical
efficiency (assumed to be more than 0.8).
On the evidence presented above, the overall level of technical efficiency
is low, given a mean index of only 0.59. A common explanation for
dispersed technical efficiency is that the assumption of common technology
across observations is violated. However, this explanation is unlikely to be
relevant in this study. The production technologies are fairly similar across
the sample of four companies and over time, although the relative use of
labour and machinery varies.
As mentioned earlier, the major variations in operations between farms
are considered to be in management methods. The variations could be due
to managerial rigidities which restrict the decision-making flexibility required to permit production on or near the isoquant. Observed changes in
the labour and transport coefficients between the OLS and frontier production functions could well be explained by this factor. Firms operating
near the frontier would appear to rely less heavily on labour as a factor of
production per tonne of latex produced, and more heavily on mechanical
operations, particularly in transporting the latex.
Test of hypotheses

Tests of the five hypotheses outlined above are reported in Table 4. The
first hypothesis, that there are no differences in technical efficiency between farms under study, was tested in our model selection process and
rejected (chi-square statistic of 79.18 compared with a critical chi-square
value of 7.81 at 95% significance level and 3 degrees of freedom). 2 It is
clearly seen from Table 3 that these farms operate at widely different levels
of technical efficiency (the range is 0.16 to 0.95).
Hypothesis 2, that there is no difference in the mean technical efficiency
between farms in the four different companies under study, is also rejected
using the chi-square statistic (see Table 4). We can conclude that mean
technical efficiencies of farms in different companies are not equal. The
mean technical efficiency of Dong-Nai Rubber Company is 0.527, and that
of Tay-Ninh Company is 0.538; Dong-Phu Rubber Company has the
smallest mean technical efficiency of 0.304, and the highest mean technical
efficiency is 0.721 for Dau-Tieng Rubber Company.
The third hypothesis is that there is no difference in the mean technical
efficiency between farms in red and grey soil regions. The chi-square value
reported in Table 4 shows that this hypothesis cannot be rejected. It is
The fact that the frontier model was chosen in preference to the OLS model is an
indication of significant variation in technical efficiencies.

2

197

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

TABLE 4
Tests of hypotheses for parameters of the distribution of the farm effects, U;,
Assumption

Ho

Chi-square
value

Table value
(95%)

Decision

Modell.O
Modell.O
Modell.O
Modell.O
Modell.3

G=m=h=O
m=h=O
m=O
h=O
G=O

79.18
3.62
1.16
1.66
75.56

7.81
5.99
3.84
3.84
3.84

Reject H 0
Accept H 0
Accept H 0
Accept H 0
Reject H 0

concluded that there is no difference in mean technical efficiency between
farms in the red and grey soil regions.
Fourth, the hypothesis that there is no difference in the mean technical
efficiency between farms of Dong-Nai Rubber Company (French management) and other companies was tested. Again, the hypothesis could not be
rejected on the basis of the chi-square test, and it is concluded that there is
no difference in mean technical efficiency between farms of Dong-Nai
Rubber Company and other companies. This result is not surprising as it
was observed in the results of the second hypothesis that the Dong-Nai
Rubber Company was neither best nor worst in terms of technical efficiency.
Finally, the result of the fifth hypothesis in Table 4 indicates that it is
rejected: the parameter G is significantly greater than zero at 1% significance level. This indicates that the stochastic frontier production function
(Model 1.3) is preferred to OLS estimation (Model 1.4). The intercept
parameter, and the elasticities of output with respect to trees, urea,
transportation and the time trend are all significantly greater than zero at
the 5% level of significance using a t-test. The low t-ratio of the elasticity
of output with respect to labour indicates it is not significantly different
from zero in this frontier estimation, although it is highly significant using
OLS estimates. This inconsistency suggests that the same technology may
not be applicable to all farms in the sample, or that the amount of fuel
used is more a function of the distance from farms to the factory rather
than the use of mechanised assistance in latex collection.
IMPLICATIONS FOR FURTHER POLICY RESEARCH

The main implications from this study are in terms of suggestions for
further policy research rather than definitive policy recommendations.
While the study is valuable in providing an overall measure of technical
efficiency, and identifying differences in technical efficiency among state

198

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

rubber farms, it does not provide explanations of why some farms are more
or less technically efficient than others. In particular, we did not include
management as a factor of rubber production, yet this is likely to be a
major factor explaining variations in technical efficiency between farms,
and should be taken into account. It would have been desirable to account
for different management and field husbandry methods in this study.
However, simply including some proxy variable for management in the
model is a simplistic and inadequate option. Management factors are very
complex matters to study, and are deserving of analysis in a separate study.
While no definitive policy recommendations are made, some observations can be made to guide future studies. These recommendations are
directed at gaining a better understanding of why variations in technical
efficiency do or do not occur, particularly when they do not correspond
with conventional wisdom. Five suggestions of areas for further research
present themselves from the results obtained in the current study: mean
technical efficiency and the attractiveness of investment in the rubber
industry; unexpectedly high technical efficiency in rubber production by
Dau-Tieng Rubber Company; unexpectedly ordinary technical performance by Dong-Nai Rubber Company; differences in the ways in which
farm managers make decisions on the mix of inputs they use to produce
rubber output; and unexpectedly insignificant differences in technical performance between farms in red and grey soil areas.
In respect of the first area for future research, the mean technical
efficiency of the 33 farms under study provides an initial basis for considering prospects for investment in the rubber industry in Vietnam. At 0.59, it
is clearly not very attractive from the viewpoint of a potential investor. It is
tempting to conclude from this result that there is much to be gained from
abandoning the state farm mode of production. Yet, there are also very
high levels of technical efficiency achieved by more than 20% of farms.
Hence, wholesale abandonment of the state farm system may not be a
desirable, at least in the short term.
Certainly, a shift back to the old plantation mode of production and
management is not guaranteed to improve technical efficiency. The company with the French management style and purportedly the most impressive performance in the industry, the Dong-Nai Rubber Company, was
shown to be only an average performer in terms of technical efficiency.
Best performance, on the other hand, has been achieved by the company
that has relied most on expertise from the former USSR. Dau-Tieng
Rubber Company was the first rubber company to undertake a joint
venture with the former USSR government in planting new rubber trees
during the 1980s. Many USSR engineers were sent to this company to
supervise the use of mechanisation and other productive activities in the

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

199

plantations. While it might be appropriate to ditch the socialist approach to
the rubber industry given the obviously low general level of technical
efficiency, there is a real risk of 'throwing the baby out with the bath water'
by doing so.
The second and third areas of future research flow from these rather
unexpected observations. First, the government needs to see what DauTieng Rubber Company is doing right, particularly on its highly technically
efficient farms, and see if it can keep these attributes in any attempt to
transform the industry. Second, it should examine why the performance of
Dong-Nai Rubber Company has not matched its reputation as the most
technically efficient rubber producer.
The fourth area of future analysis concerns a search for explanations of
why input usage varies so much between rubber farms operating with low
technical efficiency and those operating with high technical efficiency.
Evidence shows the former achieve low rubber yields per hectare and per
tree, have low labour usage per hectare, and use little urea and a lot of
fuel. By contrast, high technical efficiency farms achieve high yields, have a
high labour usage per hectare, and use more urea and less fuel (due to
relatively short distances from farm to factory). This most likely reflects
differences in management decisions on the way farm managers combine
various inputs which show up in differences in technical efficiency (distinct
from the issue of allocative efficiency, as defined by Farrell (1957), which is
not studied here).
The utilisation of urea on high-technical efficiency farms is five times
that on low-technical efficiency farms. This indicator leads to a suggestion
that an increase in urea dosage on farms which have low technical efficiency might increase their technical efficiency. However, further analysis
would be needed on the implications of this increase for allocative efficiency of urea usage.
The utilisation of fuel on low-technical efficiency farms is many times
that on high-technical efficiency farms. This can be explained by either the
overuse of fuel or the distance of the former farms from the processing
factory. The network of transportation between farms and processing
factories needs to be investigated in order to determine which of these
explanations is most important.
The model results suggest there is considerable scope to improve the
technical efficiency of rubber farms. The most obvious is to increase rubber
yields which are four to five times higher on high than low-technical
efficiency farms. These yield variations are caused by many factors, such as
varieties or clones, fertilizer and planting density. The suitability of technology should be studied carefully in order to increase productivity. In the
past, due to the high target rubber areas set from above by VNRC and the

200

V.H.S. TRAN ET AL.

rubber companies, many farms had to collect varieties or clones from many
sources without scrutiny in selection. This led to a mix of low-yielding and
uncontrolled varieties on these farms. The ability to implement effectively
development plans is a key to solving this problem, especially in the
varieties or clones acquired. The establishment stage evidently has considerable effects on the productivity of the trees.
Labour productivity estimates on farms with high levels of technical
efficiency are on average more than double those on farms with low
technical efficiency (Tran, 1992, p. 127). A study of the supervisory and
motivation techniques used on farms achieving high technical efficiency,
especially those employed by Dau-Tieng Rubber Company, could lead to
appreciable increases in technical efficiency by raising labour productivity.
The final issue for future research derives from the failure of red soil
farms to perform more efficiently than grey soil farms in technical terms.
This result needs further investigation as it was quite unexpected: it was
felt that farms in the red soil region would have major productivity
advantages over those in grey soil regions. If rubber production does not
respond significantly to the type of soil, and other farming activities do,
then locating future rubber plantings in grey soil areas might well have the
advantage of lower opportunity costs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful f~r the comments and guidance offered by George
Battese. Any errors, however, are solely our own responsibility. The senior
author also acknowledges the scholarship funding support he received from
Winrock International which made this research possible.
REFERENCES
Aigner, D.J. and Chu, S.F., 1968. On estimating the industry production function. Am.
Econ. Rev., 58: 826-839.
Aigner, D.J., Lovell, C.A.K. and Schmidt, P., 1977. Formulation and estimation of stochastic
frontier productive function models. J. Econometrics, 6: 21-37.
Battese, G.E., 1992. Frontier production functions and technical efficiency: a summary of
empirical applications in agricultural economics. Agric. Econ., 7: 185-208.
Battese, G.E. and Coelli, T.J., 1988. Predicting firm level technical efficiencies with a
generalised frontier production function and panel data. J. Econometrics, 38: 387-399.
Battese, G.E. and Coelli, T.J., 1992. Frontier production functions, technical efficiencies
and panel data: with application to paddy farmers in India. J. Product. Anal., 3: 153-169.
Battese, G.E. and Corra, G.S., 1977. Estimation of a production frontier model: with
application to the pastoral zone of eastern Australia. Aust. J. Agric. Econ., 21: 169-179.

STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM

201

Battese, G.E., Coelli, T.J. and Colby, T.C., 1989. Estimation of frontier production functions and the efficiencies of Indian farms using panel data from ICRISAT's village level
studies. J. Quant. Econ., 5: 327-348.
Bauer, P.W., 1990. Recent developments in the econometric estimation of frontiers. J.
Econometrics, 46: 39-56.
Chandrasiri, G.R., Carrad, B., Teo, C.K. and Weerasingh, S.L., 1977. The specification and
estimation of a production function for smallholding rubber in Sri Lanka. J. Rubber Res.
Inst. Sri Lanka, 54: 398-416.
Coelli, T.J., 1992. A computer program for frontier production function estimation, FRONTIER, Version 2.0. Econ. Lett., 39: 29-32.
Dong-Nai, 1991. Annual Report. Dong-Nai Rubber Company, Vietnam.
Farrell, M.J., 1957. The measurement of productive efficiency. J.R. Stat. Soc., 120: 253-281.
Meeusen, W. and Van den Broeck, J., 1977. Efficiency estimation from Cobb-Douglas
production functions with composed error. Int. Econ. Rev., 18: 435-444.
Pitt, M.M. and Lee, L.F., 1981. Measurement and sources of technical inefficiency in the
Indonesian weaving industry. J. Dev. Econ., 8: 43-64.
Schmidt, P., 1986. Frontier production functions. Econometric Rev., 4: 289-328.
Sepien, A.B., 1978. Technical and allocative efficiency in Malaysian rubber smallholdings: a
production function approach, Ph.D. thesis, Australian National University, Canberra.
Smit, H.P., 1984. Forecasts for The World Rubber Economy to the Year 2000. Macmillan,
London.
Stevenson, R.E., 1980. Likelihood functions for generalized stochastic frontier estimation. J.
Econometrics, 13: 57-66.
Teo, C.K., 1976. Production function analysis of small rubber farms in Sri Lanka. MADE
thesis, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.
Thiet, N.D., 1991. Rubber private smallholdings policies and family economy for rubber
workers in Vietnam. Working Paper 135/91, Rubber Research Institute of Vietnam,
Hochiminh City.
Tran, V.H.S., 1992. Analysis of the technical efficiency of rubber farms in Vietnam, M.Ec.
dissertation, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W., Australia.
VNRC, 1991. Rubber development program year 2000. Vietnam Rubber Corporation,
Hochiminh City.
White, K.J., 1990. SHAZAM: the econometrics computer program. Department of Economics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
Whitlam, G.B., 1976. Analysis of some factors affecting smallholder rubber production.
Papua New Guinea Agric. J., 27: 1-10.

