AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

Further evidence on pesticides, productivity and farmer health:
Potato production in Ecuador
John M. Antle
b

a,*, 1,

Donald C. Cole

b'

Charles C. Crissman

c

a Department of Agricultural Economics and Economics, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT, USA
Departments of Geography and Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
c International Potato Center, Quito, Ecuador

Accepted 31 July 1997

Keywords: Patato production; Pesticides; Farmer health

1. Introduction

A recent paper by Antle and Pingali (1994)
showed that farmers' health had a significant impact
on the productivity of Philippine rice farms, and that
pesticide use in rice production had a significant
impact on farmers' health. A simulation analysis
showed that restricting the use of insecticides that
posed the greatest health risk was a 'win-win' policy, as it would increase both the health and productivity or Philippine rice farmers. Two features of
Philippine rice production that could affect the outcome of that analysis are, first, the low productivity
of insecticides in rice production, and second, the
humid tropical rice paddy environment where farmers' use of protective clothing is minimal. The Antle
and Pingali study left open the question of whether
this 'win-win' result would hold in a situation where
the marginal productivity of insecticides or other
pesticides is higher, and where the climate is more

Corresponding author.
Director of the Trade Research Center and a University
Fellow at Resources for the Future.
*

1

compatible with the use of self-protective clothing or
other equipment.
This study replicates and extends the Antle and
Pingali study using data from a potato producing
region of Ecuador. Potato production in Ecuador is
vulnerable to two major pests, the soil-dwelling larvae of the Andean weevil (Premnotrypes vorax) and
the late blight fungus (Phytophthora infestans). The
use of insecticides and fungicides is considered by
both farmers and agricultural scientists as important
in the control of these pests, and as many as 12
applications of both insecticides and fungicides are
used in their control. Potato production occurs in a
temperate highland climate compatible with the use
of protective clothing such as rubber boots and
gloves. The Ecuador study also provides larger samples of production and health data, and these data
allow the crop production technology and the health
production function to be estimated jointly, increasing statistical reliability. In addition, in the Ecuador
study, a measure of neurobehavioral function is used
as an indicator of farmer health, an indicator that has
been validated in the occupational health literature
and that should be closely related to farmers' managerial and decision-making capacity. The Philippine

0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII SO 169-5150(97)00036-4

200

J.M. Antle et al.j Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

study used an ad hoc index of health that has not
been validated independently.
The findings of this Ecuadorian study are remarkably similar to those of the Philippine study, despite
substantial differences in the types and amounts of
pesticides that are used, in their productivity, and in
the physical environment in which they are used.
Analysis of the Ecuador data shows that health has a
statistically significant effect on productivity, with an
elasticity of cost with respect to health in the same
range as in the Philippine study. Also, like the
Philippine study, the Ecuador study shows that pesticide use has a significant effect on health. A simulation analysis similar to the one conducted in the
Philippine rice study is used to explore the effects
that reductions in pesticide use would have on health
and productivity.
The results of this study show that despite the
important role that insecticides play in controlling
the Andean weevil insect pest, a reduction in the use
of the principal insecticide used to control this pest,
carbofuran, could raise productivity and also improve farmers' health. One important difference in
the two studies does emerge, however. In the Philippine analysis, a policy reducing the use of all pesticides (herbicides and insecticides) was less efficient
than a reduction in insecticides alone, but both policies would result in the win-win outcome. In the
Ecuador case, where the productivity of pesticides is
higher, however, the win-win outcome can be obtained only when the policy targets the insecticides
that pose the greatest health risk. When the simulated
policy reduces the use of all pesticides, both fungicides and insecticides, a tradeoff between health and
productivity emerges. Thus, this study demonstrates
the importance of efficient policy design in cases
where the productivity of pesticides is relatively
high.

2. The Carchi study
The potato production and farmer health data
utilized in this analysis were collected as part of a
study of the economic, environmental and human
health effects of pesticides sponsored by the International Potato Center. The study was based in the

Carchi Province in northern Ecuador in a highland
zone 30 km south of the Colombian border. Production occurs between the altitudes of 2800 and 3400
m on steeply sloped, deep volcanic soils. Just half a
degree north of the equator, there are virtually no
changes in day length, little seasonal variation in
temperature, and limited variation in rainfall. A detailed description of the complete study and the
Carchi region can be found in the book by Crissman
et al. (1997).
The cropping system is dominated by potatoes
and pasture for dairy cattle, with these two crops
rotated in a potato-potato-pasture cycle that takes
about 2 years. Because of the equatorial Andean
climate, there are no distinct planting or harvesting
seasons, and potato production occurs continuously.
Production data were collected in a farm-level survey on 40 farms during 1990-1992 by trained enumerators who lived in the region and made bimonthly visits to the farms. Data were collected for
individual parcels, where a parcel is defined as a
single crop cycle on a farmer's field. The pesticide
use data are believed to be accurate, because they
were collected within two weeks after a farmer made
an application, so that the usual problem of data
inaccuracy because of farmer recall was avoided. In
addition, an ongoing quality-control process was
maintained during data collection which made it
possible for the enumerators to re-interview farmers
to validate or correct outlying observations. Table 1
presents summary statistics for the data used in the
econometric analysis of the potato production process that follows. A similar quality-control process
was followed for the health data that were collected.
This physical environment is highly conducive to
the soil-dwelling larvae of the Andean weevil (P.
vorax) and the late blight fungus (P. infestans).
Using backpack sprayers, farmers make an average
of more than seven applications of pesticides to each
parcel. Though a wide array of products are used by
farmers in the sample, three types are dominant. The
dithiocarbamate, mancozeb accounted for over 80%
of total active ingredient of fungicides used to control late blight. The carbamate, carbofuran, and the
organophosphate, methamidophos, accounted for
47% and 43% of all insecticide active ingredients
applied. Carbofuran is used to control the Andean
weevil and the organophosphates are used on foliar

J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

Table I
Summary statistics for Carchi potato production data
Variable

Mean

Standard
deviation

Total variable cost (sucres jha)
Expected yield (kgjha)
Area (ha)
Mean neurobehavioral score
Fertilizer quantity (kgjha)
Land preparation labor (days jha)
Crop management labor (daysjha)
Fungicide quantity
Carbofuran quantity (kgjha)
Foliage pest insecticide
Fertilizer price (kgjha)
Land preparation wage
Crop management wage
Fungicide price
Carbofuran price
Foliage pest insecticide price

14.157
9.868
-0.959
-1.525
6.309
2.374
3.897
11.905
-0.044
10.415
6.448
7.656
7.796
-0.970
9.710
-1.222

0.347
0.136
0.854
0.941
0.401
0.895
0.373
1.426
1.120
2.237
0.181
0.306
0.275
0.666
0.303
1.225

Sample size is 219. All variables in natural logarithms except
mean neurobehavioral score. Fertilizer is total N, P and K applied.
Fungicide and foliage pest insecticide quantities and prices were
quality-adjusted using the hedonic procedures as in the paper of
Antle et al. (1994).

insect pests. Most farmers manage several fields, so
that potato production and pesticide use are continuous throughout the year. An important consequence
of continuous production is a year-round potential
for occupational and incidental exposure to pesticides. Pesticides are not used in the pasture cycle and
are seldom used in other crops that may be included
in the rotation, such as legumes. Thus, a farmer's
exposure to pesticides comes almost entirely from
potato production. The insecticides used are neurotoxins-they kill the pest by interfering with the
functioning of the nervous system. Pesticides are
applied using a backpack sprayer and, in that process, the applicator's clothes often become wet with
spray mix. Consequently, the major exposure route
for the applicator is dermal, especially through his
hands and back. Applicators appear to be aware of at
least some of the risks associated with pesticide use,
yet they do not use protective clothing that effectively prevent exposure, nor do they exhibit other
exposure-averting behavior. Thus, the use of protective clothing in this temperate environment is similar
to the evidence from the Philippines study.

201

To examine the health impacts of pesticide use,
the health research team conducted a survey of the
farm population (n = 174) and an age- and education-matched referent group (n = 72) not exposed to
pesticides. All participants answered questions on
pesticide use and medical problems, received a clinical examination by a field physician, completed a
series of tests of nervous system function and underwent blood tests. These tests were oriented towards
those effects most likely to be associated with the
insecticide and fungicide exposures that the agricultural team had documented and that farm members
reported over periods of days to years. Crissman et
al. (1994) and Cole et al. (1998a) report elsewhere
on the complex exposure pattern and the higher rates
of skin problems (dermatitis), reduced vibration sensation, lower cholinesterase levels and generally
poorer neurobehavioral test results among the farm
population compared to the referent group.
Preliminary analyses revealed that the neurobehavioral tests demonstrated the most consistent relationship with recent use of pesticides within the farm
population. Neurobehavioral tests were chosen because psychiatric literature indicated problems among
those with chronic exposure to organophosphate
compounds (Gerchon and Shaw, 1961), epidemiological work has documented central nervous system
effects of acute poisoning episodes (Rosenstock et
al., 1991) and assessments of neurobehavioral function are sensitive measures of such problems in
non-clinical populations (Anger et al., 1983). We
expanded on the Neurobehavioral Core Test Battery
that was assessed cross-culturally and recommended
by the World Health Organization (Cassito et al.,
1990). Individual tests were grouped into functional
sub-scales by a neuropsychologist. A battery of tests
was used to assess a set of neurobehavioral skills
that include attention, visual and spatial abilities,
visual and auditory reaction times, and motor and
psychomotor skills. The test results were standardized so that neurobehavioral status is positively related to the test score.
This neurobehavioral measure of pesticide impacts represents a significant improvement as compared to the health impairments index utilized by
Antle and Pingali. The health impairment index is an
ad hoc measure of several factors hypothesized to be
affected by pesticide exposure, whereas the neurobe-

202

J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

havioral index used here is derived from a standard~zed t~st which measures only the part of the organIsm directly affected by the neurotoxins. In addition,
the sample size used in this study is nearly four
times the size of the Philippine study. This direct
measure eliminates most of the uncertainty of measuring health effects not originating from pesticide
use.
Because of skewed distributions in test scores, we
restricted the referent population by age (16-65 inc_1usive) and education ( > 3 years) and developed
hnear regression prediction equations based on age
and education. These restrictions removed about 20%
of the population (see Cole et al. (1997b) for details).
A standardized score was then calculated for each
test for each farm member who met the age and
education restrictions by subtracting the participants'
predicted value for the test from the measured value
and dividing the difference by the standard error of
t~e estimate derived from the referent group regresSIOn. The scores were then averaged across tests in
the subscale to obtain a sub-scale standardized score
for each function. Finally, the arithmetic mean of the
sub-scale standardized scores provided an overall
neurobehavioral score for modelling purposes.
The neurobehavioral scores for the farm population were significantly lower than those of the referent non-farming population even taking account of
differences in age, education and verbal intelligence
level. The mean standardized score was almost one
standard deviation less than the population not directly exposed to pesticides and substantially lower
than that currently observable in other working populations exposed to neurotoxic substances elsewhere
in the world. The mean minimums for the various
functions were over three standard deviations lower
indicating substantial, clinically important deficits i~
the basic cognitive tasks. Such levels of dysfunction
:vould correlate with considerable difficulties carrymg out the daily tasks of running a household and
making rational decisions in farm management and
would be comparable to the levels found in the
neuro-cognitively impaired on disability pensions in
countries such as Canada and the United States. The
quality of home and working life and the productivity of these farm members would thus be expected to
be substantially reduced.

3. Joint estimation of the cost function and the
health production function
Following the logic of the Antle and Pingali
model, we posit a cost function to represent the
production process. This cost function is derived
from a household production model in which farmers' effective management and field labor is a function of their health. From a standard cost-minimization problem, we obtain the per-hectare variable cost
function C(y, w, z, h), where y is crop yield, w is a
vector of factor prices, z represents fixed factors
(size of the farmer's field in the model presented
here), and his a measure ofthe farmer's health. This
cost function exhibits the usual convexity properties
with respect to y and w, and is decreasing in z and
h.

Following Antle and Capalbo (1994), health is
assumed to be a function h(e(x, b), c), where e(x,
b) is exposure to pesticides, x, b is a measure of
averting behavior by the farmer (such as use of
protective equipment and safe handling practices),
and c is a vector of personal characteristics. There is
little variation in averting behavior among farmers in
the study presented here, so we simplify the presentation to a health production function h( x, c),
where h is assumed increasing and concave in x.
We utilize the log-linear approximation to the cost
function,

(1)
where E 1 is an error term. Applying Shepard's
lemma, it follows that dC/dw. = x .* where x .* is
the cost-minimizing quantity of the ith input. For the
log-linear cost function Shephard's lemma can be
written as:
l

ln( xt)

=

ln( f3·)
l

l

'

l

+ ln C- ln w + E 2Z'. I
l

(2)

where the E 2 i are error terms.
We specify the health production function as:

(3)

J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

where c 1 and c 2 are measures of the farmer's intelligence not directly affected by pesticide exposure (c 1
is a measure of the ability to associate similar objects, c 2 is a measure of the individual's general
knowledge, and both are subtests of the Ecuadorian
adaptation of the Weschler adult intelligence score),
x 5 is the quantity of carbofuran applied during the
season on a particular field, and E3 is an error term.
Recall that the toxicological literature suggests that
carbofuran is the insecticide that is expected to have
a significant neurobehavioral effect.
The system of Eqs. (1)-(3) is identified and can
be estimated using nonlinear techniques that account
for the endogeneity of cost, input quantities and
health. Note that the conventional way to estimate a
log-linear model with first-order conditions is to
estimate the factor cost share equation with an additive error term as w;x;/C = /3; + E2 ;. Eq. (2) is
equivalent to estimating the cost share equations in
InC=

+

-2.294

( -1.13)

h=

1.397ln y

0.066ln z

(6.81)

( -2.93)

+ 0.040ln w4 +

0.011ln w5

(15.45)

(13.52)

-3.074
( -9.87)

+

0.046 c 1
(2.04)

+

+

203

the multiplicative error form w;x;/C = /3; exp(E 2 ).
This multiplicative error model is attractive because
it is consistent with the log-linear, constant-elasticity
specification of factor demand equations with additive errors, and because it fits the data well in this
case.
The system (Eqs. (1)-(3)) is nonlinear in the
parameters because of the ln( f3) terms in Eq. (2).
The nonlinear three-stage least squares estimation
method in the SAS 6.10 Model Procedure was used
to estimate jointly the system of Eqs. (1)-(3). This is
a system of eight equations: the cost function (Eq.
(1)); the six first-order conditions corresponding to
fertilizer (input 1), land preparation labor (input 2),
crop management labor (input 3), fungicides (input
4), carbofuran (input 5), and foliage pest insecticides
(input 6); and the health production function (Eq.
(3)). The parameter estimates with t-statistics in
parentheses are:

+

0.247ln w 1

+

(59.30)

0.007ln w6

0.103 h

(9.27)

(-3.45)

0.016ln w 2
(16.76)

+

0.085ln w 3
( 45.30)

0.177 c2

0.247ln x 5

(3.46)

( -3.25)
returns to scale and increasing returns to field size,
as expected. The essential role that pesticides play in
crop production is indicated by the positive and
significant coefficients on the fungicide, carbofuran
and foliar insecticide variables. Output-constant
own-price elasticities of demand (equal to /3; - 1)
range from about -0.75 for fertilizer to about - 1.0
for foliage pest insecticides. The coefficient on the
neurobehavioral health variable is statistically significant at all conventional levels, and its negative sign
indicates that farmers with higher neurobehavioral
function obtain lower cost of production per hectare,
and thus, higher productivity, as hypothesized. The
magnitude of the coefficient indicates that the elasticity of cost with respect to health is about - 0.15.
In comparison, the estimates of the elasticity of cost
with respect to health obtained by Antle and Pingali
in their study of two rice producing areas of the
Philippines ranged from -0.13 to -0.36.

As explained by Antle et al. (1994), it is important in
estimating production models with pesticides to account for the large number of different chemicals
that are used by farmers that exhibit varying degress
of efficacy in controlling pests. To control for varying pesticide quality, the fungicide quantity and price
and the foliage pest insecticide quantity and price
were quality adjusted using the hedonic procedure
described by Antle et al. (1994). Expected yield y
was estimated as the predicted value of a regression
of actual yield on the quantity of seed potato sown, a
set of dummy variables indicating soil types and
precipitation, the altitude of the field, and its area.

4. Implications
The parameter estimates of the cost function are
all statistically significant and indicate decreasing

204

J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

The health production function parameters are
highly significant and indicate, as expected, that
farmers with higher verbal intelligence scores (c 1
and c2 ) also have higher neurobehavioral function.
The total quantity of carbofuran applied during the
season has the hypothesized negative effect on neurobehavioral function.
Combining the cost function and the health equation, we see that higher neurobehavioral function of
farm managers lowers average production cost, while

increased use of the insecticide carbofuran increases
crop production but lowers neurobehavioral function.
To assess the net effects of a change in carbofuran
use, we simulated the model over a range of carbofuran prices (from 50% below the observed mean price
to 200% above it). To investigate the effects of the
efficiency of alternative restrictions on pesticides, the
simulation was performed with the tax imposed on
carbofuran alone and with it imposed on all pesticides. To investigate the importance of the health

-200.

o-300

·f········································

····lc····················································································~~~

0

;:::
~

e-350

·t··············································'··························································:·~~

8
CZI

] -400

·;;:

·t··········································

r·································:::Jl!Jr

j

~

-450 .

z

~ -500

·t····························

-550
-600.
-650-L---~~----~----------------------------------~

-0.75 -0.50 -0.25

0.00

Tax on All
-D- Pesticides

-e-

Tax on Carbofuran

0.25

0.50

0.75 1.00
Tax Rate

1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

2.25

-•- Tax on All Pesticides w/o
Health in Cost Function
Tax on Carbofuran w/o

-e-- Health in Cost Function

Fig. 1. The simulated effects of the pesticide tax on farmer health as measured by the mean neurobehavioral score.

J.M. Antle et al.j Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

effect in the cost function, we also simulated the
system (Eqs. (1)-(3)) that was estimated without the
health variable in the cost function (i.e., with y = 0).
The results of the simulations are presented in Figs.
1 and 2.
Fig. 1 shows the simulated effects of the pesticide
tax on farmer health as measured by the mean
neurobehavioral score. As expected, health is monotonically increasing in the tax rate because pesticide
use is negatively related to the tax rate, but the slope

205

of the relationship is higher when the effect of health
on productivity is taken into account. This figure
also shows that there is little difference between a
tax on carbofuran only and a tax on all pesticides in
terms of the health outcomes. This is because there is
little substitution between carbofuran and other pesticide inputs.
Fig. 2 shows the effect of the pesticide tax on
average variable cost of production. Here, we see
several interesting results emerge. First, when a con-

79000 -r-----------~-------------------------------------.

77000 -

~
876000~
175000~

8

~

.g 74000
't::

-

~
&73000
0

<
72000

71000 - ·---

70000~--~------~------------------------------------~

-0.75 -0.50 -0.25 0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

Tax. Rate

Tax on All
Pesticides

-a-

Tax on Carbofuran

--+-

Tax on All Pesticides w/o
Health in.Cost Function
Tax on Carbofuran w/o
Health in Cost Function

Fig. 2. The effect of the pesticide tax on average variable cost of production.

2.25

206

J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

ventional specification of the cost function is used
with health excluded from the cost function, a tax on
carbofuran or a tax on all pesticides increases the
average variable cost of production, as economic
theory predicts. Second, when health is included in
the cost function, a tax levied on carbofuran alone
results in a negative relationship between the tax
rate and average cost. This result occurs because the
positive effect of a higher pesticide price is more
than offset by the cost-reducing effect of improved
health. This result is similar to the Antle and Pingali
finding that a pesticide tax targeted at insecticides in
rice production would increase productivity. However, when a tax on all pesticides is used, a positive
relationship emerges because the effect of the tax on
cost now exceeds the effect of health in the cost
function.
The clear policy implication of these findings is
that reducing carbofuran use is a win-win proposition: farmers would be both healthier and more
productive if carbofuran use were reduced, because
the productivity gains from improved health outweigh the negative productivity effects of reduced
pesticide use. However, a policy to reduce all pesticide use would be less efficient and would result in a
tradeoff between health and productivity.
In concluding, we note that a pesticide tax is used
in the simulations to illustrate the effects of changing
pesticide use. Taxes are representative incentive-type
policies. Also, available to policy makers are several
types of regulatory and other policies. For example,
in the United States, high-risk pesticides can only be
applied by trained pesticide applicators. Many countries also restrict the availability of certain environmentally damaging or dangerous pesticides, or include regulations regarding on-farm use of risky
pesticides on the product label. There are also important technology and education policy options, including integrated pest management, the development of
late-blight resistant varieties, and programs to promote the safe use of pesticides and the use of
protective clothing. These policies could improve
productivity and the health of the farm population
without imposing the productivity losses that could
be associated with reduced pesticide use.
Trade and related exchange rate policies also
could have a significant impact on pesticide use,
environmental quality, productivity and health (Antle

et al., 1996). Ecuador's exchange rate policies have
effectively subsidized the importation of pesticides
such as carbofuran by about 30% (Lee and Espinosa,
1998). Because this policy change would be equivalent to a uniform tax on all types of pesticides, the
analysis presented here implies that the elimination
of this subsidy would reduce all types of pesticides
and improve health, but could adversely affect productivity.

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the financial
support of the Montana Agricultural Experiment Station, the International Potato Center, and the Rockefeller Foundation.

References
Anger, W.K., Cassitto, M.G., Liang, Y.X., Amador, R., Hooisma,
J., Chrislip, D.W., Mergler, D., Kiefer, M., Hortnagl, J.,
Fournier, L., Dudek, B., Zsogon, E., 1983. Comparison of
performance from three continents on the WHO-recommended
neurobehavioral core test battery. Environ. Res. 62, 125-147.
Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M., 1994. Pesticides, productivity, and
farmer health: Implications for regulatory policy and agricultural research. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 76, 598-602.
Antle, J.M., Pingali, P., 1994. Pesticides, productivity, and farmer
health: A Philippine case study. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 76,
418-430.
Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M., Crissman, C.C., 1994. Econometric
production models with endogenous input timing: An application to Ecuadorian potato production. J. Agric. Res. Econ. 19,
1-18.
Antle, J.M., Crissman, C.C., Wagenet, R.J., Hutson, J.L., 1996.
Empirical foundations of environment-trade linkages: Implications of an Andean study. In: Bredahl, M.E., Ballenger, N.,
Dunmore, J.C., Roe, T.L. (Eds.), Agriculture and the Environment: Discovering and Measuring the Critical Linkages, Chap.
12. Westview Press, Boulder.
Cassito, M.G., Camerino, D., Hiinninen, H., Anger, W.K., 1990.
International collaboration to evaluate the WHO neurobehavioral core test battery. In: Johnson, B.L., Anger, W.K., Durao,
A., Xintaras, C. (Eds.), Advances in Neurobehavioural Toxicology: Applications in Environmental and Occupational
Health. Lewis, Chelsea, MI, pp. 203-223.
Cole, D.C., Leon, N., Carpio, F., 1998a. Health impacts of
pesticide use in Carchi farm populations. In: Crissman, C.C.,
Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M. (Eds.), Economic, Environmental,
and Health Tradeoffs in Agriculture: Pesticides and the Sus-

J.M. Antle et al./ Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 199-207

tainability of Andean Potato Production, Chap. 9, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Boston, in press.
Cole, D.C., Carpio, F., Julian, J., Leon, N., Carbotte, R., de
Almeida, H., 1997b. Neurological outcomes among farm and
non-farm mral Ecuadorians. Neurotoxicol. Terata!., 1997b (in
press).
Crissman, C.C., Cole, D.C., Carpio, F., 1994. Pesticide use and
farm worker health in Ecuadorian potato production. Am. J.
Agric. Econ. 76, 593-597.
Crissman, C.C., Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M. (Eds.), 1997. Economic, Environmental, and Health Tradeoffs in Agriculture:
Pesticides and the Sustainability of Andean Potato Production.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, in press.

207

Gerchon, S., Shaw, F.H., 1961. Psychiatric sequelae of chronic
exposure to organophosphoms insecticides. Lancet, pp. 137174.
Lee, D.R., Espinosa, P., 1998. Economic reforms and changing
pesticide policies in Ecuador and colombia. In: Crissman,
C.C., Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M. (Eds.), Economic, Environmental, and Health Tradeoffs in Agriculture: Pesticides and
the Sustainability of Andean Potato Production, Chap. 6.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, in press.
The Pesticide Health Effects Study Group, Rosenstock, L., Keifer,
M., Daniell, W., McConnell, R., Claypoole, K., 1991. Chronic
central nervous system effects of acute organophosphate pesticide intoxication. Lancet 338, 223-227.

