Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

Temporal and spatial modelling of tropical deforestation: a survival
analysis linking satellite and household survey data
Colin Vance a,∗ , Jacqueline Geoghegan b
a

US EPA National Centre for Environmental Economics, Washington, DC 20460, USA
b Department of Economics, Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610, USA

Abstract
We estimate a spatially explicit model of the forest clearance process among smallholder farmers in an agricultural frontier
of southern Mexico. Our analysis takes as its point of departure a simple utility-maximising model that suggests many possible
determinants of deforestation in an economic environment characterised by missing or thin markets. Hypotheses from the
model are tested on a data set that combines a time series of satellite imagery with data collected from a survey of farm
households whose agricultural plots were geo-referenced using a global positioning system (GPS). We implement a survival
analysis to identify the effect of household level explanatory variables on the probability of deforestation. This approach allows
us to introduce a measure of the time until clearance as a covariate, thereby affording a control for the effect of potentially
important explanatory variables that vary through time but are not directly observable. In addition to identifying several
variables relevant for policy analysis, including household demographics, proximity to roads, and government provision of
agricultural support, model results suggest that the deforestation process is characterised by non-linear duration dependence,
with the probability of forest clearance first decreasing and then increasing with the passage of time.
Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
JEL classification: Q15; R14; C41
Keywords: Deforestation; Survival analysis; Agricultural households

1. Introduction
Tropical deforestation plays a central role in many
of the most acute environmental threats of our time,
including global climate change, habitat degradation, and unprecedented species extinction. Scientific
and public concerns about these and other potentially massive ecological disruptions have incited a
growing number of studies that aim to quantify the
social and biophysical determinants of deforestation
processes, as well as their interactions over time
and space. An emerging methodological approach to
∗

Corresponding author.

0169-5150/02/$ – see front matter. Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 0 7 4 - 9

these issues combines high-resolution satellite imagery, geographic information systems (GIS), and
socio-economic and geophysical data to model the
human–environment interactions that drive land-use
change (e.g. Liverman et al., 1998). In the economics
literature, the primary focus of this research has been
on identifying the socio-economic forces that explain
the spatial patterns of landscape development, but less
attention has been given to capturing the temporal
dynamics from which these patterns emerge. To the
extent that both the location and timing of forest clearance matter for assessing environmental outcomes,
this de-coupling of spatial and temporal dimensions compromises the implementation of appropriate

318

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

policy responses to deforestation. Accordingly, the
purpose of the present paper is to advance an empirical methodology that supports analysis of how, over
time and space, individual land managers respond to
changing economic and ecological conditions.
Our study focuses on land-use change in an agricultural frontier spanning the southern Mexican states
of Campeche and Quintana Roo, a region that contains one of the largest and oldest expanses of tropical
forests in the America outside of Amazonia. Over the
past 30 years, these forests have been under sustained
pressure following the construction of a highway in
1972 that opened the frontier to settlement. The road
was part of a larger development effort to promote
agricultural colonisation and has contributed to a prolonged period of land transformation that has been
captured by Thematic Mapper (TM) satellite imagery.
We model these landscape dynamics by assembling
a spatial database that links the pixels from three TM
images spanning the years 1986–1997 with a random sample of farm households whose agricultural
plots were geo-referenced using a global positioning
system (GPS).1
Following a brief overview of the study region,
our analysis takes as its point of departure a simple
utility-maximising model that suggests many possible
determinants of forest clearance in an economic environment characterised by missing or thin markets, as
typifies frontier regions in the nascent stages of economic development. We subsequently test the significance of these determinants using survival analysis,
also known as duration analysis or hazard modelling,
a statistical technique that estimates the instantaneous
probability of a transition between two states—in this
case land-use states—conditional on the time elapsed
until the occurrence of the transition. The final two
sections of the paper discuss policy implications and
suggest extensions to the current analysis for future
research.
2. The region
The southern Yucatán peninsular region occupies roughly 22,000 km2 of southwestern Quintana
1 A pixel refers to the unit of spatial resolution, or area on the
ground, in a remotely sensed image. For TM data, pixel size is a
square with length of 28.5 m.

Roo and southeastern Campeche, north of the
Mexican–Guatemala border (Fig. 1). A rolling karstic
terrain of semi-deciduous tropical forests covers the
landscape, with elevations in the centre reaching a
peak of about 250–300 m. The zone corresponds to
what was once a portion of the Maya lowlands, and
was nearly completely deforested 1000 years ago during the Classic Period of Lowland Maya domination
(100–900 a.d.; Turner, 1983). Following the collapse
of Maya civilisation in 800–1000 a.d., the region experienced a period largely free of settlement that, continuing past the birth of the Mexican nation state in 1821,
allowed the return of the forests. By the first half of
the 20th century, human intervention here re-emerged
but was primarily limited to the selective logging
of tropical woods, particularly mahogany (Swietenia
macrophyla) and cedar (Cedrela odorata), as well as
the extraction of chicle, a tree resin (from Manilkara
zapota) used in the production of chewing gum.
More extensive deforestation followed with the construction of a two-lane highway across the centre of the
region in 1972, which opened the frontier to agricultural colonisation primarily via the extension of ejido
land grants from the federal government. The ejido
sector was created following the Mexican Revolution
(1910–1917), a political and social upheaval with roots
in inequitable land distribution. Within ejido communities, land is communally regulated by an elected
committee, but in this area of southern Mexico, ejido
members (ejidatarios) typically enjoy usufruct access
to a single parcel that is permanently allocated to their
use.2 The size of these parcels varies considerably,
ranging from 10 to 350 ha, with an average size in the
sample of roughly 110 ha.3 Our study focuses specifically on the ejido sector as it historically has been the
predominate form of land tenure in the study region.
Most agriculture within ejidos is based on a traditional slash-and-burn or swidden system of temporary
cultivation and continuous rotation through forest
2 Roughly 7% of households had access to multiple,
non-contiguous plots. In the majority of these cases, cultivation
occurred on only one of these plots for the year of questioning.
3 By the time the majority of ejidos were established in the
1970s, commercial logging interests had abandoned most tracts
following the removal of valuable tree species. The resulting relative abundance of land made the region particularly attractive to
colonists who migrated from regions of the country where there
was land scarcity, most notably Veracruz, Tabasco, and Chiapas.

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

319

Fig. 1. The Southern Yucat´an Peninsular region study area. Note: The thick gray line represents the boundaries of the general region
of study, comprising about 22,000 km2 . Roman numerals indicate the approximate locations of the TM satellite zones listed in Table 2.
Reprinted from Land Use Policy, Vol. 18, P. Klepeis and B.L. Turner II, Integrated Land History and Global Change Science: The Example
of the Southern Yucat´an Peninsular Region Project, pp. 27–39, Copyright 2001, by permission of Elsevier Science.

fallow (Ewell and Merrill-Sands, 1987). The system,
referred to locally by the Maya word milpa, is dominated by maize but is often inter-cropped with squash
and beans. In recent years, a growing number of farmers have additionally introduced commercial crops,
most notably chili, and pasture into their land-use
portfolios. While the incorporation of such uses has increased the complexity and variation of swidden practices, earlier research in the region by Turner (1983)
suggests that farmers employ a plot-fallow rotation
converting to a roughly 1:3–4 ratio, cycles usually
predicated on 3 years of cultivation and 9–12 years of
fallow (Klepeis et al., 2003). Although the field survey
conducted for the present study was unable to confirm
whether such a rotation prevails today, analysis of the
satellite imagery suggests that a substantial portion of
clearance between the mid 1980s and late 1990s was

of forest not yet incorporated into the fallow cycle.4 As
the figures in Table 1 indicate, farmers in the sample
cleared an average of 1.42 ha of forest older than 15
years for agricultural production per year by the mid
1990s, in addition to clearing an average of 0.97 ha
per year of successional growth 7–15 years of age.
In the region as a whole, deforestation continued unabated through the decades of the 1980s and
1990s, with available satellite imagery revealing a
total of 617 km2 of mature forest cut between 1987
and 1997. In 1989, the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve
4 Respondents were asked about crop rotation, with most reporting that they could approximate a 1:1 crop-fallow cycle. Discussions with key informants, however, suggested that these numbers
be deemed suspect, especially given that most respondents relied
only marginally on chemical inputs.

320

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

Table 1
Average annual conversion of mature and secondary forest to agriculture among sampled households

Hectares of mature forest older than 15 years cleared for agriculture
Hectares of secondary forest between 7 and 15 years cleared for agriculture

(723,185 ha) was established in the middle of the
region, partly in response to extensive deforestation
along the highway and associated international pressures to impede further clearance. Various land uses
surround the reserve, predominately: ejidos, on which
slash-and-burn subsistence production has prevailed
but increasingly is giving way to commodity production; ejidos coupled with NGO-sponsored agricultural
and forest projects; and a small number of private
lands largely devoted to livestock production. Cumulatively, these activities have earned the region a
designation as a “hot-spot” of forest and bio-diversity
loss by various sources (Achard et al., 1998). Whether
this prognosis is supported by future trends will depend in large part on current plans surrounding the
Mundo Maya, an international development scheme to
create an ecotourism–archaeological tourist economy
stretching across portions of southern Mexico, Belize,
Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras. This plan has
led to recent hotel and road expansion in the region.
Tourist sector development notwithstanding, the region retains many of the features of an agricultural
frontier. Population density is low, infrastructure is
poorly developed, ties to outside markets remain few,
and the social relations of production are, by and
large, organised around the family farm. These features motivate the theoretical and empirical approach
taken in this paper, which emphasise the importance
of household-specific characteristics, particularly demographic composition and farm capital, in explaining land-use decision making.

3. The theoretical model
As a predominately agrarian economy, land is an
input in virtually all of the economic activities within
the ejido sector of the southern Yucatán peninsular region. Some of these activities, such as bee keeping,
agro-forestry, and hunting, rely on land under forest,

1984–1994

1993–1997

0.47
0.32

1.42
0.97

while others, such as agricultural production and animal husbandry, require that the land be cleared of trees
for use. Whether or not a farmer decides to clear a
given tract of land depends on a complex multiplicity of factors, including the market value of output
from the land in alternative uses, the availability of
labour, the household’s consumption requirement, and
the farmer’s perception of the potential future benefits
derivable from the land.
The existing, albeit small, spatially explicit economic literature on land-use change has bifurcated into
two separate modelling approaches. The current literature that has focused exclusively on the location of
land-use change has analysed deforestation in tropical
countries: Belize (Chomitz and Gray, 1996); northern
Mexico (Nelson and Hellerstein, 1997); Brazil (Pfaff,
1999); Thailand (Cropper et al., 1999; Cropper et al.,
2001); and Panama (Nelson et al., 2001). Models that
include the temporal dimension as well as location of
land-use change have focused on urban fringe development in the United States (Geoghegan and Bockstael,
2000; Irwin and Bockstael, 2002). While this latter approach has been applied to an essentially irreversible
land conversion type, that of impervious surface expansion, it can be modified to analyse tropical deforestation given the high costs of forest clearance and
the elimination of alternative forestry based land-use
options that may accompany habitat degradation.5
Adapting the model found in Irwin and Bockstael
(2002), we model the decision of the farmer to clear
land for agricultural use. Let A(i, t) be the net benefits
to agricultural use for each time period after each pixel
of land i, is cleared in time period T. Let F(i, t) be
the net benefits to the farmer for leaving pixel i in
forestry use in each time period, and let C(i, T) be the
one-time clearing costs associated with clearing the
5 The assumption of irreversibility seems reasonable in the case
of our data given that only 1.4% of the pixels reverted to forest
older than 15 year over the period under study; 7.1% of pixels
reverted to secondary forest.

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

pixel in time period T and δ is the discount rate. Then
the benefits to the farmer of clearing pixel i in period
T are:
∞

A(i, T + t)δ T +t −

t=0

∞

F (i, T + t)δ T +t − C(i, T )

t=0

(1)
For T to be the optimal time period for clearing, the
following two conditions must hold:
∞

A(i, T + t)δ T +t −

t=0
∞

∞

F (i, T + t)δ T +t

A(i, T + t)δ T +t −

t=0

∞

(2a)

F (i, T + t)δ T +t − C(i, T )

t=0
∞

>

A(i, T + 1)δ T +t −

t=1

−δC(i, T + 1)

∞

F (i, T + 1)δ T +t

t=1

(2b)

The first condition is that net benefits to clearing
are positive. The second condition considers that although clearing may yield net positive benefits at time
T, there may still be benefits to waiting because of the
potential for even higher benefits at some future date.
Such a circumstance could arise, for example, in anticipation of improved technologies that reduce clearing costs. This very simple model ignores fallow-cycle
dynamics, clearly a limitation of the current theoretical framework.
Let the characteristics of pixel i be X(i). The optimal
time for clearing this pixel then is the first time period
in which the following holds:
A(X(i), T ) − F (X(i), T ) − δC(X(i), T + 1) ≥ 0(3)
Given this theoretical framework, our empirical model
aims to explain why certain pixels, in certain locations,
and under certain land managers, become deforested.
4. The empirical model
We add an error term to Eq. (3) to account for unobservable characteristics:
A(X(i), T ) −F (X(i), T ) − δC(X(i), T + 1)
−ε(i) ≥ 0

The hazard rate—or probability that pixel i will be
deforested in period T—can then be expressed as:
h(i, T ) =

G [W (i, T + 1)] − G [W (i, T )]
1 − G [W (i, T )]

(5)

where G is the cumulative distribution function for the
error term, and
W (i, T ) = A(X(i), T ) − F (X(i), T )
−δC(X(i), T + 1)

(6a)

W (i, T + 1) = A(X(i), T + 1) − F (X(i), T + 1)

t=0

−C(i, T ) > 0

321

(4)

−δC(X(i), T + 2)

(6b)

We use a survival model to test hypotheses concerning the effect of explanatory variables, X(i), on the
hazard, h(i,T), of deforestation. Survival models are a
class of statistical methods that focus on the timing of
an event (Allison, 1995), which in this paper is designated as the change from forest cover to agricultural
land use. These models estimate the conditional probability of exiting a state given that the state has been
occupied for some length t. The dependent variable,
the duration, is the length of time that elapses from the
beginning of the state until its end or until measurement is taken and therefore truncates the observation.
Survival models have a long history of application
within the engineering and bio-medical sciences. They
have been used to model such processes as the length
of time until component failure or the survival times of
patients diagnosed with certain diseases. Over the past
two decades, these models have been recognised by
social scientists to be a powerful tool for investigating
a wide range of social phenomena, including the length
of unemployment spells, the spacing of births, and the
duration of strikes. By and large, however, they have
not received application to the issue of landscape dynamics. Two recent exceptions are a study by Coomes
et al. (2000) and one by Irwin and Bockstael (2002),
cited earlier, both of which specify variants of Cox’s
proportional hazards model to investigate fallow-cycle
length among Amazonian farmers in Peru and urban
expansion in Maryland, respectfully.
For this paper, the duration of interest is the length
of time that an individual pixel remains in forest before being converted to cropland or pasture. We estimate the effect of static and time interval-varying

322

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

covariates on this duration by specifying a fully parametric model, the complementary log–log model. This
specification assumes that the underlying process that
generates the data is continuous, but that the data are
grouped into discrete time intervals, an assumption
that is well suited for the particular case of our data.
Deforestation is a continuous process over time and
space, but we only observe the event at select discrete times as dictated by the limited availability of
cloud-free TM data for the tropics. Therefore, we do
not know the exact timing of the deforestation event,
only that it occurred during some time interval defined by the dates of the imagery. The complementary
log–log model accommodates this feature of the data
and additionally allows for different specifications of
the role of time as a covariate, making it possible to test
alternative functional forms of the hazard function.6
For example, by including the logarithm of time as a
covariate, the model corresponds to the Weibull (see
Allison, 1995 for further discussion).
For the n pixels that are observed to be deforested,
the likelihood function is:
n

Pi,tt (1 − Pi,ti −1 )(1 − Pi,ti −2 ) · · ·

(7)

i=1

where Pi ,t is the probability that deforestation occurs
to pixel i in interval t, given that the pixel was not
deforested in any earlier periods, and ti the time period in which pixel i is deforested. The complementary log–log model specification resulting from this
likelihood function is:
log[−log(1 − Pit )] = β X(i, T )

(8)

where
X(i, t)=A(X(i), T ) − F (X(i), T ) − δC(X(i), T +1)
(9)
That is, X are the exogenous variables and is a β
vector of parameters to be estimated using maximum
6 The complementary log–log model is similar to the logit and
probit models in ensuring that predicted probabilities lie in the
[0, 1] interval. Unlike these models, however, whose functions are
symmetric around zero, the complementary log–log function is
skewed to the right. One practical implication is that the logit model
is appropriate for estimating a hazard rate when events can only
occur at discrete points in time (e.g. elections, job promotions),
while the complementary log–log model should be used when
events occur on the continuous time-scale.

likelihood methods, with the assumption that the underlying survival models is distributed as type I extreme value (Irwin, 1998; Hosmer and Lemeshow,
1999).
A final estimation issue arises from the possible
existence of unobserved heterogeneity that would result from an incomplete specification of the empirical
model. Two different, but related issues concerning
unobserved heterogeneity may result from the dual
nature (i.e. temporal and spatial dimensions) of the
data. In the context of the temporal dimension, if this
incomplete specification results in unaccounted for
systemic individual differences in duration distributions, the consequences include a downward biased
estimate of the effect of time—or duration dependence in the hazard terminology—and to misleading
inferences about the effects of included explanatory
variables (Kiefer, 1988). In the context of the spatial
dimension, the possibility exists that the features of
the landscape affecting the probability that a pixel will
be deforested are spatially correlated. If any of these
variables are not included in the estimation and are
spatially correlated with included explanatory variables, then the estimated coefficients will be biased
on these variables (Irwin and Bockstael, 2001).
To control for these two types of unobserved heterogeneity, a fixed-effects specification that includes
dummy variables for the spatial unit of each ejido is
used (Hite et al., 2001). An ejido dummy was chosen
as the unit for the fixed effect because of potential
unobserved institutional differences between ejidos,
such as their establishment dates, that could affect
the baseline hazard rate. This approach allows baseline hazard rates to vary among individual ejidos but
constrains these rates to be the same within ejidos,
thereby controlling for differences in duration distributions at the ejido level. In addition, to the extent
that there are unobservable characteristics that are
correlated across space within the ejido boundaries,
this specification controls for the some of the potential
effects of spatial autocorrelation.

5. The data
The econometric model presented in this paper is estimated using Landsat TM satellite data on land cover
as the dependent variable and household survey data

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332
Table 2
Dates of Thematic Mapper Satellite Imagery
Zone I

Zones II and III

Zone IV

11 November 1984
21 February 1993
31 January 1997

1 April 1987
29 October 1994
5 February 1996

14 January 1985
7 November 1994
31 January 1997

and other biophysical spatial data for the independent
variables. The data sources for each variable are discussed briefly. The unit of observation for the model
is the TM pixel, an admittedly arbitrary unit of analysis but one that nevertheless is likely an increment
of the area over which land is cleared for farming as
suggested by the figures on forest clearance presented
in Table 1.7 The satellite images were obtained across
four contiguous zones spanning the study region, the
dates for each of which are given in Table 2. The
process of imagery classification included the normal
preparatory steps of geo-referencing, haze removal,
adding NDVI information, and principal component
analysis. These steps were followed by texture analysis, which lead to the creation of a seven-band image for signature development and classification. Signature development was facilitated by a combination
of ground truth data derived from GPS-assisted field
visits and topographic, vegetation and land-use maps.
Maximum likelihood supervised classification methods produced six land cover classes. Excluding clouds,
shadows and water, these include: mature lowland and
upland forest older than 15 years of age; one stage
of upland successional growth—predominantly secondary forest—between 7 and 15 years of age; agriculture (including pasture); an invasive fern; and inundated savannas.8 For further detail on these methods
see Geoghegan et al. (2001) and Turner et al. (2001).
From the above classes, we generate two binary
variables to register the forest conversion process.
The first assumes a value of one if upland, lowland,
or secondary growth is converted to agricultural land
over an observed interval and zero otherwise. The
second applies a stricter definition of deforestation,
7

Note that a pixel is roughly 0.076 the size of a hectare.
The primary difference across lowland and upland forest is
not in species composition but in soil quality. Bajo soils, which
support lowland forests, are deep vertisols of thick clay found in
low-lying depressions. Upland forests are supported by rendzina
soils, which are shallow but agriculturally fertile mollisols.
8

323

assuming a value of one only with the conversion
of upland or lowland forest to agriculture and zero
otherwise. Assuming that the length of fallow in the
region approximately ranges between 9 and 12 years,
we are unable to fully ensure that the former of these
deforestation variables excludes land clearance that
occurs as part of a fallow cycle. Indeed, it is highly
probable that those pixels under secondary growth are
in fact in fallow as most logging and related forest
extraction activities in the region had terminated by
1960. Consequently, we estimate the model on both
the deforestation variables defined above, recognising
that the stricter definition of deforestation is likely to
be largely purged of fallow-cycle dynamics given its
exclusion of vegetation <15 years old.
Data for the explanatory variables are from a household survey that was carried out in the region during
two separate field seasons during 1997–1998 and
were linked to the satellite data, as will be further explained below. Selection of households in the sample
proceeded according to a stratified, two-stage cluster
sample (Warwick and Luinger, 1975; Deaton, 1997),
with ejidos as the first stage unit and ejidatarios as
the second stage unit. This resulted in the random selection of 11 ejidos followed by the random selection
of 188 ejidatario households. A standardised questionnaire, administered to the household head, was
used to elicit the socio-economic and land-use data.
The questionnaire was organised into two sections.
The first section covered migration history, farm production and inputs, ethnicity, educational attainment,
access to credit and the demographic composition
of the household. By collecting information on the
births, deaths, and permanent out migration of children of the head, it was possible to reconstruct the
biological household’s age composition through time.
In addition, dichotomous data was collected on ownership of farm capital (e.g. vehicle, chain saw) for the
years 1986, 1990, 1993, 1996, and 1997. Using the
figures for each of these years, data for the interim
years were interpolated. In this way, the percent of
time for which the relevant dichotomous variable was
in effect could be approximated for any given interval
corresponding to the dates of the satellite imagery.
Completion of the second section involved a guided
tour of the agricultural plot of the respondent. Using a
GPS, the interviewer created a geo-referenced sketch
map detailing the configuration of land uses (Fig. 2).

324

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

Fig. 2. Sketch map and corresponding backdrop from TM imagery. Note: the sketch map in the left panel depicts a parcel of 100 ha. The
image backdrop in the right panel is roughly 120 ha, with pixels of 28.5 m2 . Discrepancies between the land use patterns depicted in the
sketch map and those of the image may be partly attributed to the fact that the image is from February 1996 while the sketch map was
created in June 1998. From Fig. 6 in chapter 9 of Integrated Land-Change Science and Tropical Deforestation in the Southern Yucat´an:
Final Frontiers, edited by B.L. Turner II, J. Geoghegan and D.R. Foster (Oxford University Press, forthcoming). Reprinted by permission
of Oxford University Press.

Having several GPS points recorded within the borders of the plot made it possible to digitise the borders on a backdrop of the most recent date of satellite
imagery.9 The digitised borders were then extracted
and superimposed on available images from previous years, thereby yielding a longitudinal database
of land-use change. Thus, only those pixels associated with households from which socio-economic data
were elicited are included in the sample. By overlaying
this database with other GIS layers containing features
such as: the road network, digitised from a 1:50,000
9 The emphasis of the dialogue during the sketch mapping exercise was placed on accurately geo-referencing the plot boundaries,
seen as the digitized outer rectangle in the image backdrop of
Fig. 2, rather than the land use patterns contained therein. While
the present studies relies on satellite imagery interpretation to describe those patterns, other work (see Klepeis and Vance, 2000)
draws data from the narratives given by farmers to describe the
spatial-temporal configurations of their plots, as depicted in the
left panel of Fig. 2.

map published by the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica
Geografica e Informatica (INEGI, 1985); soil quality measures, digitised from a 1:250,000 INEGI map
(1987); slope and elevation from a digital elevation
model; and rainfall extrapolated from rain gauge data;
it was possible to create spatial explanatory variables
to augment the data collected during the interview.

6. Variables used in the analysis
As suggested in the theoretical model presented
above, the land clearance decision is based on a
comparison of discounted utilities from forest and
non-forest land uses. There are several testable
socio-economic and environmental factors that could
influence this comparison, which we conceptually
group into four categories derived from the data
elicited by the questionnaire: household demographic
composition; physiographic characteristics of the

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332
Table 3
Descriptive statistics of the variables used in the model
Explanatory variable

Mean

Standard
deviation

Household members >11 (members)
Household children <12 (members)
Mature forest (1, 0)
Upland soil (1, 0)
Elevation (m)
Slope (◦ )
Precipitation (mm)
Plot size (numbers of pixels)
Percent of interval owning chain
saw (%)
Percent of interval owning vehicle (%)
Education of household head (years)
Number of household members w/>8
years education (members)
Native Spanish speaker (1, 0)
PROCAMPO (1000 s pesos)
Distance from household to plot (km)
Distance from ejido to nearest
market (km)
Duration of occupancy (years)

3.048
1.618
0.799
0.754
164.040
1.252
56.281
1357.718
0.256

1.699
1.796
0.401
0.431
69.100
2.733
4.186
1053.586
0.372

0.133
3.377
1.039

0.306
3.905
1.537

0.848
2.472
9.156
21.273

0.359
3.196
7.735
19.143

20.447

12.729

Units are given in parenthesis.

plot; farm capital (human and physical); and the
political-economic environment. Descriptive statistics
for these variables are presented in Table 3.
The influence of demographic composition is captured by two variables that partition the household according to age: family members over age 11 years, and
children under 12 years. As both indices are measured
as the average number of members in the respective
age categories over the corresponding time interval of
the imagery, they vary across households and time intervals. Following results identified elsewhere in the
literature, it is expected that the demographic variables
exert a positive effect on the hazard of deforestation
through both consumption and labour supply effects.
Six time-invariant variables control for the effects
of physiographic characteristics: a soil dummy which
serves to distinguish between higher quality upland
soils and lowland soils; the elevation and slope of the
pixel; the 30 year average of rainfall; the size of the
plot to which the pixel belongs; and a dummy indicating whether the pixel was categorised as mature forest (forest older than 15 years of age) at the start of
the interval. We expect that slope has a negative effect on the hazard of deforestation due to the greater

325

difficulty of cultivation on hillsides, while superior
soils are expected to have a positive effect. Rainfall
and elevation are also expected to have positive effects given the absence of irrigation in the region and
the presence of seasonally inundated lowlands where
farmers generally avoid cultivation. The land endowment is expected to have a negative effect as, all else
equal, a larger land endowment reduces the hazard that
any given pixel is cleared. Finally, the dummy indicating mature forest is expected to have a positive effect
on the hazard as such vegetation is generally supported
by more fertile soils relative to secondary vegetation.
Chain saw ownership, vehicle ownership, the education of the household head, the number of members
in the household having completed a high school education as of 1997, and a dummy indicating whether
the head is a native Spanish speaker control for the
effects of physical and human capital. While the first
two measures vary across households and time intervals, the latter three are time invariant. Ownership
of a chain saw and vehicle are both expected to increase the hazard of deforestation given their roles in
lowering the labour costs of forest clearance and in
accessing the plot. To the extent that more education
implies a higher opportunity cost of on-farm labour
due to increased wage-earning potential, the two variables measuring educational attainment are expected
to have negative effects. No a prior expectation is
attached to the Spanish language dummy.
The influence of the political-economic environment is captured by four variables: the ejido dummies cited above to control for fixed effects, an
interval-varying measure of the amount of agricultural
payments received by the household from a government program referred to as Programa de Apoyo
Directo al Campo/The Direct Rural Support Program
(PROCAMPO), a measure of the distance separating
the household from the plot, and a measure of on-road
distance from the ejido centre to the nearest market.
We expect the latter two variables to negatively affect
the hazard of deforestation given that they increase
access costs to both the plot and the market and effectively reduce the farm-gate price received by the
farmer for the plot’s output. Consistent with the objectives of the program, the effect of PROCAMPO is
expected to also decrease the hazard of deforestation.
Initiated in 1994, the program extends agricultural
support via payments for the continued cultivation of a

326

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

fixed area of land over 15 years, a period corresponding to the time in which agrarian price supports are to
be phased out under the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA). The payments are extended on
a per hectare basis and in 1996 were set in real terms
at 484 N pesos (US$ 64) for the remaining life of the
program. While the farmer has considerable flexibility
in selecting the crops planted, the number of hectares
eligible is based on the area that was cultivated in
any of nine basic crops in 1994, these being maize,
beans, wheat, soybeans, sorghum, rice, cotton, safflower, and barley. As the area and location covered is
fixed over the life of the program, one of its primary
intents, as stated by the agency administering the subsidy Secretar´ıa de Agricultura, Ganader´ıa, Desarrollo
Rural, Pesca y Alimentación/Secretariat of Agricultural, Cattle Ranching, Rural Development, Fishing,
and Food, 2002 (SAGARPA), is to intensify production and thereby decrease pressure on remaining
forest (Klepeis and Vance, 2000).
To capture the effect of time as a determinant of
forest clearance, we include an interval-varying variable that measures the duration of the household’s
occupancy as of the end of the time interval. The
square of this variable is also included to allow for
non-linearities in duration dependence. The inclusion of time as a covariate is a distinguishing feature
of the model, as it serves to control for a range
of inter-temporal factors that are important to the
land-use decision but that are generally not observable (Boscolo et al., 1998). The effect of learning
is one such factor. For example, we would expect
that continued acclimation to the ecological and economic conditions of the frontier environment would
partly determine the path of land allocation shifts
over time. Given that we have no direct measures of
learning effects, we rely on the variable measuring

the household’s duration of occupancy as a proxy.
In addition to the inclusion of this variable and its
square, the specification also includes dummy variables for each interval to control for the fact that they
are of differing lengths (Allison, 1995).

7. Results
Tables 4 and 5 present measures of predictive power
and the coefficient estimates, respectively, from two
complementary log–log models that estimate the effect of the above determinants on the hazard of forest
clearance. Model I in the two tables is estimated on
the entire sample of observations while Model II is
limited to just those pixels classified as lowland or upland forest at the start of an interval. In both models,
the standard errors of the coefficient estimates are corrected for heteroskedasticity using Huber/White estimates of variance. As the coefficients from the complementary log–log hazard model are difficult to interpret directly, we derive a more intuitive interpretation through calculation of the “risk ratio”. Let β i be
the coefficient associated with explanatory variable,
Xi . Then the risk ratio associated with β i is exp(βi ).
For dummy variables the risk ratio is the ratio of the
hazard rate for a pixel with the dummy variable equal
to one to the hazard rate for a pixel with the dummy
variable equal to zero, again holding other variables
constant. For the continuous variables, we subtract one
from the risk ratio and multiply by 100 (Allison, 1995),
which gives the percent change in the hazard rate with
a one unit change in Xi holding the other variables
constant.
To examine the predictive ability of the model we
employ two approaches, the results of which are presented in Table 4. The first, standard in the literature,

Table 4
Indicators of predictive performance
Model I: forest >6 years

Model II: forest >15 years

0

1

P (clearance) <0.2
P (clearance) ≥0.2

74,549
18,707

5,859
11,002

80,408
29,709

66,965
10,918

4,280
5,782

71,245
16,700

Total

93,256

16,861

110,117

77,883

10,062

87,945

Goodman and Kruskal’s gamma

Total

0

1

0.611

Total

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

327

Table 5
Complementary log–log models of forest clearance
Explanatory variable

Model I: forest >6 years
Estimated coefficient

Household members >11
Household members <12
Upland soil
Elevation
Slope
Precipitation
Plot size
Percent of interval owning chain saw
Percent of interval owning vehicle
Education of household head
Number of members w/>8 years education
Native Spanish speaker
PROCAMPO subsidy
Distance from household to plot
Distance from ejido to nearest market
Duration of occupancy
Duration of occupancy squared
Mature forest
Constant
χ 2 -statistic for interval dummies
χ 2 -statistic for ejido dummies
Number of observations
Wald χ 2
Log likelihood
a

0.026a

(4.428)
0.023a (4.394)
0.270a (10.821)
−0.011a (−23.786)
−0.023a (−6.396)
0.159a (21.990)
−0.0002a (−16.124)
−0.001 (−0.039)
0.407a (11.856)
0.022a (8.176)
0.029a (4.366)
−0.045 (−1.702)
0.023a (16.492)
−0.045a (−28.266)
−0.048a (−24.882)
−0.041a (−11.751)
0.0005a (8.042)
−0.645a (−33.609)
−6.697a (−14.855)
2,240.61a
1,328.88a
110,117
15,809a
−38022

Model II: forest >15 years
Risk ratio
2.668
2.313
1.310
−1.055
−2.229
17.268
−0.023
0.999
1.502
2.233
2.944
0.956
2.339
−4.381
−4.715
−4.009
0.052
0.525

Estimated coefficient
0.074a

(8.846)
−0.006 (−0.876)
0.416a (12.387)
−0.010a (−19.071)
−0.024a (−6.330)
0.106a (11.375)
−0.0003a (−16.210)
−0.148a (−3.560)
0.720a (16.599)
0.023a (5.906)
0.008 (0.883)
−0.244a (−6.300)
0.030a (16.979)
−0.046a (−21.873)
−0.040a (−17.174)
−0.052a (−11.817)
0.001a (11.358)

Risk ratio
7.646
−0.598
1.515
−1.027
−2.393
11.191
−0.029
0.862
2.054
2.292
0.784
0.784
3.053
−4.495
−3.959
−5.028
0.091

−4.266a (−7.741)
1,595.68a
880.30a
8,7945
9,410a
−25610

Denotes significance at 1% level.

references a matrix showing the number of predicted
versus actual changes. Following Chomitz and Gray
(1996), who argue that even low predicted probabilities convey information, we select 0.2 as the threshold
probability for designating observations as predicted
changes. Using this criterion, Model I accurately predicts 65% of deforested pixels and 80% of forested
pixels, with corresponding figures of 57% and 86% for
Model II. As Chomitz and Gray and others have noted,
however, the choice of a threshold probability value is
entirely arbitrary, and results can change dramatically
simply by selecting a different value. An alternative,
though rarely used, measure of model fit for binary
choice models is given by Goodman and Kruskal’s
gamma (Goodman and Kruskal, 1954, 1959, 1963).
This symmetric, non-parametric measure varies from
−1 to +1 and is based on the difference between concordant (C) and discordant (D) pairs of predicted and
actual values as a percentage of all pairs ignoring ties,

computed as (C −D)/(C +D).10 The value of gamma
for Model I is 0.61 and is only slightly higher for
Model II, indicating that the model reduces our error
in predicting the outcome of the dependent variable
by just over 60%.
Turning to Table 5, it is seen that the estimated
coefficients of Model I are generally of the expected
sign. Both of the demographic indices are positive and
statistically significant determinants of the hazard of
10 Concordant pairs are those for which the values are higher
(or lower) on all elements in one set compared with another.
Discordant pairs are those for which the value of one element
is higher in one set while the value of some other element is
higher in the second set. As an illustration, consider the following
hypothetical list of predicted and actual values: a. (0.9, 0); b.
(0.3, 0); c. (0.8, 1); d. (0.2, 1). From this list, ac, ad, and bd are
discordant pairs while bc is a concordant pair. Pairs ab and cd
are ties and are therefore ignored in the calculation of gamma.
Gamma in this example equals −0.5.

328

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

deforestation, an unsurprising result given that the majority of households in the region are semi-subsistent
producers, for whom which family members simultaneously represent a source of labour as well as an
overhead cost. Specifically, each additional member over 11 increases the hazard of deforestation by
2.67%, with a similar magnitude for children.
All of the physiographic measures are statistically
significant, and, in some cases, confirm findings identified elsewhere in the literature. For example, the
estimated coefficients for slope and elevation are both
negative, similar to findings of Chomitz and Gray
(1996) and Nelson and Hellerstein (1997) in their
studies of deforestation in Belize and Mexico, respectively. As expected, rainfall and superior soils both
have a positive effect on the hazard of deforestation,
while a larger plot size has a negative effect. Finally,
the negative coefficient on the mature dummy suggests that farmers prefer to clear secondary growth,
an interesting finding given that secondary growth is
generally supported by less fertile soils. Specifically,
the estimate suggests that the hazard of clearance for
mature forest in any period is about 53% of the hazard
for secondary vegetation. One possible explanation is
a desire to avoid higher clearance costs associated with
mature forest even given higher weeding costs associated with inferior soils, a trade-off analysed at length
in the fallow-cycle literature (e.g. Dvorak, 1992).
Vehicle ownership increases the hazard of deforestation, as expected, while the effect of chain saw
ownership is statistically insignificant. A somewhat
surprising result is the positive effect of the two education variables on deforestation. This may reflect
the effect of higher labour productivity from increased
managerial talent (Tao Yang, 1997), which could result in a relatively lower marginal productivity of land
and hence greater clearance. Being a Spanish speaker
decreases the hazard of deforestation, though the coefficient estimate is just out of the range of significance
at the 5% level.
With regard to the measures of the politicaleconomic environment, the estimated negative coefficients on the two distance variables are consistent
with the intuition that higher travel costs decrease the
returns from agricultural land use through a reduced
farm-gate price of output. Perhaps the most interesting finding, from a policy perspective, is the positive
and statistically significant coefficient estimate on

PROCAMPO, a result directly at odds with the
program’s intent to decrease deforestation. Specifically, the estimate indicates that each 1000 pesos
extended by the program increases the hazard of
deforestation by 2.34%.
Different specifications of the variable measuring
duration of occupancy were explored by means of
a nested likelihood ratio test, whereby the quadratic
functional form was determined to be optimal in
terms of fit and parsimony.11 The estimates indicate
non-linear duration dependence of the deforestation
process; the conditional probability of forest conversion decreases with the passage of time at a decreasing
rate, with some evidence of a reversal after 41 years.
This result may reflect a confluence of factors, including the rotation period of the fallow cycle, family
life cycle dynamics, and, as suggested above, learning
effects from adaptation to local market opportunities
and ecological constraints.
Turning to the results of Model II, estimated on
only those pixels with vegetation older than 15 years,
some significant discrepancies emerge. The most
noteworthy of these is the counterintuitive sign reversal on the coefficient estimate for ownership of a chain
saw. A plausible explanation for this finding is not
immediately forthcoming, other than to speculate that
it reflects a shortcoming of the model to adequately
control for wealth effects. In this regard, anecdotal
evidence from the field survey suggests that those
farmers who owned chain saws were more diversified
in their income generating activities, relying less on
the natural resource base for their livelihoods. Other
differences across the two models are seen with respect to the demographic variables and human capital
indicators. The number of children under age 12 years,
which is positive and significant in the model estimated on the entire sample of pixels, is now insignificant, while the magnitude of the estimate on members
older than 11 increases over three-fold. This finding
may reflect the fact that the clearance of older vegetation is more strongly determined by the availability
11 The nested likelihood ratio test compares the log likelihoods
of two nested models using the χ 2 -statistic. Specifically, if one
model is nested within another, the fit of the nested (or constrained)
model can be evaluated by taking twice the absolute difference in
the log likelihoods for the two models. This difference gives the
likelihood ratio χ 2 -statistic, which, if significant, indicates that the
nested model should be rejected.

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

of labour rather than by demand-side factors. Finally,
the variable measuring the number of members in the
household having completed a high school education
as of 1997 and the Spanish language dummy, respectively lose and gain significance levels in Model
II. With regard to the latter, the negative sign of the
coefficient estimate may be indicative of a greater
reliance of indigenous farmers on the resource base
as opposed to off-farm wage-earning opportunities.
While the remaining coefficient estimates for Models I and II are for the most part similar with respect to
sign and statistical significance, those differences that
do emerge suggest that the age of vegetation cleared
may have an important mitigating effect on the determinants of land-use decisions. The extent to which
these differences are related to Model II’s exclusion
of land under fallow is not possible to fully explore
given the limited number of dates and the length of the
temporal window captured by available satellite imagery. One intuitively appealing interpretation to the
results of Models I and II is to regard the fallow cycle
as the baseline rate of change, whereby the effect of
the explanatory variables is to accelerate or slow down
this underlying rate depending on whether a positive
or negative coefficient is observed. Some caution must
be exercised, however, in extending this interpretation
too far, particularly if the dependent variable is capturing the clearance of mature forest. In this case, a positive effect of an explanatory variable could actually
correspond to a longer cycle due to the incorporation
of more land.

8. Discussion
Several policy implications emerge from the results of the model. Perhaps most important from the
perspective of agricultural commodity price interventions is the statistical significance of the demographic
measures, suggesting potential non-independence of
production and consumption decisions that would
result from only partial integration in output and/or
factor markets. A large and still growing body of
literature addresses the implications of incomplete
markets for agricultural supply response. This literature establishes that farmers will not, in general,
exhibit behaviour consistent with profit maximisation
given prohibitively high transaction costs in market

329

participation (e.g. Singh et al., 1986; Benjamin, 1992;
Saha, 1994; Omamo, 1998; Key et al., 2000; Vance
and Geoghegan, 2002). Based on this observation, a
broad consensus has emerged that market integration
is an important prerequisite to the implementation of
structural adjustment policies as it ensures that farmers are within the reach of standard policy instruments
and, moreover, that the response to such instruments
will be predictable. This perspective gives rise to
recommendations for policies that accelerate market
articulation so as to reduce the incidence of sluggish
or perverse price responses that may characterise farm
systems in the intermediate stages of development
(Anderson Medellin et al., 1994).
Whether policies that encourage integration into the
market are consistent with both economic and environmental objectives is, however, far from clear. Proximity to roads is one policy related variable that could be
used to increase participation with the market, but one
which is also identified in this study and others to increase the probability of forest clearance (e.g. Chomitz
and Gray, 1996; Nelson and Hellerstein, 1997). Von
Thuenen’s work on locational rent functions provides
a theoretical model for explaining this result. In this
model, the value of land for agriculturists and those
pursuing other forest resources is largely determined
by its location with respect to roads or ports, whereby
forest clearance occurs until the point where harvest
and access costs equals the additional value garnered
from land-based outputs (Katzman, 1975; Hyde et al.,
1996). This model is largely applicable to the southern Yucatán, where the paving of the highway in 1972
subsidised transport costs between the frontier and
regional urban centres, instigating the unprecedented
period of land-use change modelled in this study. Nevertheless, some caution is warranted in extrapolating
the negative effect of roads to predict the effects of
future road building projects. To the extent that roads
reduce the costs of accessing off-farm wage-earning
opportunities, they can potentially reduce pressure on
forests by drawing labour off the farm. Given that
this possibility is predicated on the availability of
such opportunities, road construction associated with
the Mundo Maya tourism scheme referred to above
should proceed with an eye toward simultaneous
generation of employment in the ecotourism sector.
A final policy-relevant finding to be drawn from
the model is the positive coefficient of PROCAMPO

330

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

in increasing the hazard of deforestation, which again
may be related to farmers’ partial integration into
markets. Rather than using the support to purchase
land-intensive chemical inputs, markets for which in
the region are shallow or non-existent, farmers may
be using the support to expand the extent of cultivation through the purchase of more readily available
inputs such as labour. An additional explanation for
the positive coefficient on PROCAMPO may be due
to the specific terms of the program, which stipulate
that the area and location supported must have been
cultivated under some staple for one of the 3 years
prior to 1994. Provided that that same tract is maintained under a “productive” use not limited to staples
following 1994, the participating farmer is eligible to
receive PROCAMPO payments. The basic structure
of the support is thus at odds with an agricultural
system based on forest/fallow. By requiring that the
land be maintained under production, the program
precludes the use of fallow as a means of supporting repeat cultivation on the area enrolled, evidently
increasing pressures on remaining hectares (Klepeis
and Vance, 2000). This suggests the importance of designing support programs not only in consideration of
the prevailing market structure within which farmers
operate, but also in consideration of the managerial
strategies applied to agricultural production.

9. Conclusion and research extensions
This paper has presented two principal advancements to the spatial and temporal modelling of tropical deforestation in agrarian regions. Methodologically, the paper develops the use of GPS-assisted field
surveys as a means of linking farmer plots to available satellite imagery. The creation of geo-referenced
sketch maps makes it possible to not only spatially
associate individual farmers with their plots, but
also to track over time the forest conversion process
within these plots. Empirically, the paper presents
an application of a survival model as a means of
analysing continuous time processes using discrete
time data. By specifying the optimal timing of forest
clearance as the choice variable, the empirical model
identified several potentially important ecological
and political-economic determinants of deforestation. After estimating the complementary log–log

specification of the survival model, it was determined
that the data is characterised by non-linear duration
dependence, with the hazard of deforestation first
decreasing and then increasing with time as seen by
the coefficient estimates on the year and year-squared
covariates.
There are several potential avenues for future
research using this style of model to address deforestation processes in agrarian contexts. The first
would entail more explicit treatment of fallow-cycle
dynamics. In order to do this, a more sophisticated
theoretical model of decision making is required.
Empirically, this could be pursued through alternative specifications of the effect of time as well as
through tests of parameter consistency according to
whether mature or secondary forest is cleared. A second extension would involve further exploration of
the extent to which limited exchange opportunities
from missing or shallow markets affects the decision
to clear land. Such an analysis would be complicated
by the fact that the decision to enter the market is,
itself, an endogenous choice, requiring accommodation of potential sample selection biases. The final
issue meriting further investigation regards the empirical implications of spatial autocorrelation. While
the present analysis links the satellite imagery and
independent variables at the level of the individual
land manger, as noted above the pixel is nonetheless
an arbitrary unit of analysis, and the possibility that
unobserved farmer-specific attributes introduce biases
must be acknowledged. In this regard, one possibility
of controlling for spatial autocorrelation given the discrete nature of the present data would be to develop
a spatial lag variable as one of the covariates.

Acknowledgements
This work was undertaken through the auspices
of the Southern Yucatán Peninsular Region (SYPR)
project with core sponsorship from NASAs LCLUC
(Land-Cover and Land-Use Change) program (NAG
56406) and the Centre for Integrated Studies on Global
Change, Carnegie Mellon University (CIS-CMU;
NSF-SBR 95-21914). Additional funding from
NASAs New Investigator Program (NAG5-8559) also
supported the specific research in this article. SYPR
is a collaborative project of El Colegio de la Frontera

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

Sur (ECOSUR), Harvard Forest—Harvard University,
the George Perkins Marsh Institute-Clark University
and CIS-CMU. The views expressed in this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
those of the US Environmental Protection Agency.
We thank Laura Schneider for her assistance with
data preparation for this paper. We also thank Julie
Hewitt, two anonymous referees, and the editor for
providing valuable comments.
References
Achard, F., Eva, H., Glinni, A., Mayaux, P., Richards, T., Stibig,
H.J. (Eds.), 1998. Identification of Deforestation Hot Spot Areas
in the Humid Tropics. Trees Publication Series B, Research
Report No. 4, Space Application Institute, Global Vegetation
Monitoring Unit, Joint Research Centre, European Commission,
Brussels.
Allison, P.D., 1995. Survival Analysis Using the SAS System: A
Practical Guide. SAS Institute Inc., Carey, North Carolina.
Anderson Medellin, M., Apedaile, L.P., Pachico, D., 1994.
Commercialisation and price response of a Bean-growing
farming System in Columbia. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 42,
795–816.
Benjamin, D., 1992. Household composition, labour markets, and
labour demand: testing for separation in agricultural household
models. Econometrica 60, 287–322.
Boscolo, M., Kerr, S., Pfaff, A., Sanchez, A., 1998. What Role for
Tropical Forests in Climate Change Mitigation? The Case of
Costa Rica, Paper Prepared for the HIID/INCAE/BCIE Central
America Project.
Chomitz, K., Gray, D., 1996. Roads, land use and deforestation:
a spatial model applied to Belize. World Bank Econ. Rev. 10,
487–512.
Coomes, O.T., Grimard, F., Burt, G.J., 2000. Tropical forests and
shifting cultivation: secondary forest fallow dynamics among
traditional farmers of the Peruvian Amazon. Ecol. Econ. 32,
109–124.
Cropper, M., Griffiths, C., Mani, M., 1999. Roads, population
pressures, and deforestation in Thailand. Land Econ. 75, 58–73.
Cropper, M., Puri, J., Griffiths, C., 2001. Predicting the location
of deforestation. Land Econ. 77, 172–186.
Deaton, A., 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A
Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Dvorak, K., 1992. Resource management by west African farmers
and the economics of shifting cultivation. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
74, 809–815.
Ewell, P., Merrill-Sands, D., 1987. Milpa in Yucatán: a long-fallow
maize system and its alternatives in the Maya peasant economy.
In: Turner II, B.L., Brush, S.B. (Eds.), Comparative Farming
Systems, Guilford Press, New York, pp. 95–129.
Geoghegan, J., Bockstael, N., 2000. Smart Growth and the Supply
of Sprawl. Paper Presented at the Association of Environmental

331

and Resource Economists Workshop on the Effectiveness of
Resource and Environmental Regulation, La Jolla, CA.
Geoghegan, J., Cortina Villar, S., Klepeis, P., Macario Mendoza,
P., Ogneva-Himmelberger, Y., Roy Chowdhury, R., Turner II.,
B.L., Vance, C., 2001. Modelling tropical deforestation in the
Southern Yucatán peninsular region: comparing survey and
satellite data. Agric. Ecosys. Environ. 85 (1–3), 25–46.
Goodman, L., Kruskal, W.H., 1954. Measures for association for
cross-classification. Part I. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 49, 732–764.
Goodman, L., Kruskal, W.H., 1959. Measures for association for
cross-classification. Part II. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 54, 123–163.
Goodman, L., Kruskal, W.H., 1963. Measures for association for
cross-classification. Part III. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 58, 310–364.
Hite, D., Sohngen, B., Templeton, J., 2001. Property Tax Impacts
on the Timing of Land Use Conversion. Paper Presented at
the Annual Meeting of the American Agricultural Economics
Association, Chicago, August, 2001.
Hosmer, D., Lemeshow, S., 1999. Applied Survival Analysis:
Regression Modelling of Time to Event Data. Wiley, New York,
NY.
Hyde, W., Amacher, G., Magrath, W., 1996. Deforestation and
forest land use: theory, evidence, and policy implications. World
Bank Res. Observer 11, 223–248.
INEGI, 1985–1987. Cartas topogrficas. 1:50,000. Instituto Nacional de Estadistica Geografica e Informatica, Aguascalientes.
Irwin, E.G., 1998. Do Spatial Externalities Matter? The Role
of Endogenous Interactions in the Evolution of Land Use
Pattern. Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics,
University of Maryland, College Park, Unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation.
Irwin, E., Bockstael, N., 2001. The problem of identifying land use
spillovers: measuring the effects of open space on residential
property values. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 83, 699–705.
Irwin, E., Bockstael, N., 2002. Interacting agents, spatial
externalities, and the endogenous evolution of residential land
use pattern. J. Econ. Geogr. 2, 31–54.
Katzman, M., 1975. The Brazilian frontier in comparative
perspective. Comparative Stud. Soc. Hist. 17, 266–285.
Key, N., Sadoulet, E., de Janvry, A., 2000. Transaction costs and
agricultural household response. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 82, 245–
259.
Kiefer, N., 1988. Economic duration data and hazard functions. J.
Econ. Lit. 26, 646–649.
Klepeis, P., Vance, C., 2000. Neoliberal Policy and Deforestation
in Southeastern Mexico: Land Reform, PROCAMPO, and
Land-Use/Land-Cover Change. Paper Presented at the
Conference of Latin American Geographers, Austin, TX.
Klepeis, P., Vance, C., Keys, E., Macario Mendoza, P., Turner
II, B.L., 2003. Subsistence Sustained: Swidden or Milpa
Cultivation. In: Turner II, B.L., Geoghegan, J., Foster, D. (Eds.),
Integrated Land-Change Science and Tropical Deforestation in
the Southern Yucatán: Final Frontiers, Oxford: Clarendon Press
of Oxford University Press (in press).
Liverman, D., Moran, E.F., Rinfuss, R.R., Stern, P.C. (Eds.), 1998.
People and Pixels: Linking Remote Sensing and Social Science.
National Academy Press, Washington, DC.

332

C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 317–332

Nelson, G., Hellerstein, D., 1997. Do roads cause deforestation?
Using satellite images in econometric analysis of land use. Am.
J. Agric. Econ. 79, 80–88.
Nelson, G., Harris, V., Stone, S., 2001. Deforestation, land use
and property rights. Land Econ. 77, 187–205.
Omamo, S., 1998. Transport costs and smallholder cropping
choices: an application to Siaya district, Kenya. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 80, 116–123.
Pfaff, A., 1999. What drives deforestation in the Brazilian
Amazon? J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 37, 26–43.
SAGARPA, 2002. http://www.procampo.gob.mx/. Secretar´ıa de
Agricultura, Ganader´ıa, Desarrollo Rural. Pesca y Alimentación/Secretariat of Agricultural, Cattle Ranching, Rural
Development, Fishing, and Food.
Saha, A., 1994. A two-season agricultural household model of
output and price uncertainty. J. Dev. Econ. 45, 245–269.
Singh, I., Squire, L., Strauss, J. (Eds.), 1986. Agricultural
Household Models: Extensions, Applications, and Policy. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Tao Yang, D., 1997. Education and off-farm work. Econ. Dev.
Cultural Change 45, 613–632.
Turner II, B.L., 1983. Once Beneath the Forest: Prehistoric
Terracing in the Rio Bec Region of the Maya Lowlands.
Dellplain Latin American Studies No. 13, Westview Press,
Boulder.
Turner II, B.L., Cortina Vilar, S., Foster, D., Geoghegan, J., Keys,
E., Klepeis, P., Lawrence, D., Macario Mendoza, P., Manson, S.,
Ogneva-Himmelberger, Y., Pérez Salicrup, D., Roy Chowdhury,
R., Savistsky, B., Schneider, L., Schmook, B., Vance, C., 2001.
Deforestation and agricultural change in the southern Yucatán
peninsular region: an integrative approach. Forestry Ecosyst.
Manage. 154, 353–370.
Vance, C., Geoghegan, J., 2002. Semi-Subsistent and Commercial
Land-Use Determinants in an Agricultural Frontier of Southern
Mexico: A Switching Regression Approach. International
Regional Science Review, Forthcoming.
Warwick, D.P., Luinger, C.A., 1975. The Sample Survey: Theory
and Practice. McGraw Hill, New York.

