AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 16 (1997) 17-34

The impact of prices and macroeconomic policies on agricultural
supply: a synthesis of available results
Nlandu Mamingi

1

Department of Economics, The University of the West Indies, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown, Barbados

Accepted 23 October 1996

Abstract
This paper reviews the literature dealing with the link of agricultural prices and macroeconomic policies to agiicultural supply with
particular emphasis on Sub-Saharan Africa. Although the study echoes the stylized facts on price elasticities underlined in previous literature
reviews, the paper points out that our understanding of the quantitative dimensions of agricultural supply response is weak given the
importance of this assumed response for growth, poverty alleviation, and the environment Indeed, issues such as simultaneity of variables,
data pooling, omission of variables, and asymmetry in supply responses to price changes have not been adequately addressed in many
instances. © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

The objective of this paper is to evaluate our
knowledge of the link of agricultural prices and
macroeconomic policies to agricultural supply. In
other words, the study focuses on how the literature
deals with the following key question: Are agricultural incentives effective in boosting agricultural
supply? In that respect, this literature review supplements the previous ones as it highlights questions
that were left out or insufficiently dealt with. The
paper concentrates on econometric studies and emphasizes developing countries with special reference
to Sub-Saharan Africa.
The overall framework of the study can be laid
out as follows. Macroeconomic policies (monetary
policy, fiscal policy, trade and exchange rate policies) affect agricultural prices through their effects

1

Tel.: (246) 425 1310, ext 256; fax: (246) 425 I 014.

on the real exchange rate. Agricultural prices, along
with non-price factors including exogenous shocks,
determine agricultural output or supply.
The issue of agricultural supply response is a very
important one as it has an impact on growth, poverty,
and the environment. Not surprisingly this issue is
central in many structural adjustment programs in
less developed countries (LDCs). Indeed, the size of
agricultural supply response is informative about
whether ''a policy of taxing agriculture through lower
farm prices or through overvalued exchange rates
and industrial policies will generate resources for
investment in other sectors of the economy ... or
whether 2 such policies will retard agricultural
growth and create food and input bottlenecks which
eventually bring down the rate of growth of the
economy as a whole" (Chhibber, 1989, p. 55).
Moreover, the agricultural supply response, mainly

2

Underlined and added by us.

0169-5150/97 j$17.00 Copyright© 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Pll SO 169-5150(96)0 1216-9

18

N. Mamingij Agricultural Economics 16 (1997) 17-34

in the form of area expansion, is also useful since it
could be informative about the seriousness of environmental problems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deals with issues in the theory and
specification of agricultural supply models. Section 3
reviews some empirical studies. Section 4 contains
concluding remarks and recommendations.

2.1.1. Microspecification
The most influential model to capture crop supply
is the Neriove model. Basically, the Nerlovian model
is a dynamic model that states that output (quantity
or area) is a function of expected price, output (area)
adjustment, and some exogenous variables. Thus, a
typical Nerlovian model can be written as follows
(see, for example, Askari and Cummings, 1977, pp.
257-258):

2. Issues in the theory and specification of agricultural supply models

A?= c + al pte+ a2Zt + ut

Agricultural supply response represents the agricultural output response to change in agricultural
prices or, more generally, to agricultural incentives.
Agricultural supply response can be analyzed from
the point of view of aggregate output or supply,
subsectoral output (i.e. crop output and livestock
output) and individual crop (i.e. cotton and tea). The
level of aggregation depends on the objective of the
study as well as the availability of data. Moreover,
agricultural output or supply 3 can be captured in
any of the following: (a) acreage or area under
cultivation; (b) yield or product per acreage unit; and
(c) product of acreage and yield.
This section focuses on some issues in the theory
and specification of agricultural supply models that
are not sufficiently highlighted in the literature. The
emphasis is, however, more on model specification
than on theory. The first issue concerns impact of
prices and exchange rates on agricultural supply. The
second issue deals with other determinants of agricultural supply. The third issue is related to the
problem of simultaneity of variables. The fourth
issue concerns the asymmetric (or irreversible) nature of supply responses to price changes, and the
fifth deals with 'to pool or not to pool' question.
2.1. On the effect of prices and exchange rates

Prices and exchanges rates are very important in
dictating the pace of agricultural growth at the micro
level as well as at the macro level.

3 Agricultural supply and agricultural output are most often
interchangeable here.

pte= pte-!+
A 1 =A 1 _

1

/3( pt-1- pte-!)

+y(A?-A 1_

(I)

1)

where A 1 = actual area under cultivation at time t;
A?= area desired to be under cultivation at time t;
P 1 = actual real producer price at time t; P 1e =
expected real producer price at time t; Z1 = other
exogenous factors affecting supply at time t; and {3,
y = expectation and adjustment coefficients, respectively.
Several questions can be raised at this stage. One
of them is how to measure real output price. The
issue here is the choice of the relevant deflator.
Askari and Cummings (1977) elaborate very well on
that. The real output price can be either one of these
or none: ''(a) the price of the crop actually received
by farmers; (b) the ratio of the price of the crop
received by farmers to some consumer price index;
(c) the ratio of the price of the crop received by
farmers to some price index of the farmers' inputs;
(d) the ratio of the price of the crop received by
farmers to some index of the price of competitive
crops (or the price of the most competitive crop)"
(Askari and Cummings, 1977, p. 258).
With suitable definition of price, the above equations lead to the following:
Qt =Co+ ct Qt_ 1 + c2( PctfPctt) + c3Zt + ut

(2)

where t = 1, 2, ... , n, is the time index, Q is
agricultural output in general (area or yield per
acreage or total yield), Pc is the price of the crop, Pd
is the price of the deflator and other variables are
defined as above. A point not sufficiently underlined
in the literature is that by estimating Eq. (2), one
imposes a restriction on the coefficients of nominal
output price and the deflator price (they should be
equal to c2 in absolute value). This is rather the

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

exception than the rule. In fact, Eq. (2) can be
estimated in an unrestricted form with nominal output price and potential deflators underlined above:
Qt =Co+ cl Qt-l + Cz Pet+ Czl Pit+ Czz Pat

(2')
where P; is the input price, Pa represents the price
of alternative crops, Pco stands for the price of
consumer goods usually captured by the consumer
price index (CPI), Pu is the price of urban labor or
wages, and other variables are defined as above. The
suitable deflator (if any) can be revealed by testing
the unrestricted form Eq. (2') against various restricted forms of type Eq. (2). Note that even if one
knows today's actual price, the latter may become
irrelevant in the future.
The question concerning formation of price expectation is also an important one. In general, many
authors use some distributed lags to capture price
expectation. The lag structure, however, may vary
from one type of crop to another. In general, one
would expect perennial crops to have longer lags
than annual crops. This lag structure differential is
clearly an issue when one tries to explain aggregate
output. Note also that price expectation itself can
change due to an external shock. Finally, it is hard to
sort out whether adjustment or expectation is taking
place if the expectation coefficient and the adjustment coefficient are both equal to one (see Mundlak,
1985).
The model is a little bit vague about the components of Z. Theoretically Z includes variables describing marketing, credit, mechanization, land reform, research, irrigation, weather, and soil quality.
Nevertheless, in the Nerlove model, weather measurement (i.e. rainfall) and time trend (capturing
structural change or advance in technology) seem to
be the favorite candidates. Note that contrary to
many Nerlovian models, weather as rainfall should
not necessarily enter the model in a linear fashion as
too much rain can be a nuisance. Moreover timing of
rain matters too. The inclusion of time trend instead
of specific variables is generally justified on the
ground of lack of availability of data or multicollinearity among variables. Time trend as variable
capturing the effect of omitted variables should be a
variable of last resort as we are really interested in
tracing the impact of each specific variable.

19

Although the presence of Jagged output in the
basic equation usually gives rise to a very high R 2
and possibly reduces or eliminates autocorrelation,
this variable competes with capital stock if included.
Specially, the presence of capital stock makes the
output lagged one period loose its explanatory power
(Mundlak, 1985). The question of including capital
stock and excluding lagged output is an important
one. On the one hand, the inclusion of capital stock
can help justify the inclusion of other variables. On
the other hand, the exclusion of lagged output is
inconsistent with the Nerlove model, which is based
on price expectation and output adjustment.
The role of exchange rate is not explained at all at
this level of aggregation. In fact, exchange rate
affects crop supply generally through its effect on
price incentives.
To sum up, at the micro level area (acreage) or
output (total yield) for a given crop can be determined as follows:

(3)
where variables are defined as above.
The sign in Eq. (3) indicates the nature of the
impact of the variable in matter in crop production.
An increase in the price of the crop is an incentive to
produce more. An increase in the iriput price increases the cost of production hence becomes a
disincentive to produce more. An increase of the
price of the most alternative crop is a disincentive to
produce more of the main crop. An increase in the
price of consumer goods as well as wages negatively
affects crop production. The impact of other factors
on the crop production is to be analyzed on a case by
case basis.
2.1.2. Using macro and policy variables
Agricultural price incentives are influenced by
macroeconomic policies (trade policies, exchange
rate policies, policies towards capital movements,
and fiscal policies). The policies affect the farmer's
real income, and terms of trade between rural and
urban as well as the terms of trade between tradeables and non-tradeables (Jaeger and Humphreys,
1988).
Central to these policies is the real exchange rate
(RER), that is, the ratio of prices of tradeable to

20

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

non-tradeable goods (or vice versa). Indeed, macroeconomic policies generally result in the RER effect,
which ultimately affect output price and hence agricultural supply. The behavior of the real exchange
rate is, in many LDCs, rather harmful to agricultural
incentives as exchange rates are overvalued. Indeed,
overvalued exchange rates make local products, including agricultural products, less competitive with
imports and Jess profitable as exports. (Abt associates, Inc., 1989).
Exchange rate policies refer to policies aiming at
altering the nominal exchange rate in view of modifying the real exchange rate. In many LDCs, this
modification usually takes the form of a devaluation
which, in fact, is consistent "with smaller, greater,
or equivalent real devaluations, depending on the
adjustment in the price of non-tradeable or home
goods that result from the nominal devaluation"
(Valdes and Pinckney, 1989, p. 44). Successful devaluations bring about an increase in producer incentive as they increase the price of tradeable relative to
non-tradeable goods.
An unsustainable budget deficit (as a result of
expansionary fiscal policy) can affect agricultural
production through its effect on exchange rate. Indeed, an unsustainable budget deficit puts pressure
on money supply which in turns affects the price
level. If the domestic price inflation exceeds the
trading partner's price inflation, then an appreciation
of exchange rate results (Cleaver, 1985). 4 The latter
appreciation generally results in a decrease of producer incentive as the price of tradeable goods decreases with respect to non-tradeable goods. Note
that an expansionary fiscal policy is also more likely
to affect investment; that is, it is more likely to lead
to investment cuts in some sectors. Given the ruralurban bias that exists in most developing countries,
investment is usually cut in the agricultural sector.
Capital movements can substantially influence the
RER. A policy of heavy over-seas borrowing can
lower the RER as happened in Argentina and Chile
in the 1970s and early 1980s. Conversely, a policy of
large overseas investment can raise the RER .... The

4 For a more elaborated relationship between government
spending and the RER, see Valdes and Pinckney ( 1989).

connection between capital flows and the RER can
be sketched as follows: for any given level of international reserves, equilibrium in the balance of payments requires a higher balance in the capital account which thereby lowers the current account. In
other words, a larger net inflow of capital will induce
a lower RER, reducing the surplus in the current
account. (Valdes and Pinckney, 1989, p. 47.)
Once more, the question of interest is how to
measure real output price. Generally, here it is the
ratio of nominal output price to consumer price
index.
Another important issue is how to capture real
exchange rate. Recall, it is the price ratio of tradeable to non-tradeable goods; that is, RER = PT/Pn
where PT is the price of tradeable goods and Pn is
the price of non-tradeable goods. The literature underlines that there are serious difficulties in making
operational this definition, as adequate data on the
two prices are hard to find. Instead, the following
proxy is used: RER = e · WPijCPI where CPI is the
domestic consumer price index, WPI is the US (or
foreign) wholesale price index, and e is the official
nominal exchange rate measured as the number of
local currency per unit of US dollar (or foreign
currency). An increase of the RER is a depreciation
and the converse is an appreciation. In fact, what is
at stake here is the real exchange misalignment
which is the difference between actual real exchange
rate and equilibrium real exchange rate, equilibrium
real exchange rate (ERER) being defined as the real
exchange rate that prevails in the long run when
there is no distortion. Misalignment due to overvaluation represents an incentive distortion since by raising the price of non-tradeable goods with respect to
that of tradeable goods, it brings about misallocation
of productive resources.
Note that since CPI on which the RER is generally based is not comparable across countries for
reasons enumerated below, the RER is really a country index. This aspect has been often overlooked in
the literature.
The linkage between macroeconomic policies and
real producer prices can be expressed in terms of
direct and indirect effects (see the seminal study by
Krueger et al., 1988). The direct effect is captured by
the proportional difference between the producer

N. Mamingi j Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

price (farmgate price) and the border price (adjusting
for distribution, storage, transport, and other marketing cost). A negative difference means a tax on
exportable goods or on producers and a positive one
represents a subsidy on imports (Krueger et al.,
1988). Taxes represent distortions that are harmful to
the agricultural sector. It has been argued that in
many developing countries, especially Sub-Saharan
Africa, these distortions (taxes, mainly) have been
deliberately set up by governments through price
fixation or control.
The above direct effect is the same concept as the
nominal protection coefficient (NPC) which is the
ratio of the farmgate price to the border price after
adjusting for all the relevant costs underlined above.
Clearly, the NPC compares the farmgate price to the
maximum that could be offered to producers (border
price less than the costs advocated above). A ratio of
less than one indicates that agriculture is being taxed.
The NPC has been criticized on the ground that as a
measure of incentive distortion it ignores the exchange rate impact on policy distortion, and it also
ignores the effect of exchange rate misalignment or
implicit taxation. That is, the NPC will understate
the degree of agricultural taxation when exchange
rates are overvalued at the same time it will be
unable to provide an unambiguous answer as to the
relative importance of one source to the net effects
change over time in the sources of variation-farmgate price, international price, and exchange rate
(Jaeger, 1992). The real protection coefficient (RPC)
is used to meet the above criticisms. It is an NPC
calculated at the equilibrium exchange rate.
The indirect effect has two components. The first is
the impact of the unsustainable portion of the current
deficit and industrial protection policies on the real
exchange rate and thus on the price of agricultural
commodities relative to nonagricultural nontradeables. The second is the impact of industrial protection policies on the relative price of agricultural
commodities relative to that of nonagricultural tradeable goods. (Krueger et al., 1988, p. 255.)
Another approach showing the linkage between
macroeconomic policies (represented by real exchange rate) and real output price is that of the
World Bank. Following the World Bank (1994, p.

21

271), the real producer price is decomposed as follows:
RPP = PpjCPI = PpfP 8 e eWPijCPI P 8 /WPI
= NPCRER p 8

( 4)

where RPP is the real producer price for export
crops, PF is the farmgate producer price, P 8 is the
border price in dollars, e is the nominal exchange
rate defined as above, NPC is the nominal protection
coefficient, RER is the real exchange rate, and p 8 is
the real price of country's exports (at the border).
Eq. ( 4) reveals that it is really hazardous to
include both RER and RPP in the same equation as
the real producer price already contains information
on the RER. 5
Note that Eq. (4) can be redefined in terms of
equilibrium exchange rate as follows:
RPP = PpfCPI= PpjP 8 e ejE EWPijCPI P 8
jWPI=RPCERER p 8

(4')

where E is the equilibrium exchange rate, RPC is
the real protection coefficient, and ERER is the
equilibrium real exchange rate. Recall that neither E
nor ERER is observable.
In the pursuit of profits, farmers have to bear the
cost of inputs. Nominal output price incentive is
annihilated if input costs are high. Hence, input
prices are a very important element of agricultural
production. The prices of the following inputs are
particularly relevant: fertilizers, pesticides, improved
and high yield varieties of seeds, tractors, and cars.
Moreover, urban wages and the price of consumer
goods have a serious impact on agricultural output
prices. An increase in input prices increases input
costs and decreases the incentive to produce more,
ceteris paribus. This is generally the case for external
inputs, such as fertilizers, pesticides, improved and
high yield varieties of seed and machinery which, as
imported goods, at least in many LDCs, see their
prices raised by policies that protect industry. On the
other hand, in many countries there is a fair amount
of subsidization of these inputs as in the case of an
overvaluation of currency which artificially reduces

5 If one decides to use both variables, then one variable must be
cleaned up for the effect of the other.

22

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 (1997) 17-34

the cost of imported inputs. This brings about an
overuse of these inputs which most likely leads to
inefficiency over time and may well create environmental problems. Apart from that, some of the inputs
may have a negative effect in the long run even
when they become available to rural dwellers at low
cost. For example, some pesticides can bring about
health problems which impinge on future productivity or might result in death. The prices of consumer
goods are important to the extent that they enter the
consumer price index. As the relevant output price
incentive is the real output price (generally, nominal
price over some consumer price index), an increase
in the price of consumer goods brings about a decrease in real output price which in tum constitutes a
disincentive to produce more. The same story can be
told about wages. In fact, in many LDCs governments fix the nominal output price to make sure that
goods are affordable at a reasonable price in urban
areas and wages offered to urban dwellers have an
adequate purchasing power.
In short, agricultural output price can boost production by increasing the returns of inputs. Agricultural output price is affected by market forces and/ or
by government intervention through trade policy (export tax or subsidies), exchange rate policy, taxes
and subsidies and direct government intervention
(i.e. price controls). That is, real output price is
subject to two types of distortions: direct taxation
represented by trade tariffs and government fixation
of prices, and indirect taxation captured by currency
overvaluation as well as protection of non-agricultural sectors.
2.2. On the impact of other determinants
Apart from pure agricultural incentives captured
by prices, there are other factors that affect supply
response whose omission generally brings about
omitted variable bias. One set of such factors is
public inputs: irrigation and some type of human and
physical capital-i.e. adult literacy, life expectancy,
research, extension, road density, and roads paved
(see Binswanger et a!., 1987). Irrigation water is
expected to affect positively agricultural output
through its effect on productivity. Adult literacy, by
helping individuals to assimilate or to adopt technical advance faster, is positively related to agricultural

output. An increase in life expectancy represents a
measurement of health which affects output through
productivity.
Population density has an impact on agricultural
production. It is expected to be positively linked to
agricultural output through land use intensification
(Boserup hypothesis) or increase in cropping frequency (Krautkraemer, 1994). 6 In fact, household
composition in terms of active people may well alter
the positive impact of population density on agricultural production.
Income level has a positive impact on agricultural
output to the extent that the higher the farmer's
income the higher the level of production, ceteris
paribus. This is mainly explained by the fact that
with a higher income the farmer can easily acquire
the much needed inputs that can help boost productivity.
Technology or spending on research is perhaps
the key variable if one has to raise substantially
output in the regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa.
Indeed, an increase in research in the sense of technology advance can help reach the twin goals of
agricultural output growth and environmental conservation through land use intensification. A caution,
however, is in Qrder since some of the advances can
lead to overuse of inputs such as fertilizers which, in
the long run, may reduce agricultural productivity.
Rural infrastructure is very important in the agricultural production setting to the extent that a deficient infrastructure can wipe out all other production
incentives. Indeed, "adjusting prices may not be all
that is needed to increase the output and incomes of
target groups. More often than not, the poor in
developing countries are located in areas with little
access to roads, transports, communication, agriculture services, marketing facilities, and so on. Improving prices may be a necessary condition for restoring
incomes, but not a sufficient one. If farmers cannot
get the supplies and services they need, infrastructure
investments may be required to give these farmers
the capacity to increase output and yields" (Demery

6 Krautkraemer (1994, p. 401) uses "a renewable resource
model of soil fertility with a convexity with the net benefit
function" to show that "as population grows and the demand for
food increases, more frequent cropping becomes economical."

N. Mamingij Agricultural Economics 16 (1997) 17-34

and Addison, 1987, p. 13). Nevertheless, better infrastructure can also be a double edged sword to the
extent that it can lead to deforestation which in turns
affects soil quality and productivity over time. Better
extension and irrigation services are also positively
linked to agricultural output.
Exogenous shocks such as weather, civil strifes,
or wars are also important in explaining aggregate
output. Good weather has a positive impact on agricultural supply. Weather, in fact, constitutes one of
the most important 'risk' factors that farmers must
take into account in the crop selection. It means that,
under some circumstances, the farmer will choose
not the crop with the highest return, but the crop
which is the most drought-resistant (Bond, 1983).
There is a role for irrigation here as the latter can
temper the negative effect of rain shortfall, for example. Wars and civil strifes do not create an ideal
environment to boost agricultural output. The experience of quite a number of African countries (e.g.
Somalia and Mozambique), where famine was sustained by wars and/ or civil strifes, is striking. Last
but not least, land characteristics or soil quality is
positively related to agricultural production or supply.
To sum up, many factors determine the path of
agricultural supply. The non-inclusion of important
determining factors brings about estimate biases.

2.3. Simultaneity issue

The examination of the literature reveals that few
authors have dealt with the issue of simultaneity. To
recall, most of the studies on supply response use a
specification of the following type:

(5)
where Q1 is the agricultural supply, t is the time
period, P1 is some price measurement, j is a variable
index, Xj 1 represents other explanatory variables, a
is a constant term, and u 1 is the usual error term.
Eq. (5) implies that there is a unidirectional
causality from right-hand side variables to agricultural supply; that is, price and other explanatory
variables are uncorrelated with the error term, ur In
reality, it may well be the case that price and supply

23

are simultaneously determined in which case estimates in Eq. (5) suffer from demandjsupply simultaneity bias. Nevertheless, simultaneity in the sense
of simultaneous determination of price and quantity
is not a problem if demand is completely inelastic.
This situation is very unlikely. In any case, it is
advisable to examine prices on individual basis as in
Lopez et al. (1991). Here are some hints. The price
of agricultural exportables (export crops) in a given
country is most likely exogenous as it depends on
the world price and production and the latter do not
depend on the country's production. Nevertheless,
the price of a given export crop is probably endogenous if the country's share of the world production is
substantial. The price of agricultural exportables is
most likely exogenous if it is fixed by the government. The price of agricultural importables is exogenous. The price of agricultural non-tradeables (i.e.
staple foods) is endogenous as it depends by and
large on domestic supply 1 demand conditions prevailing in the market. Wage, the price of labor, is
endogenous as it depends on the minimum wage
structure, the price of agricultural non-tradeables, the
price of agricultural exportables, education, and technical change.
It has been argued that endogeneity is not a
problem if Eq. (5) is part of a recursive system
(current production depends on lagged price and
other exogenous variables and this quantity, once
produced, is a major factor determining current price;
Tomek and Robinson, 1972, p. 323). This is particularly plausible for some types of commodities such
as annual crops and some types of livestock.
In fact, there is not only price endogeneity at
stake here, but also the endogeneity of other explanatory variables. Indeed, with the exceptions of pure
exogenous shocks, the other explanatory variables
are by and large endogenous. For example, soil
quality depends on past soil quality, the techniques
of cultivation, and external inputs such as fertilizers
(see Salehi-Isfahani, 1993). Road variable depends
on population density and economic conditions of
the location.
Failure to deal properly with the simultaneity
problem gives rise to inconsistent estimates. Hence,
the recourse to some exogeneity tests (i.e. Hausman
exogeneity test) should become the rule rather than
the exception to decide on the simultaneity issue.

24

N. Mammgz / Agncultural Economzo 16 ( 1997) 17-34

2.4. Asymmetric agricultural supply responses to
price changes
Agricultural supply is defined as the response of
agricultural output to changes in prices, all other
factors held constant. The implicit idea is that a price
increase and a price decrease lead to the same output
change (in absolute value). The agricultural supply in
this sense is said to be symmetric or reversible, as a
price decrease will bring the supply at its original
level. In reality, the fact that 'fixed assets' or precisely, 'sticky assets' such as land, trees, buildings,
or equipment that were acquired when prices were
high, are not thrown away when the prices are low,
at least in the short run, implies that price increase
and price decrease do not give rise to a similar
change in output (Johnson, 1958). This is particularly true for perennial crops; the output change
resulting from price decrease is less than that from
price increase. The supply response is then said to be
irreversible or asymmetric. Technological innovation
can also explain this phenomenon (see Cochrane,
1955; Jaforullah, 1993).
The irreversibility concept, although theoretically
sound, has not been widely applied as the quantification of price increases and price decreases is not
straightforward. Tweeten and Quance (1969, 1971),
Wolffram (1971), Trail et a!. (1978), and Burton
( 1988) attempt to capture such price segmentation
(see Hallam, 1990; Mamingi, 1996). The neglect of
the latter can lead to misspecification bias.
2.5. Pooling issues
Data pooling brings about at least two sets of
problems that are not always understood or well
dealt with in the literature. The first problem concerns modeling and/ or method of estimation. The
second problem is data comparability.

2.5.1. Modeling
Following the literature, most of the authors model
supply response in a single equation (or multiple
equations) as follows:
Q 11 =a,+P11 {3+X,J,yJ+u 11

(6)

where i = l, 2, ... , n stands for country (or region),
= 1, 2, ... , T is the time period index, j = 1, 2, ... ,
g is a variable index, Q is some output measuret

ment, P is some price variable, X is a set of other
explanatory variables, a, are country specific variables, and u 11 is the usual error term.
Eq. (6) states that the slope (i.e. marginal effect or
elasticity) is the same across countries. The model
becomes a pure cross section model if t = 1 or
average values of variables over the period are used.
Note that when necessary, time specific variables can
be added to Eq. (6).
The following two issues are important when
estimating Eq. (6). The first basic question is whether
the pooling of several countries or regions holds. For
example, does it make sense to pool land-scarce
countries with land-abundant countries, developed
countries (DCs) with less developed countries
(LDCs), high yield countries with low yield countries? In simple terms, the question is whether the
countries face the same binding constraints. The
'pooling' test 7 and some prior information are very
useful to have an insight into the problem.
If pooling is not accepted then the equality of
slopes across countries does not hold. Put another
way, the common slope as the mean estimate of
individual slopes is no longer a good statistic as it is
affected by outliers. 8
In our view, either one tests formally for pooling
or if possible, one starts with a random coefficient
model. The latter can be presented as follows:
Q,r =a,+ ptt {3,

+ X,Jt'Y,J + u,r

(7)

This model exploits cross-country properties and
time series properties.
Bias resulting from improper pooling can blur our
understanding of how key agricultural factors affect
agricultural supply.
2.5.2. Comparability of variables across countries
The second set of issues is how to capture variables for international comparisons. Aggregate output and prices are the most troublesome variables for
international comparison.

7 It is curious that all the works reviewed below did not
formally test for 'to pool or not to pool.'
8 Note that the presence of country dummies in the withm
regressions (OLS with country specific variables) IS not necessarIly an avenue for explainmg varying slope estimates. The real
Issue IS whether some panel members (countnes, regions, etc.)
behave hke outliers.

N. Mwningi j Agricultural Economics /6 ( /997) 17-34

Concerning output, Rao and Sharma (1991) point
out two approaches: (a) the aggregate output repricing method; and (b) the purchasing power parity
(PPP) or implicit exchange rate method.
The aggregate output repricing method "suggests
revaluation of the quantity vectors of different countries using a single set of prices for different commodities. These prices may be expressed either in a
numeraire currency, in which case the value of output is expressed in that currency, or in the form of
relative prices, such as wheat-relatives, in which case
the total output in each country is expressed in terms
of the numeraire commodity'' (Rao and Sharma,
1991, p. 199).
The crucial problem of the determination of international prices in the aggregate output repricing
method has been adequately dealt with by Summers
and Heston (1988). To answer the criticism according to which wheat is not all that important in a
number of countries, some authors use the Fisher
multilateral quantity and price index to make output
comparable across countries.
The purchasing power parity (PPP) approach uses
the exchange rate as the conversion factor; that is,
the output value in country j is the value of output in
the country expressed in the country's currency times
the exchange rate of the country. Naturally, the
conversion factor must be selected appropriately and
should depend on the prices and quantities of the
agricultural commodities (Rao and Sharma, 1991).
Failure to take this into account introduces serious
biases in the measurement. Recent advances by Summers and Heston ( 1988) solve some aspects of this
problem by using the purchasing power parity of
currency. 9
Prices and exchange rates are not always easily
comparable across countries. To recall, real output
price is the ratio of nominal output price to other
prices. At the micro level, we argued that there are
several candidates as deflator, all depending on the
farmer's behavior. At the aggregate level, the usual
candidate is the consumer price index (CPI).

9 ·'Purchasing Power Currency (PPC) is understood as the
number of units required to purchase the same amount of goods
and services as say, one US dollar would buy in the United
States." (World Bank, 1993, p. 2).

25

There are two sets of problems here. First, CPI,
on which RER and real producer price are based, is
not strictly comparable across countries as it is generally based on different baskets, different weights
and different base periods. Second, misalignment is
not taken into account in the nominal exchange that
helps convert foreign currency into local currency
(or vice versa). As the empirical studies reveal, few
authors pay attention to this problem.
Similarly to the case of cross-border output comparison, some authors use a wheat equivalent measurement to solve the above twin problems. This
approach has not always been successful (see, for
example, the Binswanger et al., 1985, comments on
the Peterson, I 979, paper). On the contrary, the use
of multilateral Fisher index combined with that of
the implicit purchasing power parity exchange rate a
Ia Summers-Heston, represent a valuable approach
in this context (see Binswanger et al., 1985, 1987).

3. Review of empirical studies
This section is a review of empirical studies. It
focuses on short-run and long-run price elasticities. It
is somehow a supplement to previous literature reviews (Askari and Cummings, I 977; Bond, 1983;
Chhibber, I 989; Rao, 1989; Ogbu and Gwetibouo,
1990). 10 To evaluate different studies, we check
whether they adequately deal with the issues raised
above. The first part of the section deals with quantity studies; that is, those whose output is expressed
in total yield or yield per acreage unit. The second
part is concerned with studies using acreage as output.
3.1. Review of quantity studies
Table 1 reports the results of the inquiry for
aggregate, subsectoral, and individual crop outputs.
The following trend emerges from the table. First,
the short-run price elasticities are small for aggregate
(and subsectoral) output. Second, although small, the

10 Most remarks made here also concern studies found in these
literature reviews.

26

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

individual crop elasticities are larger than those of
aggregate output. Third, where they are derived,
long-run elasticities are larger than short-run elasticities. Fourth, price elasticities are, by and large, positive.
Although not reported in the table, most other
determining factors included in the models are found
to be very important. To corroborate, the elasticities
are 0.293 and 0.122 for precipitation and research
ha- 1 , respectively, in Peterson ( 1979). The elasticities are 2.31 and 0.93 for land quality and average
rainfall, respectively, in Van Schalkwyk and Groenewald ( 1993). The impacts are - 1.2 to - 1.5, 0.11
to 0.15, and 0.74 to 1.0 for the degree of public
involvement in input supply, the percent of government current expenditure, and population growth,
respectively, in Cleaver ( 1985). 11 The elasticities
are 0.1, 0.08, 0.057, 0.1, for road density, extension,
GDP, and rural population density, respectively, and
other quantitative effects are 1.298, 0.496, 1.325,
0.631 for irrigation, roads paved, life expectancy,
and adult literacy, respectively, for crop output in
Binswanger et al. ( 1987). Rice cultivation responds
positively to rainfall (0.77) and to high-yielding varieties (0.31) in Bapna et al. ( 1984). Drought negatively affects cereals (- 0.32), cassava (- 0.14),
maize (- 0.23), and sorghum (- 0.30); primary education has a positive impact on rice (1.23), and
cultivated area per capita is negatively linked to rice
(- 1.1) and maize (- 0.85) in Cleaver and Schreiber
(1994). 12 Production variable (0.729), the deviation
of actual production from trend (0.489), and misalignment following Edwards' approach (- 0.451)
are, aside from price, important in explaining wheat
supply in Argentina (Pick and Vollrath, 1994). In the
models using the Nerlove methodology, the lagged
dependent variable is always significant where included and so are time trend and weather.
Despite the existence of some stylized facts (price
elasticities) underlined above (facts also uncovered
in many previous literature reviews) there are a

number of issues ignored or insufficiently dealt with
that can substantially alter the stylized facts.
With the exceptions of Cleaver ( 1985) and Cleaver
and Schreiber ( 1994), all studies include some type
of output price (nominal or real) in their basic regressions. Cleaver as well as Cleaver and Schreiber
use the nominal protection coefficient instead.
Cleaver explains agricultural growth by nominal protection coefficient (or rate of currency depreciation),
the public involvement in input supply, the public
consumption to GDP in 1970-1981 and the average
annual rate of population growth. If one agrees with
Eq. (4) or Eq. (4'), then nominal protection coefficient does not fully capture real producer price. The
same remark holds for Cleaver and Schreiber, who
explain change in crop yields of some food crops in
Sub-Saharan Africa by nominal protection, drought,
primary education, the sum of area under temporary
crops arable land per capita of rural population and
area under permanent crops per capita of rural population.
Concerning exchange rates, with the exceptions of
Cleaver (1985) in one of his models, Jaeger (1992),
and Pick and Vollrath ( 1994), all authors do not
include exchange rates in their set of explanatory
variables. This is mainly explained by Eq. (4) or Eq.
( 4') which basically states that the real producer
price already contains information on the real exchange rate. Thus, Jaeger (1992) who uses simultaneously real effective exchange rates and real producer prices along with disaster variable and weather
to explain agricultural exports at the aggregate as
well as the individual crop level, is rather suspicious.
This may well explain why he obtains from time to
time a wrong sign for the impact of exchange rate
(i.e. an appreciation of real effective exchange rate
of 100% gives rise to a 33% increase in the agricultural exports of annual crop exporter countries) or an
insignificant real producer price (this is the case for
tree crop exporter countries). 13 In his framework,
the simultaneous inclusion of the two variables can

11 Cleaver ( 1985) has two models: one with nominal protection
coefficient and another with real currency depreciation. The other
variables are the same in both models.
12 Note that the coefficients are not elasticities here.

13 If the real effective exchange rate is excluded, the impact of
the real producer price shows up; it is 11.5% instead of 1.7% and
is significant.

N. MaminKi / AKricultural Economics 16 I 1997) 17-34

be justifiable if one variable is cleaned up for the
effect of the other. The Pick and Vollrath ( 1994)
study seems fine since it captures real exchange rate
by misalignment and real output price by nominal
export price. The use of real currency depreciation in
Cleaver ( 1985) would be fine if combined with other
missing variables in Eq. ( 4' ).
Binswanger et al. (1987) are a model of good
study in terms of variable coverage. Indeed, although
external shocks factors are missing here, the study
nevertheless contains the major explanatory variables
that we can think of: real producer price, irrigation,
road density, roads paved, life expectancy, adult
literacy, research, extension, GDP, rural population
density, and agroclimatic potential. Bapna et al.
(1984) is also similar to the above study in terms of
variable coverage.
Peterson (1979), in his cross-section study dealing
with developed (DCs) and less developed countries
(LDCs), includes output price, weather (long-run
annual precipitation), and technology (research publication for each country) as explanatory variables.
There is probably a certain amount of misspecification bias due to the omission of important variables
such as life expectancy, adult literacy, and irrigation
that have changed over time. For example, by adding
irrigation in Peterson's model, Chhibber (1989) finds
that the price elasticity passes from 1.27 to 0.97.
Cleaver ( 1985) contains some misspecification
problems. It is known that weather changes, as well
as land quality, in Africa are quite important in
explaining agricultural growth. Another problem of
misspecification is that the nominal protection coefficient or the currency depreciation rate used by the
author only captures part of the real producer price.
Indeed, as Eq. (4) or Eq. (4') shows, if one uses
nominal protection coefficient, then two other variables are left out: real exchange rate and real foreign
price. If one uses currency depreciation rate, then
nominal protection coefficient and real foreign price
are left out.
Life expectancy, income, roads (density and quality), research, extension, soil quality, population
growth, and country dummy variables are important
explanatory variables that can be included in Jaeger
(1992).
Lopez et al. ( 1991) explain agricultural export
supply in Malawi and Tanzania by the price of

27

agricultural exportables, the price of agricultural
non-tradeables, the wage rate, an index of weather,
and an index of technical change. All the prices are
normalized by the price of agricultural importables.
Population growth (or density), human capital, and
road variable may well be missing variables in these
regressions. Note that their high R 2 can most likely
be explained by the inclusion of lagged prices aside
current prices.
Gunawardana and Oczkowski ( 1992) is an interesting study which explains paddy supply by the
price ratio (guaranteed price of paddy to fertilizer
price), irrigation, credit, concessional sales of rice.
This is one of the rare studies where credit variable
directly appears as an explanatory variable. Although
they obtain a very high R 2 (0.97 for yield), the
inclusion of other important variables (e.g. population density) may well change the short-run and the
long-run elasticities.
Van Schalkwyk and Groenewald (1993) use price
ratio, land quality, average rainfall, and dummies (to
capture structural change over time) to explain agricultural supply in South Africa. Missing variables in
this framework may include roads, human capital,
and population growth. As for the previous study,
the high R 2 may be explained by the inclusion of
lagged variables.
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994) fail to consider in
their models, among others, population growth, population density, and life expectancy. Moreover, as
underlined above, another source of misspecification
originates from the use of nominal protection coefficient instead of real producer prices; that is, some
exchange rate variable and real foreign price are
missing. Note that some of the high R 2 may be due
to the presence of country dummy variables.
Pick and Vollrath (1994) contain some omitted
variables in some equations (i.e. human capital). The
models with severe omitted variables show up with
low R 2 • This is the case for Nigeria (0.36).
As underlined implicitly above, there is some
difficulty in evaluating the Nerlove model in terms
of omitted variable misspecification. Lagged output
(or area) usually explains a great part of variation of
output (large contribution to R 2 ). Yet the inclusion
of lagged output and time trend does not give us the
impact of several variables of interest.
Lopez et al. ( 1991) is the best empirical work in

Table I
Price elasticities with quantity as dependent variable

N

00

Regionjperiod

Data/method

Author

Output

Price
and lags

53 countries
62-64/68-70
31 SSA 70-81
31 SSA 70-81
58 countries 69-78
58 countries 69-78
58 countries 69-78
21 SSA 70-87
14 SSA 70-87
7 SSA 70-87
7 SSA 70-87
14 SSA 70-87
II SSA 70-87
4 SSA 70-87
Tanzania 64-84
Tanzania 65-84
Cameroon 47-64
Nigeria 49-64
Tanzania 45-67
Ghana 63-81
Kenya 66-80
Kenya 72-90
Tanzania 70-88
Malawi 70-87
S. Africa 76, 81, 88

Cross-S IV

Peterson (1979)

Qw

Pw,f

rQ
rQ
Q 1111 (aggregate)
Q1111 (crop)
Q1111 (livestock)

NPC,
Pmf,l

QleC

pcpi.ma

Qetc
Qacr
Cocoa
Coffee
Cotton
Tea
Tea
Cotton
Cocoa
Palm oil
Sisal

pcpi.ma

India 54-77
India
Sri Lanka 52-87
10 SSA 80-89

9 SSA 80-89
6 SSA 80-89
Argentina 71-88
Indonesia 71-88
Venezuela 71-88
Nigeria 71-88

Cleaver ( 1985)
Cleaver ( 1985)
B inswanger et al. ( 1987)
B inswanger et al. ( 1987)
Binswanger et al. ( 1987)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Jaeger ( 1992)
Mshomba ( 1989)
Mshomba ( 1989)
Behrman ( 1968)
Oni ( 1969)
Gwyer ( 1971)
Bond ( 1983)
Bond ( 1983)
Sharma ( 1992)
Lopez et al. (1991)
Lopez et al. (1991)
Van Schalkwyk and
Groenewald ( 1993)
T series Nerlove Chhibber ( 1989)
Pooled GLS-SUR Bapna et al. ( 1984)
Pooled GLS-SUR Bapna et al. ( 1984)
Gunawardana and
T series OLS
Oczkowski ( 1992)
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994)
Panel within
Panel within
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994)
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994)
Panel within
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994)
Panel within
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994)
Panel within
Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994)
Panel within
Pick and Vollrath ( 1994)
T series OLS
T series OLS c
Pick and Vollrath (1994)
Pick and Vollrath ( 1994)
T series OLS
Pick and Vollrath ( 1994)
T series OLS
Cross-SOLS
Cross-SOLS
Panel within
Panel within
Panel within
Panel 3SLS
Panel 3SLS
Pane13SLS
Pane13SLS
Panel 3SLS
Panel 3SLS
Panei3SLS
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series Nerlove
T series 2S LS
T series 2SLS
Panel OLS

Qlec
QleC
Qtec
QleC

Qtec
APE

Exch. rate
var.

Price SRE

Price LRE
1.27-1.66'

0.02

>a

n.a.
0.15 'a

RDP,
pmf.t
Pmf.t

RE
RE
RE
RE
RE
RE
RE

pcpi.ma
pcpi.ma
pcpi.rna

pcpi.rna

pcpi.ma

rate
rate
rate
rate
rate
rate
rate

pcpi.l

I

pcpi.l-

pcpi.l.t- n
pn.l

Pn.f.f-

Exch. RE

i

pcpi.f

pcpi.l

TT,_I
pim.r.I-1

pim.l.l- I

PJ.,

-0.05'
n.a.
0.06 '
n.a.
-0.18'
n.a.
0.20 '
n.a.
0.017
n.a.
0.94'
n.a.
0.22'
n.a.
0.23 '
n.a.
0.67 '
n.a.
-0.04
n.a.
0.35 '
n.a.
0.26'
0.38
1.81 '
0.68 '
0.29-0.35
0.29-0.35
0.21-0.28 ' 0.48-0.49 '
0.20 '
0.34'
0.16.
0.10'
0.08 '
0.16'
0.47 '
n.a.
0.56'
n.a.
0.92'

-0.10 '
-0.25'
0.33 '
-0.35 '
0.05 '
-0.68.
0.126

:<
~

":::;·:::;
~.

":...

"'~

~.

~
..,

::..
t'l
"""'
:::;

"

~-

"'......
0\

;:a
\()

:::'.
......

AO
Rice
Sorghum
Paddy

pgpi.l-

Cereals b
Rice b
Cassava b
Maize b
Sorghum b
Wheat b
Wheat
Coffee
Coffee
Cocoa

NPC,_ 4
NPC,_ 4
NPC,_ 4
NPC,_ 4
NPC,_ 4
NPC,_ 4
P,.,
Px.l
P,,,
P,.,

'l

0.28-0.29 ' 0.39-0.43 '
0.33 '
n.a.
0.77'
n.a.
0.09'
0.11

TT,_I
Pn.s.lags
Pn.s.lags

I

Misal.
Misal.
Misal.
Misal.

0.14'
0.75
-0.31
0.11
0.17 •
0.14
64,3 'a
27,9 'a
20,7 ..
21,8 a

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

I

'--'
-!>..

-0.45 '
-0.54'
-0.78
-0.18

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

our sample as far as the issue of simultaneity of
variables is concerned. The authors have the following reduced form:
QAX = j( pAX ,pAN ,W,h,t)

pAN= f( pAX ,w,E,PN ,h,t)
pN = f( pAX ,pAN ,w,E,q,h,t)
W =f(pAX pAN pN W
'

'

'

M'

t)

E =!(pAX ,q, w M , EG, t)
where QAX is the agricultural supply of exportables,
PAX is the price of agricultural ex portables, PAN is
the price of agricultural non-tradeables, pN is the
price of non-tradeables, w is the wage rate, h is an
index of weather, t is an index of technical change,
q represents the external terms of trade of the country (excluding agricultural export prices), wM is the
minimum wage, E stands for total domestic expenditures, and £ 0 represents government expenditures.
With the exceptions of t and q all the variables are
normalized by the prices of agricultural importables.
The price equations result from the respective
demand/supply equalities. pAN is endogenous because it largely depends on supply and demand
conditions prevailing in the market and so is pN_
The wage rate is supposed to be determined by a
combination of market and institutional forces. Aggregate real expenditures are affected by both policy
and external variables.

29

It is worth underlining that the issue of simultaneity is further complicated when using variable ratios
whose components follow different behaviors in
terms of endogeneity jexogeneity.
Binswanger et al. ( 1987) address the issue of
simultaneity by deriving output and factor demands
(fertilizers and urban wages) from profit maximization. In our view, most of the explanatory variables
in their model are truly endogenous (irrigation, roads,
research, and population growth). Most likely, population growth in Cleaver's ( 1985) model is endogenous. Misalignment is an endogenous variable in
Pick and Vollrath (1994).
The problem of data comparability is not equally
explained in many papers using cross section or
pooled data. Peterson uses real producer price defined as the ratio of an overall wheat equivalent price
for each country during each period (1962-64 and
1968-1970) by the weighted average domestic currency price of commercialized fertilizer. Although
this indeed validates comparisons across countries
possible, wheat and fertilizer are not all that important in many countries. Worse, in some countries
fertilizers are subsidized. Certainly, results are sensitive to the definition of variables adopted. For example, in attempting to explain the Peterson (1979) high
elasticity, Binswanger et al. ( 1985) find that by using
prices based on the multilateral Fisher index coupled
with purchasing power currency, the Peterson ( 1979)

Notes to Table I:
• Numbers are not elasticities.
b Output is change in crop yield (number in short-run elasticity column is not an elasticity).
c OLS with serial correlation correction.
SSA, Sub-Saharan African countries; Cross-S, cross-section data; Panel, panel data; T series, time series data; IV, instrumental variables
method; Within, OLS with country dummies; 2SLS, two stage least squares; 3SLS, three stage least squares; Gls-Sur, generalized least
squares and seemingly unrelated regression methods; Nerlove, Nerlove method; Qw, quantity using wheat equivalent; rQ, growth rate of
agricultural output; Qmf• quantity using multilateral Fisher index; Q,ec• total export crops; Qetc• total export crops for tree crop exporter
countries; Qacro total export crops for annual crop exporter countries; APE, agricultural production equivalent, which is gross value of
agricultural production in each district deflated by the index of producers' prices; AO, agricultural output; Pw, price using wheat equivalent
deflated by fertilizer price; NPC, nominal protection coefficient; Pmr• price using multilateral Fisher index; Pcpi• nominal output price of
agricultural export deflated by consumer price index; Pcpi.ma, as above but using a moving average ( t and t - I); P0 , nominal output price;
with s.Jag, sum of lags t- I and t- 2; P1, is the weighted output/input ratio; TT, agricultural terms of trade; P;m, the price ratio of
agricultural exportables to agricultural importables; Pgpi• is the ratio of guaranteed price to fertilizer price; Px.P export price; RDP, rate of
currency depreciation; Exch. rate var, exchange rate variable; RE rate, real effective exchange rate; Exch. RE, exchange rate elasticity; Price
SRE, short-run price elasticity; Price LRE, long-run price elasticity; Misal., misalignment measure following Edward's approach; n.a.,
non-available.
' Significant at the I0% level, at least.

30

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 (/997) 17-34

elasticity falls in the range 0.02 to 0.45 instead of
1.27 to 1.65.
Cleaver ( 1985) uses the nominal protection coefficient or the currency depreciation rate. But as seen
above, if the NPC is defined as the ratio of farmgate
price to the product of foreign price times nominal
exchange rate, then direct comparability becomes a
problem as some nominal exchange rates are distorted in some countries. The real protection coefficient defined from the equilibrium exchange rate is
more appropriate in this framework. This remark
also holds for Cleaver and Schreiber ( 1994).
Jaeger ( 1992) defines real producer price as the
ratio of nominal producer price to consumer price
index. The problem is that consumer price index is
not directly comparable across countries for reasons
advocated above. Instead of the consumer price index, some measurement based on purchasing power
currency a Ia Summers-Reston is preferable. For the
same reason, comparability of real effective exchange rate is problematical as it is based on consumer price index.
'To pool or not pool' has not been formally tested
in panel data studies. Jaeger (1992) can be implicitly
considered as an exception when he divides his 21
countries into tree crop exporter countries ( 14 countries) and annual crop exporter countries (seven
countries). By doing so, the results change drastically, underlying that it is not recommended to pool
both sets of countries. Although Peterson (1979)
affirms that he does not find significant differences
between DCs and LDCs countries, Chhibber ( 1988)
indicates that there is a significant difference if one
disaggregates further such as in comparing low yield
countries with high yield countries. Binswanger et al.
( 1987) do not raise the issue of 'to pool or not to
pool.' It is possible that some of the 'bizarre' results
that they obtain are simply due to the wrong level of
pooling.
3.2. Review of area responses

This part concentrates on area responses to price
changes without neglecting the impact of other important factors.
With the exception of Binswanger et al. (1987),
all the studies examined below (see Table 2) are
concerned with individual crop area responses and

are of time series nature. Maitha ( 1970) estimates the
area response for Kenyan coffee that depends on real
producer price (Fisher lag: I to 4), lagged quantity of
coffee, a dummy variable and a time trend. Frederick
( 1969) explains cotton area expansion by the relative
price of cotton to price of coffee lagged one period
(the two prices are also used separately in one
regression) and a time trend. The Seini ( 1985) final
model of cotton area contains nominal lagged cotton
price, lagged groundnut price and lagged area. Kere
et a!. ( 1986) regress acreage under wheat on the
price of wheat (nominal or deflated by the price of
the most competing crop) lagged one period, lagged
yield of wheat, monthly rainfall, and a time trend.
Binswanger et al. (1987) use price of crop output,
price of livestock, price of fertilizers, urban wages,
irrigation, road density, roads paved, life expectancy,
adult literacy, research, extension, GDP, rural density, and country dummies to explain crop area
(defined as the sum of harvested area of individual
crops as reported by FAO). Gunawardana and
Oczkowski ( 1992) have paddy area that depends on
price ratio (paddy /fertilizer), irrigation, credit, concessional sales of rice, and area lagged.
Olayemi and Oni ( 1972) is the only study that
deals with an asymmetry in price response for SubSaharan Africa. The objective is to assess how Western Nigerian cocoa farmers respond to different scenarios of price changes. The information collected
from field interviews allows to run two types of
regression: cocoa acreage on rising price and cocoa
acreage on falling price. Trail et al. ( 1978) is a study
on asymmetric area response to price changes applied to the United States late summer onion crop.
The authors compare the symmetric supply response
with the irreversible supply response captured by the
two versions of the Wolffram ( 1971) technique presented above. Jaforullah (1993) exploits the asymmetric supply framework to explain sugar cane supply in the mill zones of Bangladesh over the period
1947-81. The variables of interest are: lagged area,
price of sugar cane per hectare relative to that of
jute, yield of sugar cane relative to that of jute,
relative risk of sugar cane to jute, and two dummy
variables (one reflecting the opening up of new sugar
cane mills in the planted area of sugar cane and the
other the effect of government ban on the production
of jute in the mills zone).

N. Mamingi j Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

31

Table 2
Agricultural area elasticities
Crop and regions
Coffee
Kenya (industry)
Cotton
Uganda-Buganda
Ghana
Wheat
Kenya (Nyandurua)
Cocoa
Western Nigeria
Onion
USA

Paddy
Sri Lanka
Sugar cane
Bangladesh

Crop area
58 DCs and LDCs

Period (data type)

Author

Method

Price variable SRE

1946-64 (Time S)

Maitha ( 1970)

Nerlove type P,

0.15 '

0.38

1922-38 (Time S)
1968-81 (Time S)

Frederick ( 1969)
Seini ( 1985)

OLS
Nerlove

Pcof
pn

0.25-0.67
0.55

0.25-0.67
1.32

1965-83 (Time S)

Kere et al. ( 1986)

Nerlove

Pn

0.65

1.38

1970 ( Cross-S)

Olayemi and Oni ( 1972) OLS

pi~
pi~

1.217 '
0.643

pi~.(
pi~.(
Pip.rP~.~-

LRE

Lags

Pr.t-Lr-4

Pcof.l- I

Pn.r-

I

Pn.r-

I

1952-74 (Time S) Trail et al. ( 1978)
1952-7 4 (Time S) Trail et al. ( 1978)

OLS
OLS

pip
P!v.;
Pt

1952-74 (TimeS) Trail et al. ( 1978)

OLS

P~w
P~w

0.105
0.09 '
0.068 '
0.442 •
0.086 '

52-87 (TimeS)

OLS

Pr

0.05 •

0.06 '

Pr.r-

NLS
NLS

pip
P~w

P~w

0.30 '
0.32 '
0.15 '

0.45 •
0.41 '
0.20 •

P,~W.I

pi

0.011 •

Gunawardana and
Oczkowski ( 1992)

1951-81 (TimeS) Jaforullah ( 1993)
1951-81 (TimeS) Jaforullah ( 1993)

1969-78 Panel

Binswanger et al. ( 1987) Within

1
t

P~.r-1
P~w.r-1
P,~w.t- 1
1

Pip.r

P,~W.!
Pu

Time S, time series data; Cross-S, cross-section data; Panel, panel data; NLS, nonlinear least squares; P,. the ratio of nominal price of
coffee to the import price index; Pcof• the ratio of cotton price to coffee price; P0 , nominal price of cotton which is used separately with the
price of groundnut; Pi~ and Pi~• rising and falling prices, respectively, from direct interviews (see Olayemi and Oni, 1972); Pip• the regular
real price; P!,., and Pt. rising and falling prices, respectively, a Ia Wolffram (1971); P,~w and P~w. rising and falling prices, respectively,
using modified Wolffram technique; Pr. the ratio of guaranteed price to subsidized fertilizer price; Pi, output price quoted in domestic
currency unit converted using purchasing power parity (PPP) exchange rate deflated to 1980 prices using the price index for the OECD as a
whole; SRE, short-run price elasticity; LRE, long-run price elasticity; Lags, lags used for price.
' Significant at the I0% level, at least.

Table 2 reports the results of the inquiry. The
findings underlined in the previous part are uncovered here. Particularly, short-run elasticities are low;
long-run price elasticities are higher than short-run
price elasticities. The novelty here is that the few
studies using the asymmetric approach seem to reveal asymmetric area responses to price changes
with area responding more to rising price than to
falling price. In brief, area expansion responds to
agricultural incentives.
When included, other factors are important in
determining the pace of area change. For example,
the elasticities are -0.036, -0.091, 0.026, -0.037,

- 0.046, and 0.026 for the price of fertilizers, urban
wages, road density, research, GDP, and rural population density, respectively, and other estimates are
0.425, 1.272, and -0.138 for irrigation, life expectancy, and adult literacy, respectively, in Binswanger et a!. ( 1987). 14 For studies using the
Nerlove model, lagged output (area) is significant
where included and so are weather (rainfall) and
technological change (captured by time trend).

14

Some of the variables are wrongly signed for diverse reasons.

32

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics /6 ( 1997) 17-34

As for quantity studies, there are a number of
issues that can be raised. The problem of omitted
variables seems to be present in some studies. By
using only lagged price of cotton and coffee as
explanatory variables, the Frederick ( 1969) study is
most likely misspecified. The studies based on the
Nerlove methodology could be misspecified, as some
relevant prices are missing. Irrigation, roads, and
human capital could well be important in Trail et al.
( 1978). Population density is most likely important
in explaining paddy area in Gunawardana and
Oczkowski ( 1992).
Simultaneity is an issue in some of the models. In
Binswanger et al. ( 1987) roads, urban wages, and
population growth are probably endogenous.
Concerning the pooling issue, what was said about
Binswanger et al. ( 1987) in the previous section
holds here. Regarding the asymmetric response of
price changes, with the exceptions of Olayemi and
Oni (1972), Trail et al. (1978), and Jaforullah (1993),
all other authors fail to deal with this issue. Olayemi
and Oni (1972) indicate that the short-run rising
price elasticity is 1.217 and that of falling price is
0.643. The authors formally test the hypothesis of
price segmentation and confirm that Nigerian farmers are more responsive to price increase than to
price decrease. A shortcoming, however, is that the
ex-ante response may deviate from the ex-post one.
Trail et al. ( 1978) obtain the following short-run
elasticities: 0.105 for symmetric supply function;
0.90 and 0.068 for increasing price and decreasing
price, respectively, in the context of the Wolffram
technique; and 0.442 and 0.086 for increasing price
and decreasing price, respectively, in the context of
the modified Wolffram technique. The latter is the
best model. The authors model the case of short-run
asymmetry and long-run symmetry by using an Almon lag model. Jaforullah ( 1993), among others,
obtain the following elasticities with the modified
Wolffram technique: 0.15, 0.32, 0.20, and 0.41 in the
short run (price falling and rising) and long run
(price falling and rising), respectively. Misspecified
reversible function gives rise to an elasticity of 0.12
and 0.28 in the short run and long run, respectively.
The results from asymmetric area responses are
important in the debate concerning the potential deleterious environmental effect of price increases and
price decreases.

4. Conclusion

The objective of this paper was to review the
literature dealing with the impact of prices and
macroeconomic policies on agricultural supply.
The paper uncovers some stylized facts underlined in other literature reviews. First, farmers are
everywhere rational; that is, in developed as well in
developing countries, farmers expand their production as output prices increase. Nevertheless, this first
relational regularity between agricultural supply and
prices does not tell us the whole story about agricultural supply. A host of policy variables (i.e. overvalued currency and budget deficit) and other factors
(i.e. climate, quality of soil, and level of technology)
that also affect the level of agricultural supply can,
under some circumstances, reinforce, decrease or
annihilate the price effect. A deficient infrastructure,
for example, as is the case in many third world
countries, can wipe out the price incentive to produce more.
Second, for individual crops, the short-run own
price elasticity is smaller than the long-run elasticity.
The main reason is that while in the short run some
factors are fixed, in the long run all factors are
variable. Third, for aggregate output, the short-run
price elasticity is smaller than the long run; in fact,
aggregate supply is almost inelastic in the short run.
The quasi-inelasticity of the aggregate supply is
largely explained by immobility of capital, land, and
labor in the short run.
Policy implications of the different stylized facts
concerning the relationship between prices (and
non-prices) and agricultural output are well known
and understood. The rationality of farmers, for example, implies that measures should be taken to eliminate price distortion since an increase in output price
leads to an increase in agricultural output. At the
same time one should not neglect other incentive
elements. Indeed, in developing countries in general
and Sub-Saharan Africa in particular, non-price factors are equally if not more important than output
price in agricultural production. One such factor is
infrastructure.
While the literature does a good job detecting the
nature of relationships between determining factors
and agricultural output, it fails to perform well quantifying the strength of relationships. In other words,

N. Mamingi j Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

this literature review stresses that our understanding
of the quantitative dimensions of agricultural supply
response is surprisingly weak given the importance
of this assumed response to growth, poverty and the
environment. Indeed, issues such as simultaneity bias,
omitted variable bias, inaccurate data pooling, and
asymmetry in supply responses to price changes
have not been adequately addressed in many instances. As policy recommendations should be based
not only on the qualitative nature of the relationship
between determining factors and agricultural supply
but also on the quantitative dimension, the above
shortcomings should be taken into account in future
studies.

Acknowledgements
I wish to thank Kenneth Chomitz for valuable
advice, David Wheeler and Christopher Udry for
useful comments. I am also indebted to one anonymous referee and to the editor of this journal for very
insightful comments. Any remaining errors are mine.

References
Abt associates, Inc., 1989. Agricultural Policy Analysis: A Manual for A.I.D. Agricultural and Rural Development Officers.
AID Evaluation Special Studies, 61, Washington, DC.
Askari, H. and Cummings, J., 1977. Estimating agricultural supply
responses in the Nerlove model: a survey. Int. Econ. Rev., 18:
257-292.
Bapna, S.L., Binswanger, H.P. and Quizon, J.B., 1984. Systems of
output supply and factor demand equations for semi-arid
tropical India. Indian J. Agric. Econ., 39: 179-213.
Behrman, J.R., 1968. Monopolistic cocoa pricing. Am. J. Agric.
Econ., 50: 702-719.
Binswanger, H., Mundlak, Y. Yang, M.C. and Bowers, A., 1985.
On the determinants of cross-country aggregate agricultural
supply. World Bank, Washington, DC, mimeo.
Binswanger, H., Mundlak, Y. Yang, M.C. and Bowers, A., 1987.
On the determinants of cross-country aggregate agricultural
supply. J. Econometrics, 36: I l 1-131.
Bond, M.E., 1983. Agricultural responses to prices in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Int. Monetary Fund Staff Pap., 30: 703-726.
Burton, M., 1988. Irreversible supply functions revisited. J. Agric.
Econ., 39: I 13-120.
Chhibber, A., 1988. Raising agricultural output: price and nonprice factors. Finance Dev., 25: 44-47.
Chhibber, A., 1989. The aggregate supply response: a survey. In:

33

S. Commander (Editor), Structural Adjustment & Agriculture:
Theory and Practice in Africa and Latin America. Overseas
Development Institute, London, pp. 55-68.
Cleaver, K.M., 1985. The impact of price and exchange rate
policies on agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa. Working Paper,
728, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Cleaver, K.M. and Schreiber, G.A., 1994. Supplement to reversing the spiral: the population, environment, and agriculture
nexus in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Cochrane, W., 1955. Conceptualizing the supply relation in agriculture. J. Farm Econ., 37: I 161-1175.
Demery, L. and Addison, T., 1987. The alleviation of poverty
under structural adjustment. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Frederick, K.D., 1969. The role of market forces and planning in
Uganda's economic development, 1900-1938. East. Afr. Econ.
Rev., I: 47-62.
Gunawardana, P.J. and Oczkowski, E.A., 1992. Government policies and agricultural supply response in Sri Lanka. J. Agric.
Econ., 43: 231-242.
Gwyer, G.D., 1971. Long- and short-run elasticities of sisal
supply. East. Afr. Econ. Rev., 3: 19-29.
Hallam, D., 1990. Econometric Modelling of Agricultural Commodity. Routledge, London, 19! pp.
Jaeger, W., 1992. The effects of economic policy on African
agriculture. World Bank Discussion Papers, Africa Technical
Department Series 147.
Jaeger, W. and Humphreys, C., 1988. The effect of policy reforms
on agricultural incentives in Sub-Saharan Africa. Am. J. Agric.
Econ., 70: 1036-1043.
Jaforullah, M., 1993. Asymmetric supply response: evidence from
Bangladesh. J. Agric. Econ., 44: 490-495.
Johnson, G.L., 1958. Supply functions: some facts and notions. In:
E.O. Heady, H.G. Dresslin, H.R. Jensen and G.L. Johnson
(Editors), Agricultural Adjustment Problems in a Growing
Economy. Iowa State University Press, Ames, pp. 74-93.
Kere, P.A., Mwangi, W.M. and Ogutu, A., 1986. The supply
responsiveness of wheat farmers in Kenya. East. Afr. Econ.
Rev., 2: 151-155.
Krautkraemer, J.A., 1994. Population growth, soil fertility, and
agricultural intensification. J. Dev. Econ., 44: 403-428.
Krueger, A.O., Schiff, M. and Valdes, A., 1988. Agricultural
incentives in developing countries: measuring the effect of
sectoral and economywide policies. World Bank Econ. Rev.,
2: 255-271.
Lopez, R., Ali, R. and Larsen, B., 1991. How trade and economic
policies affect agriculture. Working Paper, 719, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Maitha, J.K., 1970. Productivity response to price: a case study of
Kenyan coffee. East. Afr. Econ. Rev., 2: 31-37.
Mamingi, N., 1996. On the impact of prices and macroeconomic
policies on agricultural supply and the environment: a synthesis. World Bank, Washington, DC, mimeo.
Mshomba, E.R., 1989. Price elasticity of supply of Tanzania's
major export crops. East. Afr. Econ. Rev., 5: 9-20.
Mundlak, Y., 1985. The aggregate agricultural supply. World
Bank, Washington, DC, mimeo.
Ogbu, O.M. and Gwetibouo, M., 1990. Agricultural supply re-

34

N. Mamingi /Agricultural Economics 16 ( 1997) 17-34

sponse in sub-Saharan Africa: a critical review of the literature. Afr. Dev. Rev., 2: 83-99.
Olayemi, J.K. and Oni, S., 1972. Asymmetry in price response: a
case study of Western Nigerian cocoa farmers. Niger. J. Econ.
Soc. Stud., 14: 347-355.
Oni, S.A., 1969. Production response in Nigeria agriculture: a
case study of palm produce, 1949-1966. Niger. J. Econ. Soc.
Stud., 11: 81-91.
Peterson, W.L., 1979. International farm prices and the social cost
of cheap food policies. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 61: 12-21.
Pick, H.D. and Vollrath, L.T., 1994. Real exchange rate misalignment and agricultural export performance in developing countries. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change, 42: 555-571.
Rao, J.M., 1989. Agricultural supply response: a survey. Agric.
Econ., 3: 1-22.
Rao, P.D.S. and Sharma, K.C., 1991. On the aggregation problem
in international comparisons of agricultural production aggregates. J. Dev. Econ., 35: 197-204.
Salehi-Isfahani, D., 1993. Population pressure, intensification of
agriculture, and rural-urban migration. J. Dev. Econ., 40:
371-384.
Seini, W., 1985. The economic analysis of the responsiveness of
peasant cotton farmers to the price incentives in Ghana. Tech.
Pub!. Ser., Univ. Legon, Ghana, 51: 77-81.
Sharma, K.L., 1992. Aggregate farm supply response in Kenya.
East. Afr. Econ. Rev., 8: 92-101.
Summers, R. and Heston, A., 1988. A new set of international

comparisons of real product and price Levels estimates for 130
countries, 1950-1985. Rev. Income Wealth, 34: 1-25.
Tomek, W.G. and Robinson, K.L., 1972. Agricultural Product
Prices. Comell University Press, Ithaca, 376 pp.
Trail, B., Colman, D. and Young, T., 1978. Estimating irreversible
supply functions. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 60: 528-531.
Tweeten, G.L. and Quance, C.L., 1969. Positivistic measures of
aggregate supply elasticities: some new approaches. Am. J.
Agric. Econ., 51: 342-352.
Tweeten, G.L. and Quance, C.L., 1971. Techniques for segmenting independent variables in regression analysis: reply. Am. J.
Agric. Econ., 53: 359-360.
Valdes, A. and Pinckney, T.C., 1989. Trade and macroeconomic
policies: impact of agricultural growth: evidence to-date. East.
Afr. Econ. Rev., 5: 42-61.
Van Schalkwyk, H.D. and Groenewald, J.A., 1993. An estimate of
aggregate supply response in South African Agriculture. Dev.
South. Afr., 10: 549-558.
Wolffram, R., 1971. Positivistic measures of aggregate supply
elasticities: some new approaches - some critical notes. Am.
J. Agric. Econ., 53: 356-359.
World Bank, 1993. Purchasing power of currencies: comparing
national incomes using ICP Data. International Economics
Department, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank, 1994. Adjustment in Africa: Reforms, Results, and
the Road Ahead. Oxford University Press, New York, 284 pp.

