AGRICULTURAL

ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

Developments in biophysical and bioeconomic simulation of
agricultural systems: a review 1
Caleb A. Oriade * , Carl R. Dillon
Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA
Accepted 5 May 1997

Abstract
This paper reviews the features and uses of some recent biophysical and bioeconomic simulation models in agricultural economics
research. Problems associated with earlier models are discussed and the extent to which recent simulators have addressed these concerns is
appraised. Some salient factors that will enhance the continued relevance of simulators as research and decision support tools are indicated.
© 1997 Elsevier Science B.V.

1. Introduction
Perhaps more than any other research methodology employed in agricultural economics, the growing
popularity of systems approach and simulation techniques is rather exceptional judging from the reported number of applications in recent decades. The
use of this technique in agricultural research, which
was described as relatively novel in 1971 (Dent and
Anderson, 1971), had become so widespread a few
years later to the extent that two surveys of over 300
literature each did not exhaust available publications
in the field (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser,
1977). Ever since, no serious attempt has been made
to undertake such a comprehensive review as it is
doubtful if the value of such an exercise would
justify the amount of resources required. Instead, the
recent trend is to narrow the focus of such studies to

Corresponding author.
This project was funded by Arkansas Agricultural Experiment
Station project no. 1464.
*

1

some specific simulation systems andjor agricultural
practices (Musser and Tew, 1984; Braat and Van
Lierop, 1987; Dillon et al., 1991).
In almost all the surveys of simulation use in
agriculture, certain conclusions are strikingly similar
regardless of the scope of such studies. The surveys
have attributed the attractiveness of simulation to the
dearth of feasible alternative methodologies for tackling the inherent dynamic and/ or stochastic nature
of agricultural problems. Also, the appeal of simulation has been enhanced by increasing computer capability at a relatively cheaper cost. However, certain
concerns have been raised pertaining to the wisdom
of employing simulation tools in every study. The
objective of this exercise is to review some of the
recent simulators 2 and their applications to physical

2 In this study, simulators refer to models that are developed for
simulation purposes (Musser and Tew, 1984; Dillon eta!., 1991).
This definition contrasts with Anderson (1974) where simulators
refer to the modelers (persons) and simulands are used for the
models.

0169-5150/97 j$17.00 © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Pll SO 169-5150(97)000 12-1

46

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

and/or biological issues in agriculture. Such information will help identify the potential strengths of
simulation that the modelers can build upon, as well
as the possible pitfalls to avoid. Now that simulation
is increasingly being used for decision support, information from such a periodic evaluation could prevent costly mistakes from being made or repeated.
In the sections that follow, some conceptual issues in simulation are first discussed. Next, factors
that could enhance or limit the appeal of simulation
are highlighted. Third, the distinguishing features of
the class of simulators commonly used in agricultural production research are presented. Fourth, a
number of common simulators and their applications
are surveyed. Finally, an appraisal of these simulators and their applications is undertaken while some
of the factors that could enhance the continued relevance of this methodology are indicated.

2. Certain concepts in simulation
For the sake of exposition, a brief overview of
certain issues in simulation is presented as a thorough discourse of these concepts has been undertaken elsewhere (Dent and Anderson, 1971; Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977). Simulation
is a numerical manipulation of a symbolic model of
a system with a view to generating experimental
information about the systems or the model of systems (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977;
Czaki, 1984). Five phases in simulation are generally
recognized. These are: the model specification, parameter estimation, verification (which may also include calibration), validation and revision stages
(Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; Musser
and Tew, 1984). The tasks to be accomplished in
these phases are somehow self-explanatory except
for the verification and validation functions which
are often misconstrued. As will be seen in the next
section, these two steps are arguably the mostly
criticized components of simulation which deserve
further elucidation.
Verification is the process of establishing the truth
or correctness of model's reality (Dent and Anderson, 1971). It is the process by which the investigator determines whether or not the model performs in
accordance with the intended purpose (Johnson and

Rausser, 1977). Verification may be undertaken at
the level of programming the model (Dillon et al.,
1991) and/or debugging the program (Anderson,
1974; Law and Kelton, 1991). On the other hand,
validation is the process of ascertaining the closeness
of the model to reality which is reflected in the
model's ability to duplicate the required characteristics of the systems and fulfilling the modelling
objectives (Dent and Anderson, 1971; Wright, 1971;
Johnson and Rausser, 1977). Simply put, the objective of validation is to ascertain the usefulness, rather
than the truthfulness, of the model (Dillon et al.,
1991).
Implicit in the above concepts of verification and
validation is the fact that both duties need not be
performed by the same set of investigators. Often,
simulators are usually not developed oy the end-users.
Therefore, while the function of model verification
may rest with the developers, the users are certainly
responsible for validating the models to establish the
relevance of such simulators to the specific problems
under investigation.
Naylor and Finger (1971) proffer three methodological concepts of validation in economics which
can be extended to validation in computer simulation. Law and Kelton ( 1991) expatiate on these
concepts by providing specific recommendations on
how these concepts can be implemented. The first
concept, rationalism, holds that economic models are
simply a system of logical deductions from synthetic
premises of unquestionable truth that are not themselves open to empirical validation (Naylor and Finger, 1971). Thus the role of validation is to identify a
set of basic assumptions governing the behavior of
the system being modeled. For this concept, the
operational framework proposed by Law and Kelton
(1991) is that the model should possess high face
validity that seems reasonable to people who are
knowledgeable about the system being modeled.
These underlying assumptions may be identified by
using any combination of these methods: conversations with system experts, observation of the system,
studying the results from earlier attempts, checking
the existing theories, the use of experience and intuition.
The second concept, empiricism is in complete
opposition to rationalism as it refuses any assumptions that cannot be independently verified. To im-

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

plement this concept, Law and Kelton (1991) recommend the testing of model's assumptions empirically
by using either the goodness of fit statistics, sensitivity analyses or other testing parameters. Finally, the
last concept, positive economics holds that a satisfactory validation is the one that demonstrates an efficient ability of the model to predict the dependent
variables that are treated by the model regardless of
whether the underlying assumptions are valid or not.
Naylor and Finger (1971) further argue that a
satisfactory validation is one that incorporates basic
elements of the three concepts in a multistage validation (MV) fashion. In MV, each of the three conceptual positions is regarded as a necessary but not
sufficient procedure for validating simulation experiments (Naylor and Finger, 1971; Ray and Richardson, 1978). The first stage in MV calls for the
formulation of a set of hypotheses or postulates
underlying the model. The second stage attempts to
validate the postulates subject to the limitations imposed by existing statistical tools. The third and final
stage in MV tests the model's ability to predict the
behavior of the system under investigation. For this
definitive test, when real systems exist, validation
may be a relatively easy task of comparing the
simulated data to real, out of sample data (King et
al., 1993). If the population distribution of the real
systems is known, the generated data can be tested
statistically to see whether they could come from
such a distribution (Anderson, 1974). However, if
information on the real systems is not available,
which is the common reason for most ex ante simulation analyses, validation becomes subjective and
the expert opinion plays a key role in determining
the credibility of the model (Law and Kelton, 1991).
In all cases, an acid test of satisfactory validation is
the ability to show that the simulation model leads to
a better decision which cannot be readily obtained
with alternative techniques (Wright, 1971).

3. Strengths and weaknesses of simulation
Numerous factors have contributed to the
widespread use of simulation in agricultural economics research. First, by training, economists are
generally not equipped to undertake physical experimentation that would produce needed information

47

for economic studies. Therefore, when satisfactory
experimental data can not be sourced from physical
scientists, simulation becomes inevitable because of
the relative ease of generating the input-output data
that are needed. Also, simulation provides a means
for incorporating certain stochastic variables (e.g.,
states of nature) that are not easily observable but
can facilitate a better understanding of the system
being modeled. Simulation becomes a more powerful
tool when the generated data lead to sound management decisions that cannot be outclassed by using
alternative techniques. Simulation can substitute for
large scale physical experimentation while ex ante
simulation can aid the understanding of a system that
does not exist or that is currently impracticable to
experiment (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser,
1977).
Another factor that is responsible for the explosive use of simulation is the increasing computer
power and affordability (Dillon et al., 1991; King et
al., 1993). One of the early concerns of simulation is
its high cost. For this reason, Dillon (1971) notes
that simulation, once started, will continue until
available funds are exhausted. The observation of
Anderson (1974) that a study through simulation
always absorbs more resources than anticipated a
priori duly complements this position. Therefore, It
is not surprising to see an increased use of simulation as technological advances lower computation
costs and make it very competitive when compared
to physical experimentation or other methods.
The bulk of systems simulation has been used to
address complex stochastic and/ or dynamic problems in agriculture. Application to irrigation projects
represents a substantial component of simulation
(Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; King
et al., 1993). In general, simulation has been used
primarily as a research tool with little consideration
for its credibility where credible models are simulators that have been widely accepted to the extent of
being used as an aid in making decisions (Law and
Kelton, 1991). However, the increasing demand for
such credible models is now stimulating interest in
the development of specialized simulators that meet
these needs (King et al., 1993).
The criticisms of simulation are also worthy of
consideration. Virtually all empirical applications
have not placed much premium on the importance of

48

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

model validation (Johnson and Rausser, 1977; King
et al., 1993). Since a majority of these simulators are
usually developed by parties that are external to their
subsequent usage, validation is a prerequisite for
discerning whether the predetermined model assumptions and the resultant model prescriptions are transportable and applicable to the new environment or
problem under investigation. Also, some users may
need to strengthen their justification for employing
simulation tools as it is possible that feasible, costeffective alternative techniques that can yield superior results are available.
While the modelling objectives of economists often involve some optimization, potential developers
and users sometimes fail to recognize that simulation
is not necessarily an optimal procedure and its application to a problem does not automatically lead to an
optimal solution. While the search for an efficient
way of using simulation as a means of optimization
is an area deserving attention, few approaches have
been suggested to deal with optimization of systems
through simulation modelling (Anderson, 1974;
Czaki, 1984; Azadivar and Lee, 1988). According to
Azadivar and Lee (1988), these are: the Response
Surface Methodology (RSM), direct search, and
Stochastic Approximation Method (SAM). RSM entails the estimation of the regression parameters of
linear or quadratic form of simulation outcomes (Box
and Wilson, 1951; Smith, 1976). If the number of
feasible simulation outcomes is limited, direct search
for optimal results may be possible either with repeated iterations (Anderson, 1974; Czaki, 1984) or
by careful enumeration and evaluation of all possible
outcomes (King et al., 1993; Swinton and King,
1994). However, since a sizeable number of simulation models are often stochastic and more complicated in nature, the third category, SAM, which is a
group of statistically convergent search methods,
may be more appropriate (Kushner and Clark, 1978).
A heuristic procedure developed by Azadivar and
Lee (1988) for optimizing complex stochastic systems modeled by simulation is a good example of
the SAM method. However, users need to balance
the gains of optimization with the extra costs of
pursuing any of these optimization procedures.
Other criticisms of simulation include: the need to
validate the simulator in every application which
makes its use time-consuming and expensive

(Ramos, 1987), the divergence between model results and real world situations (Anderson, 1974), the
fact that many simulation decisions and inputs are
predetermined and uncontrollable thus necessitating
an interdisciplinary cooperation for the simulators to
be adaptable for other research (Musser and Tew,
1984).

4. Biophysical and bioeconomic simulation

Surveys of simulators and their applications have
usually been conducted by subject area (Dent and
Anderson, 1971; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; Czaki,
1984; Musser and Tew, 1984). Although there is no
consensus as to the appropriate jargon for this classification, the categories provided by Johnson and
Rausser (1977) will suffice. Their five broad classes
are the firm and process, the market, the aggregate,
the development and the natural resource models.
In agricultural production, a sub-set of firm and
process models, otherwise known as biophysical
simulators, are very common (Boggess, 1984; Musser
and Tew, 1984). Biophysical simulators (BPS) are
process models that explicitly account for the biological andjor physical components of agricultural production (Musser and Tew, 1984). These simulators
provide the means of generating production response
surfaces required for empirical production research
(Boggess, 1984).
Often, BPS and bioeconomic simulators or models have been used interchangeably. A bioeconomic
model is a mathematical representation of a biological system which describes biological processes and
predicts the effects of management decisions on
those processes (King et al., 1993). In practical
applications, there seems to be no clear distinction
between BPS and bioeconomic models (BEMS). For
instance, the literature cited in BPS and BEMS
surveys often overlap (see, e.g., Musser and Tew,
1984; Dillon et al., 1991; King et al., 1993). However, a few attempts have been made to distinguish
between both classes of sii):lulators. In general, BPS,
by themselves, do not irytlude an economic component. Musser and Tew {1984) contend that it is the
magnitude of physical processes that differentiates
BPS from BEMS. However, this distinction fades as
BPS is intensively used to solve economic problems.

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

A more definitive difference between BPS and BEMS
can be gleaned from King et al. (1993). They notice
that BEMS generally fall within the class of predictive models where biological processes are represented by a relatively small number of equations
relating current state and control variable levels to
future states of the system. Conversely, BPS belong
to a class of process models where relatively detailed
subsystems of physical and biologically processes
are linked in an overall representation of plant (or
animal) growth in such a way that the structure and
parameters of component subsystems are based on
general theoretical models of specific physical or
biological processes. Nevertheless, it is rather difficult to distinguish between both simulators in practice and the remainder of this survey will focus on
both sets of simulators jointly.

5. Survey of BPS and BEMS simulators
The simulators reviewed in this section are neither
representative nor exhaustive of all relevant models.
Rather, the choice was influenced either by their
acceptance, as reflected in the number of applications, or by the extensive involvement of agricultural
economists in their development. Even with these
criteria, it is conceivable that some important simulators would have been inadvertently left out.
SOYGRO (Wilkerson et al., 1983) and CERES
(Ritchie and Otter, 1985) models are among the most
famous process models that have been used in simulating whole crop-soil systems. Although SOYGRO
was developed as a decision support tool for irrigation and pest management, it has been largely used
for research purposes (Hoogenboom et al., 1992).
SOYGRO simulates the yield, growth and development of soybeans (Glycine max L. Merr) as a function of soil, weather and management variables
(Wilkerson et al., 1983). From its early version in
the early 80's, SOYGRO has undergone substantial
modifications such that it now ranks among the most
flexible models whose validity of results is no longer
location-specific or environment-dependent. Hoogenboom et al. (1992) describe the measures that were
taken to ensure that the predictions of the model are
reliable. During verification, the code was checked
so as to ensure that the programming logic was

49

consistent and a true reflection of the system being
modeled. This was accomplished with the aid of
debugging tools of FORTRAN compilers and some
static program analyzers. For calibration, data from
experimental sites in Gainesville, Florida were compared to model predictions. SOYGRO has been extensively validated in various locations in USA and
Europe (Hoogenboom et al., 1992; Moulin and
Beckie, 1993; Nagarajan et al., 1993; Savin et al.,
1994; Gabrielle et al., 1995). Unlike many simulators, transportability of SOYGRO is enhanced by the
generic format that was adopted for data entry so
that site-specific information can be used for model
predictions.
To a large extent, the above features of SOYGRO
are shared by other -GRO models for grain legumes.
They are PNUTGRO for peanuts (Arachis hypogea
L.) and BEANGRO for common beans ( Phaseolus
vulgaris L.). Also, these attributes characterize
CERES (an acronym for crop estimation through
resource and environment synthesis) class of models
for cereals. The purpose of CERES models is to
generate yield estimates by modelling factors that
were considered to be most relevant in yield determination. These factors include plant growth and development, soil water and nutrient status (Ritchie and
Otter, 1985). Random factors that could be controlled by management such as pest and disease
infestations were not considered. CERES Wheat and
CERES Maize are the common types of CERES
models. CERES and -GRO models are among the
models within the framework of IBSNAT-DSSAT
(the International Benchmark Sites Network for
Agrotechnology Transfer Project Decision Support
Systems for Agrotechnology Transfer) whose goal
was to standardize the structure of these models in
order to enhance their suitability for any region
(Hoogenboom et al., 1992). Validation results for all
or any components of SOYGRO and CERES models
have generally shown a satisfactory level of correspondence between observable data and simulated
variates, although certain sub-routines often require
some recalibration before realistic model estimates
are obtained (Moulin and Beckie, 1993; Nagarajan et
al., 1993; Savin et al., 1994; Gabrielle et al., 1995).
FLIPSIM (Richardson and Nixon, 1986) is a
FORTRAN computer simulation model that was developed for analyzing the probable consequences of

50

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

alternative policies and income tax developments on
typical farms. It is a firm level, recursive, simulation
model which generates the annual production, farm
policy, marketing, financial management, growth,
and income tax components of a farm over a planning horizon of up to ten years (Richardson and
Nixon, 1986). FLIPSIM identifies the optimal path
of crop enterprises by systematically enumerating
and evaluating the outcomes of all feasible alternatives. Verification and validation of FLIPSIM was
fashioned after the multistage approach suggested by
Naylor and Finger (1971).
HERB (Wilkerson et al., 1991), WEEDSIM
(Swinton and King, 1994) and WEEDCAM
(Lybecker et al., 1994) are all recent BEMS which
are handy decision support systems for the management of agricultural pests (mainly weeds). HERB
was first in the series of these pest management
models to be developed. HERB is a computer-based,
interactive, menu-driven program that can generate
post-emergence herbicide recommendations for profitable soybean production (Wilkerson et al., 1991).
Using the field-specific information supplied by the
user, the model provides a number of feasible weed
control alternatives and their associated impacts on
weeds and returns (King et al., 1993). Data obtained
from North Carolina experiments were used to calibrate HERB model. Information on the specific procedures employed for model verification and validation is rather scanty but satisfactory results with
HERB applications have been reported (Wilkerson et
al., 1991; Wiles et al., 1992). WEEDCAM is similar
to HERB except it is a bioeconomic model for
managing both pre- and post-emergence weeds in
irrigated com (Zea mays L.).lt is a spreadsheet-based
computer software which was developed and validated in Colorado. Its format assumes the knowledge
of spreadsheet data management. This novel approach enhances the flexibility and robustness of the
model with its liberal data entry and manipulation
procedures.
WEEDSIM extends the frontiers of the above
weed management models by recognizing a more
plausible scenario of multiple weeds and multiple
control strategies within a dynamic setting. It is a
computer-based, dynamic, bioeconomic weed management model for com and soybeans that identifies
a two-year path of weed control treatments that

maximize net returns per acre. The two-year horizon
enables the model to track the carryover effects of
current weeds and control measures in subsequent
season. WEEDSIM, like the other two pest management models, identifies the weed control strategies
that maximize returns by systematically enumerating
and evaluating profits under all possible sequences
of feasible weed control actions, rather than using
dynamic programming or other optimization procedures. For verification, the steps described in Law
and Kelton (1991) were followed while statistical
tools and expert opinions were used in model validation. Evidence from on-field validation trials suggests that WEEDSIM is a promising tool for enhancing returns and/or reducing herbicide use when
compared to farmers' conventional practices (Buhler
et al., 1996; Porcella et al., 1996). A related model,
GWM (Wiles et al., 1994), which has a better users'
interface and which is considerably more flexible
than WEEDSIM in terms of its data entry capabilities is presently being field-tested in several locations.
GLEAMS (Groundwater Loading Effects of Agricultural Management Systems) (Leonard et al., 1987)
is a simulation model for evaluating the effects of
different management systems on the movement of
agricultural chemicals. It is a suitable tool for addressing the groundwater quality concerns of chemical usage. Another related model is AGNPS (Agricultural NonPoint Source) (Young et al., 1989) which
is an event-based water quality model for analyzing
nonpoint-source pollution in agricultural watersheds.
Since a major constraint to the widespread use of
these water quality models is their time-consuming
input data demands, geographic information systems
(GIS) have been successfully integrated with AGNPS (Tim and Jolly, 1994). This development has
proved to be an effective way to collect, manipulate,
visualize and analyze the input and output data of
AGNPS (Srinivasan and Arnold, 1994). GLEAMS
and AGNPS have ben found to be useful tools for
environmental planning in various locations (Bingner
et al., 1992; Sugiharto et al., 1994; Foltz et al., 1995;
Rode and Frede, 1997).
EPIC (Erosion-Productivity Impact Calculator)
(Jones et al., 1991) was developed by a multidisciplinary team of USDA researchers at the Blacklands
Research Center in Temple, Texas. EPIC is a dy-

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

namic model that can be used to estimate soil erosion and its impacts on crop production. The nine
major components of EPIC are: weather, hydrology,
erosion, nutrient cycling, soil temperature, tillage,
crop growth, crop and soil management, and economics. EPIC has been extensively used and the
model appears to give acceptable results with mini-

51

mal calibration (Bryant et al., 1992; Rosenberg et al.,
1992; Foltz et al., 1995; Hughes et al., 1995).
CEEPES (the Comprehensive Environmental Economic Policy Evaluation System) (Bouzaher et al.,
1995) is an integrated system of simulation models
and policy appraisal tools that facilitates a systematic
evaluation of trade-offs from alternative agroenvi-

Table I
Some simulators and their applications
Simulator

Description

Examples of Application

AGNPS(Young eta!., 1989)

Water quality model for analyzing nonpoint-source pollution
in agricultural watersheds.

CEEPES(Bouzaher eta!., 1995)

Integrated system for evaluating trade-offs from alternative
agroenvironmental policies
Process models for predicting growth, development and
yield of respective cereal grains.

Kozloff et a!., 1992;Sugiharto
et a!., 1994;Rode and Frede,
1997.
Bouzaher et a!., 1995.

CERES models(Ritchie and Otter, 1985)

CIM(Brown et a!., 1983)
CORNF(Stapper and Arkin, 1980)
COTTAM(Jackson et al., 1988)
EPIC(Jones eta!., 1991)
FLIPSIM(Richardson and Nixon, 1986)

GAFS(Hutton and Hinman, 1968)
GLEAMS(Leonard eta!., 1987)
GOSSYM(Baker et a!., 1986)
GRAZE(Loewer et a!., 1980)
HERB(Wilkerson eta!., 1991)
SORGF(Maas and Arkin, 1978)

A computer-based model for managing insect pests in cotton
A biophysical simulation model for corn
A model for simulating the growth, development and yield
of cotton. Similar to GOSSYM.
Dynamic model for estimating soil erosion impacts on crop
production
A firm level, simulation model for generating production,
financial and marketing data.
A general agricultural firm simulator
Model for evaluating effects of management systems on
movement of agricultural chemicals
A model for simulating the growth of cotton.
Dynamic model for simulating beef-forage production as a
function of both management and environmental variables.
A bioeconomic model for post-emergence control of weeds
in soybeans.
A biophysical simulation model for sorghum.

SOYGRO(Wilkerson et a!., 1983)

A process-oriented computer-based model for predicting
growth, development and yield of soybeans

SW AT(Brown and Hollis, 1996)

A semi-empirical model for predicting concentrations of
pesticides entering surface water from agricultural land.
A hydrology model for simulating water balance and related
processes in rural basins

SWRRB(Williams et a!., 1985)

TAMW(Maas and Arkin, 1980)
WEEDSIM(Swinton and King, 1994)

A Biophysical simulation model for wheat. It is very similar
to CERES-Wheat
A dynamic bioeconomic model for multiple weed management in corn and soybean.

Parsch et a!., 1991;Johnson et
a!., 199l;Moulin and Beckie,
1993.
S zmedra et a!., 1991.
Dillon et a!., 1989.
Dillon eta!., 1989.
Foltz et a!., !993;Hughes et a!.,
1995;Sabbagh eta!., 1992.
Duffy et a!., 1986;Bai1ey and
Richardson, 1985;Perry et a!.,
1986;Salassi eta!., 1987.
Harris and Mapp, 1986.
Foltz et a!., 1993.
Misra and Spurlock, 1991.
Parsch and Loewer, 1987.
Wiles et a!., 1992.
Harris and Mapp, 1986; Dillon
et a!., 1989.
Boggess and Amerling, 1983;
Boggess et a!., 1985; Szmedra
et a!., 1991; Parsch et a!.,
1991; Nagarajan eta!., 1993.
Arnold and Allen, 1996;Brown
and Hollis, 1996.
Arnold and Williams,
1987;Singer eta!., 1988;Savabi
et a!., 1988.
Dillon eta!., 1989.
Swinton et a!., 1995;Buhler et
a!., 1996;Forcella et a!.,
1996;0riade et a!., 1996.

52

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

ronmental policies. This is a useful policy evaluation
model especially with the growing concern regarding
the potential environmental and health effects of
agricultural chemicals. The four major components
of CEEPES are: policy, agricultural decision, fate
and transport, and health and environmental risk.
Other simulators that have featured in literature
include SORGF (Maas and Arkin, 1978), CORNF
(Stapper and Arkin, 1980), TAMW (Maas and Arkin,
1980), COTTAM (Jackson et al., 1988), GOSSYM
(Baker et al., 1986), CIM (Brown et al., 1983),
GRAZE (Loewer et al., 1980), GAFS (Hutton and
Hinman, 1968), SWRRB (Williams et al., 1985) and
SWAT (Brown and Hollis, 1996). Features of these
simulators are summarized in Table 1.
6. A survey of selected applications
As with simulators, this survey does not consider
all empirical work involving some simulation. Instead, the few that were selected only serve to illustrate the breadth of issues for which simulation
methods have been deemed appropriate. The categories include irrigation, crop management, pest
management, livestock management and agriculture
and environment.

6.1. Irrigation
BPS and BEMS have been used extensively to
determine the optimal allocation of irrigation water
without over-exploiting the aquifers. Mapp and Bidman (1976) employed GAFS to simulate a representative farm and estimate returns under alternative
duration and severity of soil moisture and atmospheric stresses during the critical stages of crop
development. Simulated farm incomes under alternative strategies facilitated the recommendation of
strategies and policy initiatives that are optimal under various water resource situations. Bernardo et al.
(1987) used a biophysical simulation model,
SPAW-IRRIG, to generate yield response to irrigation schedules. The irrigation activities so generated
were later employed in a mathematical programming
model that identified irrigation strategies for constrained profit maximization under limited water
supply. Bernardo (1988) employed SORGF to evaluate the effects of spatial variability of irrigation

applications on the efficiency of irrigation. The
growth and yields of sorghum were simulated under
both the assumption of uniformity and non-uniformity in water application. This formed the basis for
comparing benefits under spatial variability to returns from conventional practice of uniform sprinkler
irrigation.
On irrigation and risk, Boggess and Amerling
(1983) employed SOYGRO to explore the implications of irrigation investments on risk and returns to
irrigation strategy. This crop model was used to
estimate yield response of crops to irrigation with
seventeen years of historical weather data. Using
cost estimates for alternative irrigation practices generated by a computer-based irrigation cost generator
program, irrigation strategies that could maximize
present value of returns under various weather conditions were identified. Harris and Mapp (1986) employed SORGF to simulate sorghum returns to
stochastic soil water and other production and environmental conditions. The returns were later subjected to stochastic dominance comparisons in order
to identify the water-conserving irrigation strategies
for grain sorghum farmers that depend on the Ogallala aquifer in Oklahoma. Bosch and Eidman (1987)
utilized a bioeconomic model to explore the value of
soil and weather information for choosing optimal
irrigation strategies when risk preferences of decision makers are not neutral. The study simulated the
value of information for an expected utility maximizing decision maker whose representative farm comprises both irrigated and non-irrigated acreage under
corn, soybean and rye production in Minnesota.
Although the irrigation scheduling strategy was examined, the model proposed can be employed to
analyze the returns to any production input under
risk.

6.2. Crop management
With FLIPSIM, Duffy et al. (1986) evaluated the
effects of alternative farm programs and levels of
price variability on the survival and growth of Texas
cotton farms. Five levels of price variability and
three farm policy options under 1981 Farm Bill were
simulated for two representative cotton farms. Perry
et al. (1986) employed the model to evaluate alternative cropping patterns and share leasing arrange-

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

ments that can enhance the economic viability of
tenant rice and soybean farmers in Texas. FLIPSIM
was used to simulate probability distributions of
returns to a typical producer. Stochastic dominance
techniques were later applied to these returns in
order to identify efficient strategies and establish the
relationship between crop rotation practices and the
nature of share-leasing arrangements. Against the
backdrop of declining acreage under rice production
in the Mississippi River Delta region of the United
States, Salassi et al. (1987) also used FLIPSIM to
determine the economic survivability of rice farms if
the prevailing economic conditions persist. The study
led to the identification of enterprise mix and production practices that would sustain a higher level of
production.
With CERES models, Johnson et al. (1991) predicted crop yields under different input levels to
facilitate their evaluation of on-farm effects of cropping strategies that could reduce nitrate groundwater
pollution. These crop yields were in tum employed
in optimization and linear programming models from
which inferences concerning leaching-profit tradeoffs of representative farms were drawn. Parsch et al.
(1991) developed an amalgam of CERES-wheat and
SOYGRO models which they used to assess the
risk-return tradeoffs of double-cropped wheatsoybean producers such that the costs of early harvest of winter wheat are compensated by improved
returns of early soybean plantings. With other models, Misra and Spurlock (1991) utilized GOSSYM to
generate yield information required for the identification of efficient cotton cropping systems that balance
the dual objective of maximizing whole-farm returns
while reducing the risk of scarce fieldwork time. In a
study that investigated the optimal crop mixes as risk
preferences of farmers change in the Blackland
prairies of Texas, Dillon et al. (1989) employed four
crop simulation models (i.e., CORNF, SORGF,
T AMW and COTTAM) to generate the needed input-output data. The economic decision problem
was solved by applying mean-variance programming
to the simulated returns.
6.3. Pest management
Reichelderfer and Bender (1979) developed a
simulation model that described the physical produc-

53

tion relationships between Mexican bean beatles,
control inputs and soybean yields under different
conditions. The simulation model was later used to
investigate the relative social and economic advantages of alternative methods of controlling these
insect pests in soybeans. Boggess et al. (1985) developed and employed a multi-species bioeconomic
simulation model, the Florida Soybean Integrated
Crop Management Model (SICM), that could prescribe optimal pest management strategies for soybeans within a deterministic, multiple species setting.
SICM, which has been incorporated into SOYGRO,
was used to simulate the population dynamics
(fecundity, development and mortality) for common
insect pests of soybeans and under varying weather,
cultural and soil conditions.
Szmedra et al. (1991) used the Cotton Insect
Management (CIM) simulation model to study the
impact of extending the boll weevil eradication
(BWE) program to Mississippi River Delta region of
the United States on producers' returns and the
efficacy of such pest control actions. The model
aided the determination of the effectiveness of BWE
participation and non-participation under low and
high levels of integrated pest management (IPM).
Nyangito et al. (1996) employed a whole farm simulation model, the Technology Impact Evaluation System, to assess the impact of alternative disease control methods on the economic viability of dairy cattle
production among small holder farmers in East
Africa. Returns under various alternative immunization programs were simulated and stochastic dominance tools facilitated the identification of efficient
strategies for resource poor, risk averse farmers in
the study area.
For site-specific management of weeds, Wiles et
al. (1992) used HERB to investigate the value of
information about weed patchiness for improving the
recommendations of HERB that were based on nonpatchy weed distributions. In a related study, Oriade
et al. ( 1996) employed a modified version of WEEDS1M to examine the potential economic and environmental benefits of site-specific weed management
relative to the conventional uniform control of weeds.
Simulations with this model were carried out within
a dynamic but deterministic framework.
For assessing the implications of pesticide policy
on returns to pest control, Swinton et al. (1995) used

54

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

WEEDSIM to simulate the effect of local bans and
taxes on triazine herbicide use in com (Zea mays
L.).

6.4. Livestock management

Brorsen et al. (1983) developed and utilized a
stocker cattle growth simulation model to estimate
physical and economic results of alternative stocker
production systems. The model was used to calculate
energy requirements, dry matter intake, and stock
gains and weights of alternative production systems
in Oklahoma. Parsch and Loewer (1987) utilized a
biophysical model, GRAZE, to determine whether
rotational or continuous grazing results in optimal
performance for steers pastured on Bermuda grass
( Cynodon dactylon L. Pers.) in western Arkansas
and when faced with weather uncertainty. The pasture growth and animal weight gain under nine rotational grazing strategies were simulated with the
model. Strategies were compared on the basis of net
returns while variance and other measures of dispersion were used to gauge the riskiness of each grazing
strategy.
6.5. Agriculture and environment

Sabbagh et al. (1992) developed and used EPICPST model to simulate the effects of different agricultural management practices on crop yields and
pesticide losses by surface runoff, sediment movement, and leaching under irrigation in the High
Plains region of Oklahoma. Kozloff et al. (1992)
used AGNPS in a Minnesota watershed to simulate
the relative effectiveness of alternative cropland retirement schemes with respect to budget outlays for
annual payments to landowners, reduction in downstream sediment yield and nutrient loss, and reduction in on-site erosion. Foltz et al. (1993) combined
output from EPIC and GLEAMS with a farm level
linear programming model to assess the economic
and environmental implications of selected eastern
Com Belt farming systems. Sugiharto et al. (1994)
used EPIC and AGNPS to simulate the effects of
selected management practices on associated sediment and phosphorus yields originating from agricultural land used for dairy operations. They simulated
1990-1991 land management alternative practices

on three soils in the Upper Bower Creek area of
Wisconsin and compared the quality of effluents
from fields and watersheds to current standard practices. Bouzaher et al. (1995) used CEEPES to assess .
the economic and environmental implications of
atrazine ban in the Com Belt region of United States.
Hughes et al. (1995) employed EPIC and budgeting
tools to evaluate both the short-run profitability and
long-run sustainability of a number of agricultural
practices in the Barley cropping area of Jordan.
6.6. Miscellaneous

Other applications of BPS and BEMS include the
determination of optimal timing of harvests, evaluation of research productivity and marketing analysis.
Kellogg et al. (1988) developed a bioeconomic model
which they used, in conjunction with optimal control
techniques, to determine the optimal time periods for
opening the harvest season for Bay Scallop fishery in
North Carolina. Bosch and Shabman (1990) developed a bioeconomic model which they later used to
study the effects of alternative types of research
information on the returns to oyster production. The
model results provide an insight into the nature of
research priorities that is appropriate for enhancing
productivity in the oyster industry. Finally, in
marketing, Bailey and Richardson (1985) have used
FLIPSIM to evaluate alternative marketing strategies
for cotton. Daily features and cash cotton prices were
simulated by the model and the impact of alternative
marketing strategies to the farm's survival and economic success was determined within a whole-farm
framework.

7. Critique and appraisal

Although earlier surveys (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; Musser and Tew, 1984) point
to a preponderance of simulation applications in
irrigation studies, simulators are now being richly
applied to pest management, animal and crop production, risk and environmental issues. Traditionally,
simulators have been used to resolve dynamic and/or
stochastic problems. However, its use in static and
deterministic cases has been increasing. Also, while
the primary objective of simulation is to forecast

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon j Agricultural Economics 17 ( 1997) 45-58

crop (or livestock) yields, evidence suggests that its
potential for estimating pollutants and in generating
certain inputs and intermediate products is being
explored.
Recent BPS and BEMS have improved considerably as serious attempts have been made to avoid
pitfalls associated with earlier systems. Model
builders have capitalized on technological advances
in making their systems more robust, flexible and
portable. Programming modules are increasingly
being standardized and it is not uncommon to find
simulation programs that, in addition to being somehow user-friendly, possess advanced graphic capabilities. In some cases, quality documentation that is
typical of commercial software is now being provided. However, a sizeable proportion of simulators
are still cumbersome and poorly-designed to the
extent that their developers often insist on formal
training of potential users before permitting the use
of such systems.
There is evidence of improved interdisciplinary
collaboration between physical and social scientists
which has resulted in the development of more robust and widely-tested simulators. However, this
contradicts one of the reasons often adduced for
developing new simulators which is the lack of
certain desirable features in the earlier models. For
instance, the motivation for developing SOYGRO,
instead of using the then existing soybean models, is
the need for a simpler model that has the ability to
simulate crop growth in response to daily microclimate and stress factors (Wilkerson et al., 1983).
Also, WEEDSIM was developed because of the
inability of earlier pest management models to account for the more plausible dynamic nature of weed
problems within a multiple species and multiple
control setting (Swinton and King, 1994). Since
these simulators were developed without any commercial intent, it is possible for more robust and
widely applicable models to emerge from collaborative efforts that lead to the upgrade of existing
systems instead of developing new ones. With this
approach, desirable features that are lacking in earlier models can be incorporated in later versions.
The structure of funding model-building projects
sometimes has implications on the shelf-life and
popularity of the resultant simulators. Model developers often rely on research grants for developing

55

their systems and interest in such models wanes once
grant funds are exhausted. A system of archiving
models and the associated resource personnel is germane in ensuring maximum returns to model-building ventures and avoid unnecessary duplication of
efforts.
The verification and validation aspects of existing
models both during system development and subsequent applications have improved considerably. Users
now regard validation as a key component of project
implementation. Virtually all studies now incorporate
some elements of validation. However, in most cases,
on-field validation trials were carried out at locations
close to where initial data for calibrating the systems
were sourced. Rather than attesting to the robustness
of the simulators, this location bias may account for
the high degree of correspondence between the simulated and experimental results. For instance, models
that were validated outside the immediate modelbuilding environment often have to be recalibrated in
order to obtain acceptable model results (Moulin and
Beckie, 1993; Nagarajan et al., 1993; Savin et al.,
1994; Gabrielle et al., 1995).
Still on validation, there seems to be no consensus
as to how validation steps should proceed. For validation of BPS and BEMS, some modellers have
relied heavily on basic comparisons of simulated and
observed results. Occasionally, subjective expert
opinion is sought to determine the acceptable level
of congruence. It is certain that disagreement on
what constitutes an acceptable form of validation
procedures will continue until generally agreeable
standards are set. Until then, Naylor and Finger
(1971) multi-stage approach as augmented by Law
and Kelton (1991) which was described earlier may
serve as a convenient starting point.
Simulation seems like a methodology of convenience. Some studies that employed simulation tools
failed to investigate whether alternative strategies
that could produce similar or superior results were
readily available. Also, simulation results are sometimes interpreted as optimal solutions. This conclusion is valid only if simulation routines have incorporated an optimization search technique such that
the resultant simulation outcomes have converged to
the results of any optimization process. Some of the
possible optimization search methods were highlighted in an earlier section of this review.

56

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

8. Conclusion
Simulation, econometric and mathematical programming methods rank among the best known
methodologies for tackling the various questions in
applied economic research. However, the review
shows how simulation is a unique method that can
facilitate the resolution of certain complex and j or
dynamic problems that might otherwise remain intractable. Therefore, the continuous relevance of BPS
and BEMS as suitable research tool is certainly not
in doubt despite the minimal instances of their misuse and abuse.
The importance of simulation to management decision making is reflected in the increasing number
of simulation-based decision support systems that is
now in use. This represents a shift from the conventional role of simulation as a purely research tool. It
also places a higher premium on the precision of
simulation results as the acceptable margin of error
disappears. Consequently, in order to ensure the
usefulness of simulation methods in facilitating optimal management decisions, the residual concerns
that are highlighted in this and similar studies should
be addressed.

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance
of Matthew Mason with the literature review. Also,
the authors are grateful to the two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions.

References
Anderson, J.R., 1974. Simulation: Methodology and application in
agricultural economics. Rev. Marketing Agric. Econ. 43, 3-55.
Arnold, J.G., Allen, P.M., 1996. Estimating hydrologic budgets
for three Illinois watersheds. J. Hydro!. 176, 57-77.
Arnold, J.G., Williams, J.R., 1987. Validation of SWRRB simulator for water resources in rural basins. J. Water Res. Planning
Manage. 113, 243-256.
Azadivar, F., Lee, Y., 1988. Optimization of discrete variable
stochastic systems by computer simulation. Math. Comp.
Simul. 30, 331-345.
Bailey, D., Richardson, J.W., 1985. Analysis of selected marketing strategies: A whole-farm simulation approach. Am. J.
Agric. Econ. 67, 813-820.

Baker, D.N., Lambert, J.R., Mckinion, J.M., 1986. GOSSYM: A
simulator of cotton crop growth and yield. S.C. Agric. Exp.
Station, Clemson Univ., Tech. Bull. No. 1089.
Bernardo, D.J., 1988. The effect of spatial variability of irrigation
applications on risk-efficient irrigation strategies. So. J. Agric.
Econ. 20 (1), 77-86.
Bernardo, D.J., Whittlesey, N.K., Saxton, K.E., Basset, D.L.,
1987. An inigation model for management of limited water
supplies. Western J. Agric. Econ. 12, 164-174.
Bingner, R.L., Mutchler, C.K., Murphree, C.E., 1992. Predictive
capabilities of erosion models for different storm sizes. Trans.
ASAE 35, 505-513.
Boggess, W.G., 1984. Discussion: use of biophysical simulation
in production economics. So. J. Agric. Econ. 16 (!), 87-89.
Boggess, W.G., Amerling, C.B., 1983. A bioeconomic simulation
analysis of irrigation investments. So. J. Agric. Econ. 15 (2),
85-91.
Boggess, W.G., Cardelli, D.J., Barfield, C.S., 1985. A bioeconomic simulation approach to multi-species insect management. So. J. Agric. Econ. 17 (2), 43-55.
Bosch, D.J., Eidman, V.R., 1987. Valuing information when risk
preferences are nonneutral: an application to irrigation
scheduling. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 69, 658-668.
Bosch, D.J., Shabman, L.A., 1990. Simulation modelling to set
priorities for research on oyster production. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 72, 371-381.
Bouzaher, A., Cabe, R., Johnson, S.R., Manale, A., Shogren, J.F.,
1995. CEEPES: An evolving system for agroenvironmental
policy. In: Milon, J.W., Shogren, J.F., (Eds.), Integrating
Economic and Ecological Indicators: Practical Methods for
Environmental Policy Analysis. Praeger. pp. 67-89.
Box, G.E.P., Wilson, K.G., 1951. On the experimental attainment
of optimal conditions. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. 13, 1-45.
Braat, L.C., Van Lierop, W.F., 1987. Integrated economic-ecological modeling. In: Braat, L.C., Van Lierop, W.F. (Eds.),
Economic-Ecological Modeling. Studies in regional science
and urban economics 16, pp. 49-53.
Brorsen, B.W., Walker, O.L., Hom, G.W., Nelson, T.R., 1983. A
stocker cattle growth simulation model. So. J. Agric. Econ. 15,
115-122.
Brown, C.D., Hollis, J.M., 1996. SWAT-a semi-empirical model
to predict concentrations of pesticides entering surface waters
from agricultura1land. Pest. Sci. 47, 41-50.
Brown, L.G., McClendon, R.W., Jones, J.W., 1983. Cotton and
insect management simulation model. In: Ridgway, R.L., Lyold, E.P., Cross, W.H., (Eds.), Cotton Insect Management with
Special Reference to the Boll Weevil, Washington, D.C.,
USDA ARS Agric. Handbook No.589, 1983.
Bryant, K.J., Benson, V.W., Kiniry, J.R., Williams, J.R., Lavewell,
R.D., 1992. Simulating com yield response to imgation timings: Validation of the EPIC model. J. Prod. Agric. 5, 237-242.
Buhler, D.D., King, R.P., Swinton, S.M., Gunsolus, J.L., Porcella,
F., 1996. Field Evaluation of a bioeconomic model for weed
management in com (Zea mays). Weed Sci. 44, 915-923.
Czaki, C., 1984. Simulation and systems analysis in agriculture.
Developments in Agricultural Economics, 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 262 pp.

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon j Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

Dent, J.B., Anderson, J.R., 1971. Systems, management and agriculture. In: Dent, J.B., Anderson, J.R., (Eds.), Systems Analysis in Agricultural Management. Wiley. pp. 3-14.
Dillon, J.L., 1971. Interpreting systems simulation output for
managerial decision-making. In: Dent, J.B., Anderson, J.R.,
(Eds.), Systems Analysis in Agricultural Management. Wiley.
pp. 85-122.
Dillon, C.R., Mjelde, J.W., McCarl, B.A., 1989. Biophysical
simulation in support of crop production decisions: A case
study in the blacklands region of Texas. So. J. Agric. Econ. 21
(!), 73-86.
Dillon, C.R., Mjelde, J.W., McCarl, B.A., 1991. Biophysical
simulation models: recommendations for users and developers.
Comp. Electronics in Agric. 6, 213-224.
Duffy, P.A., Richardson, J.W., Smith, E.G., 1986. Effects of
alternative farm programs and levels of price variability on
Texas cotton farms. So. J. Agric. Econ. 18 (2), 97-106.
Foltz, J.C., Lee, J.G., Martin, A.M., 1993. Farm level economic
and environmental impacts of eastern corn belt cropping systems. J. Prod. Agric. 6, 290-296.
Foltz, J.C., Lee, J.G., Martin, M.A., Preckel, P.V., 1995. Multiattribute assessment of alternative cropping systems. Am. J.
Agr. Econ. 77, 408-420.
Porcella, F., King, R.P., Swinton, S.M., Buhler, D.D., Gunsolus,
J.L., 1996. Multi-year validation of a decision aid for integrated weed management in row crops. Weed Sci. 44, 650661.
Gabrielle, B., Menasseri, S., Houot, S., 1995. Analysis and field
evaluation of the CERES model water balance component.
Soil Sci. Am. J. 59, 1403-1412.
Harnos, Z., 1987. Agricultural models. In: Braat, L.C., Van
Lierop, W.F. (Eds.), Economic-Ecological Modeling. Studies
in regional science and urban economics 16. pp. 100-103.
Harris, T.R., Mapp, H.P., 1986. A stochastic dominance comparison of water-conserving irrigation strategies. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 68, 298-305.
Hoogenboom, G., Jones, J.W., Boote, K.J., 1992. Modeling
growth, development, and yield of grain legumes using SOYORO, PNUTGRO and BEANGRO: a review. Trans. ASAE
35, 2043-2053.
Hughes, D., Butcher, W., Jaradat, A., Penaranda, W., 1995.
Economic analysis of the long-term consequences of farming
practices in the barley cropping area of Jordan. Agric. Sys. 47,
39-58.
Hutton, R.F., Hinman, H.R., 1968. A general agricultural firm
simulator. Agric. Econ. and Rural Soc. Rep. 72, Pennsylvania
State Univ.
Jackson, B.S., Arkin, G.F., Hearn, A.B., 1988. The cotton simulation model 'COTTAM': fruiting model calibration and testing.
Trans. ASAE 31, 846-854.
Johnson, S.L., Adams, R.M., Perry, G.M., 1991. The on-farm
costs of reducing groundwater pollution. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
73, 1063-1073.
Johnson, S.R., Rausser, G.C., 1977. Systems analysis and simulation: A survey of applications in agricultural and resource
economics. In: Judge, G.G. et a!. (Eds.), A survey of agricul-

57

tural economics literature, vol. 2. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota press, pp. 157-301.
Jones, C.A., Dyke, P.T., Williams, J.R., Kiniry, J.R., Benson,
V.W., Griggs, R.H., 1991. EPIC: An operational model for
evaluation of agricultural sustainability. Agric. Sys. 37, 341350.
Kellogg, R.L., Easley, J.E. Jr., Johnson, T., 1988. Optimal timing
of harvest for the North Carolina bay scallop fishery. Am. J.
Agric. Econ. 70, 50-62.
King, R.P., Lybecker, D.W., Regmi, A., Swinton, S.M., 1993.
Bioeconomic models of crop production systems: design, development and use. Rev. Agric. Econ. 15, 389-401.
Kozloff, K., Taff, S.J., Wang, Y., 1992. Microtargetting the
acquisition of cropping rights to reduce nonpoint source water
pollution. Water Resources Res. 28, 623-628.
Kushner, H.J., Clark, D.S., 1978. Stochastic approximation method
for constrained and unconstrained systems. Springer, New
York.
Law, A.M., Kelton, W.D., 1991. Simulation modeling and analysis. McGraw Hill Books, NY, pp. 298-324.
Leonard, R.A., Knisel, W.G., Still, D.A., 1987. GLEAMS:
Groundwater loading effects of agricultural management systems. Trans. ASAE 30, 1403-1418.
Loewer, O.J., Smith, E.M., Benock, G., Gay, N., Bridges, T.C.,
Wells, L.G., 1980. Dynamic simulation of animal growth and
reproduction. Trans. ASAE 23, 131-138.
Lybecker, D.W., Schweizer, E.E., Westra, P., 1994. WEEDCAM
Manual. Colorado State Univ., 49 pp.
Maas, S.J., Arkin, G.F., 1978. User's guide to SORGF: a dynamic
grain sorghum growth model with feedback capacity. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Program and Model Documentation No. 78-1.
Maas, S.J., Arkin, G.F., 1980. A wheat growth and development
simulation. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Program
and Model Documentation No. 80-3.
Mapp, H.P., Eidman, V.R., 1976. A bioeconomic analysis of
regulating groundwater irrigation. Am. J. Ag. Econ. 58, 391402.
Misra, S.K., Spurlock, S.R., 1991. Incorporating the impacts of
uncertain fieldwork time on whole-farm risk-return levels: a
target MOTAD approach. So. J. Agric. Econ. 23 (2), 9-17.
Moulin, A.P., Beckie, H.J., 1993. Evaluation of the CERES and
EPIC models for predicting spring wheat grain yield over
time. Can. J. Plant Sci. 73, 713-719.
Musser, W.N., Tew, B.V., 1984. Use of biophysical simulation in
production economics. So. J. Agric. Econ. 16 (!), 77-86.
Nagarajan, K., O'Neil, R.J., Lowenberg-Deboer, J., Edwards,
C.R., 1993. Indiana soybean system model (ISSM): crop
model evaluation. Agric. Sys. 43, 357-379.
Naylor, T.H., Finger, J.M., 1971. Validation. In: Naylor, T.H.,
1971. Computer simulation experiments with models of economic systems. Wiley, New York, pp. 153-164.
Nyangito, H.O., Richardson, J.W., Mundy, D.S., Mukhebi, A.W.,
Zimmel, P., Namken, J., 1996. Economic impacts of east coast
fever immunization on smallholder farms, Kenya: a simulation
analysis. Agric. Econ. 13, 163-177.

58

C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Agricultural Economics 17 (1997) 45-58

Oriade, C.A., King, R.P., Porcella, F., Gunsolus, J.L., 1996. A
bioeconomic analysis of site-specific management for weed
control. Rev. Agric. Econ. 18, 523-535.
Parsch, L.D., Loewer, O.J., 1987. Economics of simulated beefforage rotational grazing under weather uncertainty. Agric.
Sys. 25, 279-295.
Parsch, L.D., Cochran, M.J., Trice, K.L., Scott, H.D., 1991.
Biophysical simulation of wheat and soybean to assess the
impact of timeliness on double-cropping economics. In: Hanks,
J., Ritchie, J.T., (Eds.), Modeling Plant and Soil Systems.
Agronomy monograph series, No. 31, Madison, WI, pp. 511534.
Perry, G.M., Rister, M.E., Richardson, J.W., Grant, W.R., 1986.
Analyzing tenure arrangements and crop rotations using farm
simulation and probit analysis. So. J. Agric. Econ. 18 (2),
165-174.
Ray, D.E., Richardson, J.W., 1978. Detailed description of
POLYSIM. Oklahoma Agricultural Experiment Station, technical bulletin, T-151, 46 pp.
Reichelderfer, K.H., Bender, F.E., 1979. Application of a simulative approach to evaluating alternative methods for the control
of agricultural pests. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 61, 258-267.
Richardson, J.W., Nixon, C.J., 1986. Description of FLIPSIM V:
a general firm level policy simulation model. Texas Agric.
Exp. Station, 49 pp.
Ritchie, J.T., Otter, S., 1985. Description and performance of
CERES-Wheat: A user oriented wheat yield model. In: Willis,
W.O., (Ed.), ARS wheat yield project. USDA-ARS-38 pp.
159-175.
Rode, M., Frede, H.-G., 1997. Modification of AGNPS for agricultural land and climate conditions in central Germany. J.
Environ. Quality 26, 167-172.
Rosenberg, N.J., McKeeney, M.S., Easterling, W.E., Lemon,
K.M., 1992. Validation of EPIC model simulations of crop
responses to current climate and carbon dioxide conditions:
Comparisons with census, expert judgement and experimental
plot data. Agric. For. Meteorology 59, 35-51.
Sabbagh, G.J., Norris, P.E., Geleta, S., Bemado, D.J., Elliot, R.L.,
Mapp, H.P., Stone, J.F., 1992. Environmental and economic
impacts of pesticide and irrigation practices: EPIC-PST simulation. J. Prod. Agric. 5, 312-317.
Salassi, M.E., Eddleman, B.R., Hamill, J.G., 1987. Economic
survivability of Mississippi rice farms: a deterministic simulation approach. So. J. Agric. Econ. 19 (2), 163-173.
Savabi, M.R., Arnold, J.G., Richardson, C.W., 1988. Application
of SWRRB on rangeland watersheds. In: Modeling agricultural, forest, and rangeland hydrology. Proceedings of the
1988 International Symposium, American Society of Agricultural Engineers, pp. 219-231.
Savin, R., Hall, A.J., Satome, E.H., 1994. Testing the root growth
subroutine of the CERES-wheat model for two cultivars of
different cycle length. Field Crops Res. 38, 125-133.

Singer, M.P., Arnold, F.D., Cole, R.H., Arnold, J.G., Williams,
J.R., 1988. Use of SWRRB computer model for the national
coastal pollutant discharge inventory. American Water Resources Association technical publication series, TPS. 88-1,
pp. 119-131.
Smith, D.E., 1976. Automatic optimum-seeking program for digital simulation. Simulation 27, 27-31.
Srinivasan, R., Arnold, J.G., 1994. Integration of a basin-scale
water quality model with GIS. Water Res. Bull. 30, 453-462.
Stapper, M., Arkin, G.F., 1980. CORNF: A dynamic growth and
development model for maize (Zea mays L.). Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Program and Model Documentation
No. 80-2.
Sugiharto, T., Mcintosh, T.H., Uhrig, R.C., Lardinois, J.J., 1994.
Modeling alternatives to reduce dairy farm and watershed
nonpoint source pollution. J. Environ. Quality 23, 18-24.
Swinton, S.M., King, R.P., 1994. A bioeconomic model for weed
management in com and soybean. Agric. Sys. 44, 313-335.
Swinton, S.M., Lybecker, D.W., King, R.P., 1995. The effect of
local triazine restriction policies on recommended weed management in corn. Rev. Agric. Econ 17, 351-367.
Szmedra, P.I., McClendon, R.W., Wetztein, M.E., 1991. Economic risk efficiency of boll weevil eradication. So. J. Agric.
Econ. 23 (1), 237-245.
Tim, U.S., Jolly, R., 1994. Evaluating agricultural nonpoint-source
pollution using integrated geographic information systems and
hydrologic/water quality model. J. Environ. Quality 23, 2535.
Wiles, L.J., Wilkerson, G.G., Gold, H.J., 1992. Value of information about weed distributions for improved post-emergence
control decisions. Crop Protection 11, 547-554.
Wiles, L.J., King, R.P., Lybecker, D.W., Schweizer, E.E., Swinton, S.M., 1994. User's guide. General Weed Management
(GWM) Model Version 1.0. Dept. of Agric. and Applied
Economics, Univ. of Minnesota, Staff Paper P94-23.
Wilkerson, G.G., Jones, J.W., Boote, K.J., Ingram, K.T., Mishoe,
J.W., 1983. Modeling soybean growth for crop development.
Trans. ASAE 26, 63-72.
Wilkerson, G.G., Modena, S.A., Coble, H.D., 1991. HERB: decision model for postemergence weed control in soybean. Agron.
J. 83, 413-417.
Williams, J.R., Nicks, A.D., Arnold, J.G., 1985. Simulator for
water resources in rural basins. J. Hydr. Engrg. Ill, 970-986.
Wright, A., 1971. Farming Systems, models and simulation. In:
Dent, J.B., Anderson, J.R., (Eds.), Systems Analysis in Agricultural Management. Wiley, pp. 17-33.
Young, R.A., Onstad, C.A., Bosch, D.D., Anderson, W.P., 1989.
AGNPS: a nonpoint-source pollution model for evaluating
agricultural watersheds. J. Soil Water Conserv. 44, 168-173.

