AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

The impact of the tomato agroindustry on the rural poor in Mexico
Marfa Antonieta Barron, Fernando Rello*
Faculty of Economics, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico

Abstract
This article addresses the issue of whether the tomato agroindustry (TAl) has been an effective instrument in the reduction of
rural poverty. The TAl is by far the most important agroindustry in Mexico in terms of exports and employment creation. Most
of the laborers employed by the TAl in northwest Mexico are temporary migrants coming from poverty-stricken regions in
southern Mexico. Conditions of poverty-induced migration are explained. The characteristics and strategies of large, modern
tomato enterprises are analyzed. The main conclusion is that migrant income earned in the tomato fields and packing plants, is
fundamental for the bare survival in villages in poverty-stricken regions. However, this does not provide a solution to poverty
alleviation because migrant income is not sufficient to contribute to capital formation in the migrating communities, or the to
create the conditions for endogenous local development.© 2000 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
Keywords: Tomato agroindustry; Employment; Migration; Poverty; Mexico

1. Introduction
This article analyzes the role of globalization and
agroindustry in the generation of income and the improvement of living conditions in rural Mexico. The
position one frequently encounters in the available
literature as well as a position taken by various Latin
American governments, is that the export agroindustry is a means of promoting equitable rural development. It is important therefore to pose the following
question: has agroindustry in fact been an effective
instrument in the reduction of rural poverty?
Unfortunately, there is a dearth of studies analyzing
the effects of agroindustry on rural poverty. Most of
the studies have concentrated on agroindustrial technology, financing, forms of association, and markets.
These studies provide little information on the effects of agroindustry on incomes and employment in
* Corresponding author. Present address: Medanos 39, Col. Las
Aguilas, 01710 Mexico DF, Mexico.

poverty-stricken regions. Some studies, however, have
provided useful insights on the labor market (e.g.,
Wilcox-Young, 1993, for northern Mexico).
To address this gap in knowledge, we undertook a
study of the tomato agroindustry (TAl) in Mexico, and
its impact on employment in poverty-stricken rural areas. The TAl in particular, and the horticulture agroindustry in general, are interesting for several reasons.
In general, in terms of output, employment, processing/packing, and exports, horticulture agroindustry is the most important agroindustry in Mexico.
According to data from the Ministry of Agriculture,
horticulture constitutes 18% of Mexico's agricultural
production and half of its agricultural exports. Due
to the highly labor-intensive nature of horticulture
and horticultural processing, it generates more than
20% of the total labor-days within the Mexican agricultural sector. Moreover, horticulture agroindustry
has survived and flourished in the current climate of
globalization, and has diversified exports to the US
market and increased its scale of production.

0169-5150/00/$ - see front matter© 2000 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
PII: S0169-5150(00)00090-6

290

M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

In particular, the TAl is the most important of the
horticultural agroindustries. TAl has created a regional
labor market to which workers are attracted from the
country's poverty-stricken rural regions. Thousands of
indigenous peasant workers leave these poor regions
every year to labor in the tomato fields in the north of
Mexico.
Our research question is whether the TAl is contributing to poverty alleviation in migrant-sending regions, in particular, in communities in Oaxaca, which
send migrant workers yearly to TAl fields in Sinaloa
and Baja California, in the northwest of Mexico.
We proceed as follows. First, we examine labor
supply status and the migration caused by poverty in
the Mixteca region and Valles Centrales, both regions
being in Oaxaca. Second, we examine the labor market in northern regions where the TAl packers operate,
including wages and working and living conditions of
the workers' families. Finally, we assess the impact of
the TAl on the living standards of the Oaxacan peasant families that send migrants to the TAl areas.

2. Labor supply generated in the poor regions
exporting labor
We hypothesize that labor supply to Mexican
agroindustry coming from marginal rural zones depends, among other things, on the degree of poverty
and on the scarcity of jobs in the sending areas. If
poverty aggravates and living conditions deteriorate,
then the "push factor" to migrate will increase, or
at least the incentive will increase to seek, outside
of agriculture or outside the sending region, other
sources of employment or income that are not to be
found within the local economy.
As a result of the application of structural adjustment programs and rural reform programs, rural
poverty in Mexico has deepened during the past
decade. At the same time, both internal and external
migration have increased significantly. The number of
rural poor increased during 1984-1992, from 6.7 to
8.8 million living in extreme poverty (INEGI-CEPAL,
1993). Another study of the "social sector" of agriculture, both "ejidos" (tenant organizations) and other
communities, concluded that rural poverty in ejidos
is massive. 47.3% of ejido farmers were poor in 1994
(de Janvry eta!., 1997).

There is enough information available in Mexico
to conclude that the principal response of rural families to worsening living conditions has been to seek
an income outside agriculture on their own farm.
This response is also common among agricultural
field-workers in other countries. Three surveys have
been carried out recently on ejido homes, providing
information on sources of family income and change
in those incomes over time. The first two surveys
were carried out in 1990 and 1994, by the Ministry
for Agrarian Reform. The third was carried out in
1997, by the Institute for Agrarian Development and
the World Bank. Analyses of these data include de
Janvry et al. (1997, 1998), Lanjouw (1998), CEPAL
(1999), and Davis (1999).
Earnings outside own-farming are very important
to the poorest rural families. For example in 1994,
small farmers with holdings of less than 2 ha, whose
little land placed them among the poorest, earned only
18% of their family income from own-farming and
livestock husbandry, whereas their income from other
sources (working outside the agricultural sector and
working in wage-employment in the agricultural sector) amounted to 47% of their total income. Remittances from migrants to other areas within Mexico,
and from emigrants to the US made up another third
of their incomes. Yunez-Naude eta!. (1998) reach the
same conclusion using general equilibrium models applied to rural towns in Mexico. This demonstrates the
great importance to poor rural families in Mexico of
income from migration.
The regions with high rates of out-migration, such
as our focal region, Oaxaca, are poor and very scarce
in natural and human capital. They are dependent on
low wages from unskilled jobs, and live in barely accessible, poverty-stricken regions that generate very
little employment. Poverty rates in these regions are
high and increasing. In 1970, 74% of the Mixteca
population had an income level of less than twice the
minimum wage, which placed them below the poverty
line. In 1990, this percentage had grown to 80%. Faced
with this precariousness and the lack of jobs, the response of many families has been to migrate towards
the northwest to work in the vegetable fields.
Majority of the population migrates. There are
whole villages of seasonal migrant workers. A survey
carried out in Coatecas (Valles Centrales) indicates
that 87% of the 217 families surveyed had family

M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

members who were migrants. Out of these migrants,
72% went to Sinaloa to work on the tomato and other
vegetable fields. This demonstrates the great importance of employment created by the TAl for the poor
of Oaxaca (Ortiz, 1998).

3. TAl, axis of the labor market
The high labor requirements demanded by the
production and packaging of tomatoes and other vegetables has led to the creation of a wide regional
market for labor. Estimates made by the Program of
Agricultural Day-Workers of the Ministry of Social
Development suggest that, in the State of Sinaloa
alone, 135 000 migrant day-workers congregate from
various regions of Mexico.
The demand for work depends on the dynamism
of the horticultural business and their technology. The
TAl companies, that participate in the labor markets
of the northwest are modern, large and diversified.
They operate in different regions, and in association
with other national and foreign companies in both the
agroindustrial and financial sectors. The largest companies control between 1000 and 2500 ha. These are
owned or rented lands, on which they employ the most
up-to-date technology. Their proprietors have become
prosperous exporters. The largest are big businessmen,
owners of warehouses in the wholesale markets of
Mexico City and Guadalajara. Further details on the
TAl can be found in Echanove ( 1999) and Lara and
de Grammont (1999).
Recent trends in vegetable production and export
indicate moderate growth. However, the TAl has increased its size and share of the horticulture sector.
There is also evidence of concentration in the TAL
One also observes increasing diversification in horticultural production as part of a business strategy
to boost penetration of Mexican produce into export
markets. According to data from to the Ministry of
Agriculture, 14 horticultural varieties were produced
in Mexico in the early 1970s, while in 1994 there were
more than 80 varieties, some of them exotic and ethnic
vegetables.
The TAl, despite the continuing modernization of
its technology, has always been, and continues to be,
labor-intensive. All the tasks involved are done manually - seedling production either in greenhouses or

291

in the fields, planting out cuttings, cultivation, and
harvesting. This can be contrasted with the mechanized harvesting and packing of processed tomatoes
prevalent across the US. Tomatoes are also much
more labor-intensive than maize, the main cereal
crop. The number of work days per hectare of tomato
corresponding to the technology available previous
to ferti-irrigation is calculated at about 122 days,
as opposed to 29 days required for the production
of maize.
The TAl operates within a context of fierce international competition for control of the final markets
for horticultural produce, within the US and Canada.
Technological modernization forms part of this commercial battle. In recent years, Mexican horticulturists have begun to close the technological breach
that separates them from their competitors, and to
introduce both plastic-culture (a technique requiring the planted land to be covered in plastic sheets)
and ferti-irrigation. Both technologies raise labor requirements per hectare. This is particularly so since
raising production rates from 30 to 60 or more tons
per hectare, increases labor needs for the manual
harvesting involved. The latter is an unskilled task
performed by the migrant workers. Labor needs have
also increased for produce-selectors to work in the
packing plants.
In addition to use of new technology, flexible and ad
hoc means of labor organization are being used. For
example, more specialized labor is required in view of
these new production techniques, in better-paid positions (engineers and technicians) for supervising production. Yet TAl firms continue to utilize unskilled
seasonal migrant indigenous workers for harvesting,
as well as local women in the packing plants. The
greater volume of harvest (arising from use of new
technologies and consequent increases in productivity) is handled by taking on more migrant workers and
more women workers. The areas are still hired by the
traditional hiring methods. The situation here is, therefore, one of combining modern production technology
with old forms of labor organization.
It is a great advantage for the TAl to have access to cheap labor that it can employ entirely at the
convenience of the industry's methods and production rhythms. Field and harvesting tasks are carried
out by migrant indigenous workers. Often these are
whole family groups, including the children. They

292

M.A. Barron, F. Rello/Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

are employed on a seasonal basis for the 6 months
a year that an agricultural cycle lasts. They are hired
for piecework or by the day, but with a stipulated
minimum daily tonnage to be harvested. They are
hired for low wages and with hardly any work-related
benefits.
The basic strategy of the TAl consists of combining investment in the most up-to-date technology
with the intensive use of cheap labor, and this constitutes the basis of the TAl's competitive advantage.
The possibility of finding workers, at low cost and in
the numbers and at the times required by the companies, is extremely important to these companies.
Therefore they adopt hiring methods designed to ensure the supply of labor in the production process.
Even though some day-workers arrive in these production regions under their own will, the majority
of workers are hired by, or bound to, the companies from the workers' place of origin. As harvest
approaches, the employer contracts middlemen who
travel from Sinaloa to labor-exporting regions in the
States of Oaxaca or Guerrero. Middlemen and buses
arrive at a given site on dates known to everyone
locally, and begin to select people. When they have
assembled 50 or 60 workers, they transport them to
Sinaloa.
Is the TAl an enterprise based on cheap labor?
Without doubt, the existence of low-cost migrant work
represents a huge advantage to, and benefit for, such
a business. This industry benefits from the flow of
poorly paid labor, because it keeps the business's labor costs low while keeping high its competitive level
and profits. However, the competitiveness of the TAl
does not depend solely on relatively low salaries, but
also on a well-demonstrated capacity to modernize its
technology and increase its productivity.

4. Recent trends in labor supply and living
conditions
Recent trends in the northwest's labor market are
marked by an important fact for migrant workers: labor supply has grown faster than labor demand. The
existence of this new process was suggested by the noticeable increase in new entrants to this labor market in
1997 as compared to 1995. The group of day-workers
migrating for the first time to San Quintfn, in the State

of Baja California, rose from 31 to 44% of the total
numberofmigratingmen between 1995 and 1997. The
corresponding figures for migrating women showed
an increase from 29 to 50% (Barron, 1997). The rapid
growth in labor supply is explained by the deterioration in peasant agriculture, and the accelerated growth
in migration, in response to rural poverty. Although
less rapidly than the labor supply, the TAl's labor
demand has grown too. The latter is mainly the result of an increase in crop production, which means a
greater volume for manual harvest, hence more labor
demand.
This situation is equivalent to a trend towards saturation of the labor markets. This has significant negative effects on the real wages earned by day-workers,
on the hiring methods used by the TAl, and on the living conditions of the day-workers. The TAl has taken
advantage of the existence of a more abundant labor
supply to give preference to workers with the most
physical strength and experience, and has reduced the
hiring of children. At the same time, it has also chosen
labor-hiring methods that imply a more intensive use
of the labor force (hiring by piecework). This means
of hiring is convenient, in terms of income, to both
parties. For the TAl, it signifies a reduction in the total labor cost. The stronger, more able, workers can
harvest 100 baskets a day or more, thereby increasing
their daily income but at the cost of considerable physical expense and of a premature exhaustion of their
work capacity.
The situation is one of precarious work and living conditions. Migrant day-workers who reach San
Quintfn are lodged in camps that have earthen floors,
walls of corrugated cardboard, and roofs of the same
material or of corrugated metal, materials which make
the accommodation terribly hot in summer and extremely cold in winter. They have no running water and
no latrines. Working conditions are no better. Protective equipment is deficient, and cases of intoxication
are frequent due to the inadvertent ingestion of toxic
agricultural chemicals. However, the National Program for Agricultural Day-Laborers that operates in
the area, has made significant headway in its attempts
to improve the living conditions for migrant workers.
It has established creches, health-centers, and schools
for very young children. In Sinaloa, the Program's
presence has been even stronger, and living conditions
have consequently improved.

M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

5. Evaluation of the effects of the TAl
5. 1. Efj'ect on wages
Are day-laborers' wages low? The wages paid by
the TAl are similar to rates in other regions of commercial agriculture within Mexico, and therefore they
are not low in this respect. However, they are low
compared to wages in the manufacturing industry,
since industrial workers' wages usually include the
legally established perquisites, such as Sunday pay,
social security, holiday pay and pensions, none of
which is included in the agricultural day-laborer's pay.
On an international level, the Mexican agricultural
day-laborer is at a clear disadvantage relative to his/her
peer in US or Canada. The farmworker in US earns
approximately US$4.00 per an hour and in Canada
CA$6.95, in Mexico this amount would be paid for a
day's work.
There is a homogeneity in wages in the regions
studied. According to the responses from the 16 persons interviewed in Oaxaca, their wages fluctuate
around 40 Mexican pesos. (There are 9.3 pesos to the
US$.) These figures coincide with those given in the
Day-Laborers Program in Culiacan, Sinaloa and by
a survey carried out in San Quintin, Baja California
in 1997, where the wages fluctuated between 40 and
50 Mexican pesos (Ban·6n, 1997). Higher wages are
paid for piecework but they do not compare with
those paid for day-labor since they imply a greater
work period. Similarity in wages over regions could
be due to the tomato packers' following similar wage
policies and that many tomato packing firms have operations in various regions. Besides, the day-workers
work successively in different regions and know the
wages paid in those regions and would not accept a
lower wage than that paid in other regions.

5.2. The impact on employment
The main positive impact of the TAl on poverty
is to be seen in employment creation. This is the
TAl's principal contribution to the economy of
poverty-stricken regions, where there is an endemic
lack of natural resources and work. In the Valles Centrales outmigration region, there is a prevalence of
small-holdings: 11% of families own less than 1 ha,

293

32% have up to 2 ha, and 24% have 3 ha. Most of the
region has an unfavorable climate, so farm income is
insufficient to satisfy the family's needs. 1
The families have to look for employment outside
agriculture. One choice is craft work (the fabrication
of articles using raw materials from palm trees). According to a survey, 97% of the families have at least
one member working at this. However, the income
from these manufacturing only covers the purchase of
the family's daily maize consumption. 2 The most important off-farm income comes from migration labor.
The latter is the most important source of family income. The 86% of the 217 families interviewed have
members that are migrant workers. In 50% families
with migrants, 1-3 members are migrants, in 35% of
the families, 3-6 members are migrants, and in 15%
more than 7 members are migrants. More than half of
the population leaves these towns to work.
Previous information indicates that migration has
accelerated since 1985, the year that marked the
Mexican economic crisis. Before 1980, only 11% of
the population interviewed had migratory experience,
while starting from 1985 75% of those interviewed
began to migrate.
The advantage of migrant workers have in the TAl is
that they are able to find stable employment for many
months of the year. That is impossible in the outmigration regions. It is not surprising that the migration
period is long, because a longer period of migration
means a higher conesponding income earned by the
workers, and thus greater savings to be taken home.
The TAl has created a demand for labor that has
exerted significant multiplier effects within the TAl
regions. Many workers come from the Sinaloa Altos,
a poorer area in the hills, but close to the inigated
plains, where the tomato crop is sown. The question
is, does the flow of workers from Oaxaca displace the
local Sinaloan workers? Apparently it does not. There
are no records of unemployment in the rural areas of
Sinaloa, a state that has a marked economic dynamism.
If there were an excess of local labor, the TAl businessmen would not have to spend money employing

1 This regional information and the following is to be found in
Ortiz (I 998), who studied a sample of 217 family units in Coatecas
Altas, Valles Centrales.
2 The daily income for an 8 h per day is 7 pesos, which is the
equivalent of 2 kg of maize.

294

M.A. Barron, F Rella/ Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

middlemen to hire labor from elsewhere, given that migrant workers receive the same wages as locally-hired
day-workers.
Another issue is whether the migration has a negative effect in the outmigration regions, creating labor
shortages there. This does not appear to be the case,
since the demand for workers is very low there, where
the economy is stagnant. Migrating peasant workers
usually return home in time to plant their own subsistence plots.
5.3. Effects on income
The sample of 217 families analyzed by Ortfz does
not provide enough information to analyze family income strategies nor the impact of income and savings from migration on poverty levels. To complement
the sample, we interviewed 16 migrant families from
Valles Centrales, Oaxaca, applying a more extensive
questionnaire than that used by Ortiz. The sample size,
though small, is adequate as a case study to generate
hypotheses for further research. The results are laid
out in Tables 1 and 2.

The interviews revealed that the minimum migration period is 3 months, the most frequent is 6 months,
and there are even families who migrate for 1.5 years
at a stretch. This information coincides with data from
Ortiz's survey that, of 636 migrants interviewed, 27%
migrated for a period of between 2 and 5 months, 66%
migrated for between 6 and 9 months, and 7% migrated for more than 10 months.
What are the determining factors of the migrants'
earnings, and of their savings? The most important
factors, in this order, are the length of migration time,
and the number of workers per family. Our data show a
strong correlation (0.89) between income and duration
of migration. Correlation between income and number
of family workers is weaker and there is no correlation
between income and salaries paid (Table 1).
The magnitude of these two factors has an impact
on the amount of savings accumulated, as is shown
in Table 2. The migration strategy consists of placing
on the labor market the greatest possible number of
family members, and of migrating for the longest time
possible without abandoning cultivation of the family
plot of land. This explains why entire families leave,
and why they stay away for several months at a time.

Table 1
Salary, income and income determinants"
Family income: pesos per year
1800.00
2160.00
9600.00
11520.00
16128.00
16128.00
16128.00
16560.00
16632.00
21120.00
23040.00
26460.00
34800.00
54000.00
54720.00
74880.00

Workers per family

2
2
4
4
4
3
3
4
4

5
5
4
2
4

Weeks of migration

Daily wage

4
8
8
24
16
16
16
23

75b
45
JOOb
40
42
42
42
40
42
40
40
42
40
45
60b
60b

22
22
24
21
29
50
76
52

Correlation of income
No. of workers=0.41
Weeks of migration=0.89
Daily salary=0.15
"Source: Personal elaboration, based on interviews with families. Valles Centrales, Oaxaca, 1999.
b Salaries paid by piecework.

M.A. Barron, F Rella/ Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

295

Table 2
Savings of migrant families and their determining factors 1999a
Family

Savings (pesos)b

No. of weeks they can feed
themselves with savingsc

A
B

37720
32032
23850
18060
13420
12180
12118
11808
10496
8928e
7920
7750
6688
4876
2025

178
151
112
85
63
57
57
56
49
42
37
36
31
23
10

c
D
E
F
G
H

J
K
L
M
N
0

Dependence coefficientd

I

1.25

1.75
I
2

1.3

a Source: Based on authors' interviews with families.
b Savings are equal to the income minus the cost of the basic foodstuffs as reported by those interviewed.
c Multiple of the weekly cost of basic foodstuffs for family members in the zone of origin.
d Number of migrant families divided by number of migrant workers.
e Income for 1998.

The day-workers who migrate for many months and
are unable to return in May to plant their own land,
enter into land agreements.
On the basis of this information it could be said
that there exist at least two family subsistence strategies. The first is the most common and consists of the
combination of migration and subsistence agriculture.
Families migrate some months and come back in time
to cultivate their plots with subsistence products. The
second strategy is to migrate for a longer period and to
accumulate more savings to be invested later in their
community. In this case family plots are rented to relatives or trusted neighbors.
The savings accumulated by the migrant workers
vary according to the migration strategy of each family. However, in all cases the total is substantial, when
the following factors are taken into consideration.
First, the economy of subsistence farming and the employment sources to be found locally in the workers'
places of origin cannot guarantee any family sufficient
income for survival. Second, family spending on food
in their places of origin is relatively low, estimated
at 212 Mexican pesos per week (US$22.5), which is
5512 pesos per 6-month period for a family of five.

Almost all the families interviewed saved more than
5512 pesos, which means that they can all live for
6 months back in their home communities without
needing to earn any further income (Table 2). Thus, the
accumulated savings of the migrant day-workers will
cover all their basic needs, although at an elemental
level of subsistence.
The final use to which the migrant families put their
accumulated savings reveals the significance of those
savings to the families. All of them stated that they
spend their savings on food and household expenses, in
other words they use their savings for survival. Some
families mentioned that they invested in the redecoration of their homes, the purchase of animals, fertilizer,
a yoke, but only one family mentioned having used
their savings to buy land. The income of these latter
families is obviously higher than the income of the
families who spend their savings only on food. This
establishes a clear relationship between the level of
savings and the kind of spending.
The information gathered provides insights into
the child labor issue. In the current context of intense
commercial competition between Mexican and North
American horticulturists, the US horticulturists are

296

M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

pressurizing the governments of the US and Mexico
to implement and enforce regulations against child
labor, because, according to them, child labor puts
US horticulturists at a disadvantage. This argument is
false, because the wages paid to the children are the
same as wages to adults. On occasion, the adults even
help the children fill the stipulated minimum daily
requirements in order to wanant those daily wages.
In this respect, the employment of children does not
put Mexican tomato growers in a better competitive
position. Moreover, child labor is diminishing due to
the rapid growth in adult labor supply.
That the TAl agrees to hire minors explains the low
level of the dependency coefficient for the families of
migrating day-workers shown in Table 2. This represents a great advantage to these families in that they
can thus substantially raise their earnings. Prohibiting child labor in the tomato fields would represent
a severe blow to the economy of migrating families.
The National Program of Agricultural Day-Laborers
estimates that between 30 and 35% of family income
is generated by children. However, the employment
of children entails substantial costs to migrant families because they cannot attend school. There are no
education programs in the working fields for migrant
children. Besides, working conditions in the fields of
Sinaloa and Baja California are hard for the children.
5.4. Implications for sustainability
Seasonal migration does not create conditions for
sustainable economic development in the sending regions. The greater part of migration income is still
destined just to ensure survival. Very little is invested
in the natural, physical or human capital of these
communities. Conditions for endogenous growth of
sending-region have not been improved by the migration. For example, the extra income is not sufficient for
the workers to buy land and fertilizer, except in a few
cases. The prolonged absences also result in neglect
of the workers' own land. Family plots are normally
badly attended due to migration. The fact that children also migrate in order to work, means that they do
not attend school in any regular manner, perpetuating
the high levels of illiteracy prevalent in Oaxaca, and
the low level of potential in human capital.
This last problem needs to be emphasized. Education is a fundamental instrument in the matter of

access to better-paying jobs. Because of their deficient
education, the day-workers are condemned to occupying the hardest, worst-paid positions. If the educational level of the children does not improve, they
will continue working and earning just the same as
their parents, thereby recreating these same conditions
of poverty. To summarize, this agricultural scheme of
infra-subsistence migratory work is being perpetuated.
It is a non-sustainable means of livelihood, because it
would enter into crisis if, for any reason, the migratory
flow were intenupted.

6. Conclusions
First, the employment offered by the TAl is crucial to the survival of entire villages in Oaxaca, and to
other settlements that find themselves trapped in conditions of unemployment and extreme poverty. These
jobs offer them an income very difficult to obtain in
their poverty-stricken, marginal villages in Oaxaca.
Without these earnings, many of these people would
already have abandoned their home villages, or would
be living there under even worse circumstances.
Second, this positive impact is not the result of
good wages and work-related benefits provided by the
TAl, because, as discussed above, wages are low and
benefits and working and living conditions are poor,
and they represent a stark contrast to the earnings and
prosperity of large, modern companies. The positive
impact is more the result of the context of extreme
poverty in which the migrant workers find themselves,
and the lack of dynamism in the economy of the regions that they come from. Faced with this context of
almost no local work alternatives, seasonal migration
to the fields of Mexico's northwest is inevitable, and
there is no viable substitute for this.
Third, discussions prior to the signing of NAFTA
suggested that the fruit and vegetable production and
export sector was going to bring enormous benefits to
Mexico. While it is true to say that vegetable exports
have proved to be an alternative to rural unemployment, they cannot resolve the problem of rural poverty
and backwardness, related to deeper structural factors.
Fourth, migrant earnings allow the families to survive, but they contribute scarcely any capital to the
local community. Consequently, this income does not
contribute towards the creation of local conditions

M.A. Barron, F. Rella/Agricultural Economics 23 (2000) 289-297

fomenting endogenous development. It does not represent a synergetic development, which would raise
the productive capacity of the labor-exporting regions
in the same way as in the TAl regions.
Fifth, it would thus not be rash to suggest that the
TAl, which makes substantial profits, assume a larger
role in the war on poverty of these migrant communities, the very people who have made those profits
possible. This would not compromise the TAl's competitiveness. This could be undertaken in any of the
following ways: (1) collaborating more in educational
programs; (2) construction of classrooms; (3) paying
teachers who educate the children of migrant laborer;
(4) improving the living and working conditions of the
migrant day-workers in the TAl regions.

References
Barron, M.A., 1997. Empleo en Ia agricultura de exportaci6n en
Mexico. Juan Pablos-UNAM, Mexico.
CEPAL, 1999. Efectos sociales de Ia globalizaci6n sabre Ia
economfa campesina en Honduras. Mexico y Nicaragua,
Mexico.
de Janvry, A., Gordillo, G., y Sadoulet, E., 1997. Mexico's
second agrarian refmm. Household and Community Responses,
1990-1994. Center for US-Mexican Studies, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla.
de Janvry, A., Sadoulet, E., 1998. Agrarian heterogeneity and
precision policies. In: Proceedings of the Latin American

297

Seminar on Agricultural Heterogeneity and Differentiated
Policies, Mexico.
Davis, B., 1999. The adjustment strategies of Mexican ejidatarios
in the face of Neoliberal reform. In: World Bank, Mexico
Ejido Reform: Avenues of Adjustment- Five years Later, Vol.
II, Background Paper. Environment and Socially Sustainable
Development Sector Management Unit.
Ech:lnove, F., 1999. Los empresarios horticolas y sus procesos
de integraci6n y diversificaci6n. In: Grammont, H. (Coord.),
Empresas, Reestructuraci6n Productiva y Empleo en Ia
Agricultura Mexicana. Plaza y Valdes Editores, Mexico, 1999.
INEGI-CEPAL, 1993. Magnitud y evoluci6n de Ia pobreza en
Mexico, 1984-1992, Mexico.
Lanjouw, P., 1998. Poverty and nonfarm economy in Mexico's
Ejidos, 1994-1997. In: World Bank, Mexico Ejido Reform:
Avenues of Adjustment- Five years Later, Vol. II, Background
Paper. Environment and Socially Sustainable Development
Sector Management Unit.
Lara, S., de Grammont, H., 1999. Reestructuraci6n productiva y
mercado de trabajo rural en las empresas horticolas. In: de
Grarnmont, H. (Coord.), Empresas, Reestructuraci6n Productiva
y Empleo en Ia Agricultura Mexicana. Plaza y Valdes Editores,
Mexico.
Ortiz, M., 1998. Familias campesinas en condiciones de muy
alta marginaci6n en Oaxaca. El caso de Coatecas Altas.
Unpublished.
Yunez-Naude, A., Taylor, J.E., Dyer, G.A., 1998. Farm-nonfarm
linkages and agricultural supply response in Mexico: a
villagewide modeling perspective. In: Proceedings of the IFPRI
Workshop Strategies for Stimulating Growth of the Rural Farm
Economy in Developing Countries. Airlie House, Virginia.
Wilcox-Young, L., 1993. Labor demand and agroindustrial
development: the evidence from Mexico. J. Dev. Stud. 30 (!),
168-189.

