Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
SCIENCE@DIRECT"

ELSEVIER

AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Estimating the benefits of farm animal welfare legislation
using the contingent valuation method
Richard M. Bennett*, Ralph J.P. Blaney
Department of Agricultural and Food Economics, The University of Reading, P. 0. Box 237, Reading RG6 6AR, UK

Received 14 May 2001; received in revised form 13 March 2002; accepted 14 August 2002

Abstract
This paper presents the method and findings of a contingent valuation (CV) study that aimed to elicit United Kingdom
citizens' willingness to pay to support legislation to phase out the use of battery cages for egg production in the European Union
(EU). The method takes account of various biases associated with the CV technique, including 'warm glow', 'part-whole' and
sample response biases. Estimated mean willingness to pay to support the legislation is used to estimate the annual benefit of
the legislation to UK citizens. This is compared with the estimated annual costs of the legislation over a 12-year period, which
allows for readjustment by the UK egg industry. The analysis shows that the estimated benefits of the legislation outweigh
the costs. The study demonstrates that CV is a potentially useful technique for assessing the likely benefits associated with
proposed legislation. However, estimates of CV studies must be treated with caution. It is important that they are derived from
carefully designed surveys and that the willingness to pay estimation method allows for various biases.
© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: Ql8; Q26
Keywords: Farm animal welfare; EU legislation; Contingent valuation; Costs and benefits; UK

I. Introduction

Farm animal welfare issues are becoming increasingly important within the European Union (EU).
This is shown by consumer concerns about animal
welfare and reflected by the increasing amount of
legislation designed to improve the welfare of farm
animals within the EU (see Wilkins, 1999). 1 For example a survey of some 2500 people in the UK, Ire*Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-1189316478.
E-mail address: r.m.bennett@rdg.ac.uk (R.M. Bennett).
1 In the UK, this is also shown by the increase in farm assurance
schemes which contain numerous standards designed to improve
animal welfare, and which are supported by major food retailers
(such as the RSPCA Freedom Food scheme and the Tesco chain
of food stores).

land, France, Germany and Italy (Harper and Henson,
2001) found that an average of 66% of people said
that they had reduced their consumption of livestock
products due to their concerns about the way that the
animals were treated and 60% said that they purchased
'farm animal friendly' products (such as free-range
eggs and chicken). 2 As well as the general increase
2 Broome (1998) reports that 33% of consumers in Ireland restricted their consumption of meat (with concerns about animal
welfare being the main reason given), whilst 83% of consumers
in France stated that concerns over animal welfare affected their
consumption of some livestock products (e.g. veal). Of course,
concern about farm animal welfare is not only found in EU countries. For example, PETA (2002) report a survey of citizens in
the United States of America that found that 90% 'opposed' the
confinement of chickens and other animals on 'factory farms'.

0169-5150/03/$- see front matter© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
doi: I 0.1 016/S0169-5150(03)00037-9

86

R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

in EU legislation to protect and improve farm animal
welfare, it was agreed in 1997 that animal welfare
considerations become annexed (retrospectively) to
the Treaty of Rome establishing the European Community by means of a Protocol on Animal Welfare.
The Protocol is important because it states the desire
to "ensure improved protection and respect for the
welfare of animals as sentient beings" and goes on
to state that "in formulating and implementing the
Community's agricultural, transport, internal market
and research policies, the Community and the Member
States shall pay full regard to the welfare requirements
of animals ... "(the latter statement had already been
part of the 1992 Treaty on European Union). This
highlights the increasing ethical concerns about the
treatment of animals within the EU and, importantly,
explicitly recognises animals as beings capable of
pleasure and pain rather than as inanimate goods. 3
The production of eggs from hens kept in battery cages has specifically received attention from
consumers, 4 animal welfare groups and policy makers. A UK poll in 1995 (King, 1995) found that 72%
of UK citizens thought that the battery-cage system
was wrong, whilst Harper and Henson (2001) found
that battery-cage systems were thought 'somewhat
unacceptable' on average by citizens in the UK, Ireland, France and Germany. 5 Organisations such as
Compassion in World Farming and Eurogroup for Animal Welfare have campaigned to have cages banned
within the EU (CIWF, 2002; Eurogroup, 2002). In
July 1999, European Agriculture Ministers agreed to
3 In his excellent treatise on economics and animal welfare,
Mcinerney (1993) notes that animal welfare is just another economic commodity for which peoplehave preferences relative to
other things they choose to consume with their available income.
Thus, the (animal) welfare standards a society pursues are a coincidental outcome of the pursuit of its own (human) welfare.
4 In response to consumer concerns, some food stores, such as
Marks and Spencer in the UK, have ceased selling eggs from
cage systems. Fearne and Lavelle (1996) found that consumers of
free-range eggs were largely influenced by hen welfare considerations followed by perceived higher egg quality, whilst consumers
of cage eggs were largely influenced by the price and size of eggs
in their purchasing decisions. Morris (1996) notes that although
consumers may be concerned about hen welfare and wish to buy
non-cage eggs, some will not be sufficiently motivated to actually
do so.
5 Broome (1998) reports that 70% of French consumers perceived animal welfare problems with the cage egg system and that
this influenced their consumption of eggs.

ban the keeping of laying hens in battery cages from
1 January 2012 (EU Directive 99/74/EC).
However, the banning of battery cages will impose
costs on egg producers, consumers and society as a
whole. Do the benefits of such a ban outweigh these
costs? In an attempt to address this question, this paper presents the method and findings of a contingent
valuation (CV) study undertaken in 1996 to estimate
the benefits of a ban on cages in the EU for citizens
of the UK. The paper considers the desirability of the
legislation in the light of the study's estimates of benefits and the likely costs of the legislation within the
UK.

2. Survey methods
A questionnaire divided into four mam sections
was designed. A specimen version of the questionnaire is shown in Appendix A. The first section
contained questions about the extent to which people
are concerned about farm animal welfare generally
and about specific production practices (including
egg production using the battery-cage system). This
section also asked people about their consumption
expenditure and included questions as to whether
their consumption decisions are affected by their animal welfare concerns and their consumption of cage,
barn/perchery or free-range eggs. The next section
presented information on the battery-cage system
generally practised in the EU. This information was
checked by animal scientists to ensure that it was
scientifically correct and unbiased in its description.
The section then presented the proposal to phase out
the use of battery cages in the EU and asked people if
they supported such legislation. They were then asked
if they would be willing to pay a specified amount
to support the legislation as a general increase in the
price of a dozen eggs. A single-bounded dichotomous
choice elicitation method (Bishop and Heberlein,
1979; Mitchell and Carson, 1989, pp. 101-103) was
used. Twelve different bid amounts (see Table 1) were
used and randomly allocated to people within the
sample. These combinations were chosen following
an exploratory survey of people using an open-ended
willingness to pay (WTP) elicitation format. Prior to
the WTP questions, people were reminded of their
limited budget and that any payment to support one

R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney/ Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

Table I
Responses to willingness to pay questions according to bid level
(UK pence)a
Bid amount

Yes

No

No opinion

15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70

44
41
38
33
38
36
31
34
33
34
20
22

5
10
7
6
7
11
14
10
9
15
13
21

5
5
4
4
I
8
7
4
6
7
4
2

87

The ACORN system is based on UK population census data and contains some 54 different categories
within the UK population classified according to
key socio-economic factors such as age, sex, ethnic
group, marital status and family/household structure,
occupation, economic position (income, etc.), education and home ownership. The cover letter sent
out with the questionnaire not only explained the
purpose of the survey but also provided a small
incentive by offering to include respondents in a
free prize draw. One month after the initial posting, a further letter and copy of the questionnaire
were sent to non-respondents urging them to return a completed questionnaire. The response rate
was 30%.

a Bid is an increase on the current egg price. Respondents were
advised of the current egg price (around £1.50 per dozen eggs).

3. Results
issue will necessarily mean that they have less money
available to contribute to other issues or to buy things.
Respondents were then asked whether the higher price
of eggs indicated by the WTP amount would affect
their consumption of eggs and, if so, by how much
(i.e. number of eggs per week). Respondents were also
asked their maximum WTP to address all of their farm
animal welfare concerns using an open-ended format.
Following this section, there was a series of 'debriefing questions'. In the first of these, respondents
were asked (by means of an open-ended question format) to explain their responses to the WTP questions.
Then they were asked to score (from 1 to 10) the extent to which each of a series of attitudinal statements
reflected their own feelings with regards to the responses that they gave to the WTP questions. These
questions were used to explore the rationality of respondents and to test for specific biases of people's responses (the results section gives more detail regarding
these questions). The final section of the questionnaire
contained background questions on the respondent's
sex, age, education, income, occupation and household
size.
Following pretesting, the questionnaire, together
with a cover letter, was posted to 2000 people in
the UK during the latter part of 1996. The sample
was selected randomly from all households in the
UK but stratified according to the ACORN geodemographic classification system (CACI, 1993) to reflect
the socio-economic characteristics of the population.

3.1. Concerns about farm animal welfare and
support of the cage ban
Eighty-six percent of respondents were 'very
concerned' or 'somewhat concerned' that farm animals may suffer or be mistreated (41 and 45%, respectively), whilst only 1% stated that they were 'not at all
concerned'. Sixty-one percent acted on their concerns
by purchasing/not purchasing farm animal products on
animal welfare grounds (free-range eggs and veal were
frequently mentioned in this context). Of the three livestock production practices presented to them, respondents scored veal production with calves in confined
crates as being most unacceptable, followed closely
by cage egg production (both with median scores of
I = very unacceptable) with transport of animals for
up to 24 h (with food and water at 8 h intervals) being
less generally unacceptable (with a median score of 2).
Over half of the respondents gave other examples of
the treatment of farm animals that they were concerned
about. On average, respondents' households purchased around nine eggs per week. Sixty-four percent
stated that they purchased free-range eggs, II% barn
or perchery eggs and just 9% stated they purchased
battery-cage eggs. Fifty-nine percent of respondents
were female and 41% male, with a mean age range of
40-59 years. Mean income range of respondents was
£15,000-20,000 per annum, whilst mean household
size was 2 (with a range of 1-14 and 0-5 children).

88

R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney/ Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

Seventy-nine percent of all respondents supported
the proposed EU ban on battery-cage egg production and only 7% stated they did not support the ban.
Ninety-six percent of all respondents answered the
WTP questions put to them. Table 1 shows responses
to the WTP questions according to the bid level, with
each of the 12 different bid amounts randomly allocated within the sample. The analysis of WTP responses is presented below.
Responses to the WTP 'debriefing' question, which
asked respondents to explain their reasoning behind
their WTP responses, found that the majority (67%) of
respondents gave income/expenditure and/or animal
welfare as the main reasons behind their responses
(this question was answered by 87% of all respondents). For example a typical response was "20p extra
for a dozen eggs is not much to pay to improve hen
welfare, especially since I don't buy many eggs". A
minority of 2% of respondents objected to the legislation scenario presented to them. Table 2 shows a
summary of responses to the attitude statements presented to respondents (respondents scored from 1 to 10
depending on the extent of their agreement to each
statement). The first statement was specifically designed to test for 'warm glow' bias (discussed later) in
responses to WTP questions, asking respondents the
extent to which they considered their WTP to be like
a charitable donation to a worthy cause. The proportion of relatively high scores for this statement shows
that this may have indeed influenced many people's
WTP. The second attitude statement was designed to
test for 'part-whole' bias (discussed later) of people's
responses to the WTP questions, asking them the extent to which they considered their WTP to be not just

for hen welfare but for farm animal welfare generally.
The relatively high proportion of respondents giving
a high score to this statement suggests that this bias
may have indeed influenced people's WTP. The third
statement seeks some further information on people's
attitudes to the proposed legislation to ban battery
cages in the EU, as presented in the WTP scenario.
Nearly 82% of respondents agreed relatively strongly
that such legislation is necessary (i.e. gave a score of
7 or more to the attitude statement). The fourth attitude statement sought to explore the extent to which
people's WTP is for their personal satisfaction from
not consuming battery-cage eggs, whilst the fifth attitude statement sought to explore the extent to which
people's WTP reflects the satisfaction they would get
from knowing that others would not be reducing hen
welfare by consuming battery-cage eggs. This tests
the 'negative externality of animal suffering' argument considered by Bennett ( 1995) and the public
good nature of the legislation. The scorings would appear to show that people are aware that the proposed
egg legislation would provide public good benefits in
a way that the market, by itself, cannot and that this
may have influenced their WTP.
When asked the maximum that they would be willing to pay (in terms of an increase in their weekly
household food bill, due to higher prices) to address
all of their farm animal welfare concerns, 79% of respondents gave an amount, with just 5% stating that
they found this task too difficult. Ninety-one percent
of respondents to this question gave a positive amount
ranging from £0.10 to 100. The remainder stated a
WTP of zero. The mean WTP given by respondents
was £5.50 (with a median value of £5).

Table 2
Summary of responses to the attitude statements (% of respondents)"
Attitude statement

WTP is like a charitable donation
WTP is for welfare generally
Legislation is necessary
WTP for personal satisfaction
WTP to prevent others buying

N

Score
1-2

3-4

5-6

7-8

9-10

28
12
6
19
23

9
6
4
4
5

22
15
8
18
21

15
22
16
15
15

26
46
66
44
37

534
542
548
525
504

a Respondents were asked to score from 1 (not at all true of my feelings) to 10 (very true of my feelings). Percentages relate to those
responding to the questions and may not add to 100% due to rounding. N: number of respondents answering each question (out of a total
of 591 respondents).

R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

89

3.2. WTP to support the cage ban

Table 3
Willingness-to-pay model for the egg legislation

A parametric model was used to estimate mean and
median WTP. The procedure chosen is an extension of
Cameron's (1988) approach, proposed by Hanemann
et al. (1991) and is outlined below.
Let individual i have an implicit price or WTP for
the animal welfare legislation given by

Variable

Parameter
estimate

Standard
error

Pr >chi

Intercept
BID a
AVOIDb
INCOME"
SUPPORTd
WARMGLOWe
PARTWHOLEr

-1.9742
-0.0307
0.8485
0.1984
1.1743
0.0962
0.1313

0.6201
0.0087
0.3050
0.0644
0.1994
0.0464
0.0422

0.0015
0.0004
0.0054
0.0021
0.0001
0.0381
0.0019

(1)
where WTP; is the individual's true, but incompletely
observed, willingness to pay; x; a vector of explanatory
factors which can be observed, Ui a symmetric random
error with zero mean and unit variance that arises from
the unobserved factors about i' s WTP, b a vector and
s is a scalar to be estimated. Each respondent is asked
whether they are willing to pay a randomly assigned
amount (B;). The probability of observing a positive
response to this WTP question is
Pr(Yes)

= Pr(u;

+-- B;/s

+ x;bjs).

(2)

Alternatively, this probability can be written as
(3)
+ d' x;),
where c = -1/s and d = bjs. F() is the cumulative

Pr(Yes)

=

F(cB;

distribution function of u; and its assumed distribution determines the type of binary choice model used.
It is the presence of a varying bid level that enables
the identification of the scale of the WTP relationship. Thus, the bid (B;) is included in the right-hand set
of variables in the binary choice model along with the
explanatory variables (x;). The coefficients obtained
from the binary choice model can then be used to identify the parameters in Eq. (1). The estimated parameters in the binary choice model are c and d' and thus
the estimates of b' and s (Bennett and Larson, 1996)
will be:
b'

-d'

= --,
c

-1
s=-.
c

(4)
(5)

Once the coefficients of the explanatory variables
have been estimated from the model, it is then possible to estimate WTP. In this case, maximum likelihood estimation procedures were used, specifying a
logit model (assuming a logistic distribution function)

Number of observations: 446; -21og likelihood: 319.198;
chi-square for covariates: 145.378 with six degrees of freedom
(P = 0.001); association of predicted probabilities and observed
responses: 86.4% concordant, 13.4% discordant (Yes-350 predicted, 339 actual; No-96 predicted, I 07 actual).
a BID is the presented bid amount (i.e. from £0.15 to 0.70).
b AVOID is a dummy variable (0: no, 1: yes) denoting whether
the respondent stated that they avoided purchasing any products
due to concerns about the welfare of animals involved.
c INCOME is the income category score of 1-12 for amounts
of 0-£5000 to >55,000 in steps of £5000.
d SUPPORT is the level of support given by respondents to
the proposed legislation to ban battery cages (where 0: no, 1: no
opinion and 2: yes).
e WARM GLOW is the combination of two variables: (i) a
dummy variable (0: no, 10: yes) indicating whether the respondent
had stated that their WTP was a payment towards a 'cause' in
the open debriefing question and (ii) the score (1-10) given to the
attitude question that their WTP is like a charitable donation to a
worthy cause.
r PARTWHOLE is also a combination of two variables: (i) a
dummy variable (0: no, 10: yes) indicating whether the respondent
had stated that their WTP was a payment toward animal welfare
in the open debriefing question and (ii) the score (1-10) given to
the attitude question that their WTP is not just for hen welfare
but for farm animal welfare generally.

and using standard procedures available in the SAS
software package (SAS, 2000).
Table 3 shows results for the preferred model following extensive model testing. A large number of
test models were used with all demographic and other
variables being included. Economic theory suggests
that price (i.e. BID), income and preference variables
(i.e. AVOID and SUPPORT) should be determinants
of WTP, and thus it was considered important that
such variables be included within the model. The preferred model had the best individual variable significance and the highest coincidence of predicted and
observed responses. Nearly 10% ofthe sample stated
they had no opinion concerning the WTP question or

90

R.M. Bennett, R.J.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

did not state a WTP preference and these respondents
were assumed to have a zero WTP.
All of the explanatory variables have a high level of
statistical significance associated with them. BID is the
presented bid value and the parameter estimate shows
the expected negative relationship between the size of
the bid presented to respondents and the probability
of them giving a 'Yes' response. AVOID is a dummy
variable indicating whether the respondent stated that
they avoided purchasing any livestock products due
to concerns about farm animal welfare. The positive
sign indicates that those avoiding products on farm
animal welfare grounds were more likely to say 'Yes'
to WTP questions. INCOME is the income category
score (1-12) and is used as a proxy variable for disposable income. The coefficient is positive, meaning
that the higher people's income the more likely they
were to say 'Yes' to WTP questions. SUPPORT denotes whether respondents did or did not support the
proposed legislation or had no opinion. The coefficient
is positive, meaning that those who stated that they
supported the legislation were more likely to say 'Yes'
to WTP questions. WARMGLOW is a variable that
denotes the extent to which respondents considered
their WTP to be like a charitable donation to a worthy
cause. The positive sign means that the more respondents agreed with this statement the more likely they
were to say 'Yes' to WTP questions. PARTWHOLE
reflects the extent to which respondents considered
their WTP to be not just for hen welfare but for farm
animal welfare generally. Again, it has a positive sign
meaning that the more respondents agreed with this
view, the more likely they were to say 'Yes' to WTP
questions. Thus, each of the model's variables, apart
from BID, had a positive upward influence on WTP.
Using this model, and including zero WTP values,
mean WTP was estimated at £0.90 (per dozen eggs)
and median WTP at £0.45. The model allowed for
negative WTP values and had a 'correct percentage'
predictive ability of over 86%. However, there are a
number of potential biases of WTP estimates, which
may need to be taken into account. These include
warm glow, part-whole, and non-response biases.
Warm glow bias is where respondents' WTP is for
the purchase of moral satisfaction associated with giving for a good cause (like a charitable donation) rather
than for the good itself, leading to an upward-biased
estimate ofWTP (see Andreoni, 1990; Kahneman and

Knetsch, 1992). Part-whole bias is where respondents'
WTP is for a larger class of goods than the good
being offered, again, resulting in an over-statement
of WTP (Mitchell and Carson, 1989, pp. 250-252;
Carson and Mitchell, 1995). In this context, respondents may feel that they are paying to improve animal
welfare more generally rather than just to improve the
welfare of caged hens. In the survey results, there was
a strong correlation between respondents who gave
high scores to the 'warm glow' and 'part-whole' attitude statements and those who had higher WTP values. In addition, the model presented above shows a
strong statistical influence of the WARMGLOW and
PARTWHOLE variables, suggesting an upward bias
ofWTP due to both warm glow and part-whole effects.
This was corrected by setting these variables to their
lowest level for each respondent within the model and
re-estimating WTP. The resultant revised mean WTP
is £0.47, nearly half of the original estimate. Correction for part-whole bias reduced mean WTP by around
33% and correction for warm glow bias reduced it by
around 15%.
Censoring of WTP values at both the upper and
lower tails of the distribution was also undertaken.
The reason for this is that WTP should be limited
by income (Hanemann and Kanninen, 1999). Individual respondent's maximum WTP to address all of
their farm animal welfare concerns (obtained from an
open-ended WTP question) was used as a basis for
censoring. Clearly, a respondent's WTP for the egg
legislation should be somewhat less than their WTP to
address all of their farm animal welfare concerns. On
the broad assumption (based on the findings of this
and previous surveys that identified a number of farm
animal welfare issues that UK citizens are concerned
about) that there will be several other farm animal welfare issues that people may have a WTP to address,
an upper censoring point was used based on 20% of
the WTP for all farm animal welfare concerns (i.e.
the assumption is that WTP for one issue-to support
cage legislation-should not exceed 20% of WTP for
all farm animal welfare issues). Following censoring,
the WTP model increased its 'correct percentage' predictive ability to 90%, whilst mean WTP fell to £0.43
(i.e. censoring only reduced WTP by £0.04).
Further correction for survey non-respondents and
any sample selection bias was undertaken. Responses
were adjusted by weights reflecting the national

R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney/ Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

socio-economic profile according to ACORN category. Correction for response imbalance between genders was also carried out. In fact, response rates were
relatively consistent across geodemographic groupings. Response rates from ethnic groups and those
living in multiple dwelling units (i.e. small, low cost
accommodation grouped together in larger buildings)
were noticeably lower, and these groupings had lower
incomes associated with them. Correction for sample
bias reduced mean WTP by just £0.02 to 0.041.

4. Discussion and conclusions
The results of the survey have showed that the vast
majority of respondents are concerned about animal
welfare and supported the proposed legislation to
phase out the use of battery cages for egg production
within the EU. Moreover, most respondents would
be willing to pay an additional amount on the price
of eggs to support the legislation. The mean WTP
was initially estimated at £0.90 but after correction
for warm glow, whole-part and non-response/survey
sample biases, mean WTP fell to £0.41 as an increase
in the price of a dozen eggs to support the legislation.
The main issue related to WTP estimates is whether
they provide a reasonable measure of people's true
WTP. Carson et al. (2000a,b) provide a useful review
of the current debate concerning the CV method. There
are clearly a number of possible biases that can influence WTP estimates. These may be related to the way
people interpret and respond to WTP questions (which
are related to the way in which WTP questions are
asked, the scenario presented to respondents, 6 etc.),
sample selection and the design and conduct of the survey and the WTP estimation methods used. For example Bateman et al. (1999) found a variation in WTP of
40% depending upon the elicitation/estimation method
used. Such variation may be due, at least in part, to
6 Carson et a!. (2000a,b) noted that CV elicitation scenarios
should be 'consequential' (i.e. be perceived by respondents as
being able to influence policy) if they are to be taken seriously by
respondents, and not hypothetical in the sense of being 'imaginary'.
With the benefit of hindsight, it would have been better not to have
used the word 'imagine' in the scenario presented to respondents in
this survey. However, evidence presented suggests that respondents
gave serious consideration to their responses and that the 'face
value' of the scenario was not compromised.

91

poor survey design in some studies, different information being presented to respondents or the presence of
various biases, such as those identified and corrected
for in this survey. The dichotomous choice elicitation
method used in this survey is the recommended one
(Arrow et al., 1993) for CV surveys, whilst the general
estimation method has been commonly used to analyse
discrete-response CV data and is compatible with economic theory (see Hanemann and Kanninen, 1999 for
a comprehensive review of statistical/economic analysis of discrete-response CV data). The use of 'warm
glow' and 'part-whole' variables to adjust WTP estimates is an extension of the standard analysis.
This study has endeavoured to test for a number
of possible biases and to correct for them-but other,
perhaps unrecognised biases may have existed and
not been accounted for? Warm glow and part-whole
biases appeared to result in a relatively large upward
bias to WTP. Very few contingent valuation studies
have tested for these biases and even fewer have
corrected WTP estimates to take account of them.
It is recognised that the adjustment for warm glow
and part-whole biases undertaken in this study may
be questioned. 8 Responses to the warm glow and
part-whole bias debriefing questions may not accurately reflect these biases, and the simple method of
adjustment within the parametric model may be seen
as a rather crude correction of WTP. Nonetheless, it is
important that CV studies test for the presence of such
biases, and that their effects on WTP be taken into account, otherwise WTP estimates may be misleading.
The study used a socio-economic classification
system to ensure a representative sample of UK citizens. Variables in the parametric model used to estimate WTP were all highly significant and the model
had a high predictive ability. The rationality and consistency of respondents' responses to WTP questions
was tested by means of 'debriefing' questions. Most
respondents gave clear reasoning for their WTP responses. Also, there were strong correlations between
people's concerns about farm animal welfare, their
purchasing behaviour, their income and their WTP.
7 For example the survey was undertaken during the period when
the numbers of cattle affected by BSE was still relatively high.
The BSE 'crisis' is likely to have influenced people's attitudes to
livestock production/animal welfare issues.
8 Indeed, there is debate as to whether 'warm glow' is a relevant
issue for CV studies (see Carson et a!., 2000a,b, p. 6).

92

R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

Moreover, a mean WTP of £0.41 for hen welfare
compares reasonably with a mean of £5.50 to address
all of people's farm animal welfare concerns.
However, a few questions concerning the validity
of the findings of the survey remain. First, some 75%
of respondents said they purchased free-range eggs,
yet only around 20% of retail eggs purchased nationally are free-range (Corporate Intelligence, 1998). It
is likely that some respondents wrongly perceived the
eggs that they purchased as free-range. This likelihood
is supported by a national poll of consumers in the UK
(Market and Opinion Research International Limited,
1999) which found that over 80% of consumers did
not realise that eggs labelled as 'farm fresh' and 'good
country eggs' were from hens kept in battery cages.
This information problem has been recognised by the
European Commission, with compulsory labelling of
eggs according to method of production being required
from 1 January 2004. It may also be the case that those
who purchased non-cage eggs were more likely to respond to the survey.
A 30% response rate to the postal questionnaire
was achieved. This may seem low but is within the
range reported by Thistlethwaite and Finlay (1993)
who found response rates to mail surveys ranging from
18 to 47%. However, the response rate could have
been improved by further reminder letters or, if resources had allowed, by carrying out face-to-face interviews. The problem remains that the survey was
unable to obtain direct information on the WTP of
non-responders. Those responding to the survey could
have had a greater interest in hen welfare (as suggested above in terms of those purchasing non-cage
eggs), and thus a higher WTP for the legislation. An
extreme assumption would be that all those who did
not respond to the survey had no interest in the issue
and had a zero WTP. This is unlikely, but is a useful
assumption for the purposes of the cost-benefit analysis outlined below. Under this assumption, estimated
mean WTP would fall to just over £0.12 per dozen
eggs.
Carson (2000) provides a list of factors to be considered when assessing the quality of a CV study.
The first he labels 'face validity', which is a clearly
and accurately described scenario, which is plausible
to respondents. Specifically, Carson states that a CV
questionnaire should contain (a) an introduction outlining the general context, (b) a detailed description of

the good, (c) a description of the institutional setting,
(d) a clear statement about how the good will be paid
for, (e) a method to elicit respondents' preferences
(the dichotomous choice format is recommended), (f)
debriefing questions which ask respondents to explain
their responses and (g) questions to obtain information on respondent characteristics including attitudes
and demographics. The questionnaire used in this
study (Appendix A) contains each of these elements.
The second and third factors listed by Carson are (i)
that the relevant population must be sampled and (ii)
that the sample size should be at least several hundred
and each member of the population should have a
positive and known probability of being sampled. For
this survey, the relevant population (i.e. all UK citizens) was sampled and a representative sample of this
population was invited to participate in the survey by
means of a weighted demographic sampling method.
The sample size was over 500. The fourth factor is the
survey method. Carson accepts that mail surveys are
cheaper but warns of sample selection bias. Sample
selection bias has been acknowledged in this survey
and has been corrected for in two, different ways.
Finally, Carson mentions a number of other considerations in assessing the quality of a study. Concerning
the analysis of results he states that an equation with
reasonable explanatory power and coefficients with
the expected signs (as provided by the model used to
estimate WTP in this study) provides evidence in support of the proposition that the survey has measured
the intended construct. He also states that studies
should take income constraints on WTP into account,
which this study undertook through censoring of WTP
responses and inclusion of an income variable in the
WTP model.
The estimated WTP value can be used to derive an
estimate of the benefits of the proposed legislation to
citizens in the UK. In 2000, UK consumers purchased
6080 million shell eggs (MAFF, 2001a; over 98% of
these were produced domestically). Sixteen percent of
the respondents to the WTP questions stated that an
increase in egg price by the bid amount presented to
them would result in an average reduction in their consumption of eggs of 18%. Assuming that the remaining respondents would not reduce their consumption
of eggs due to a change in price, UK consumption
of eggs is estimated to fall to around 5905 million
per annum. In addition, around 80% of eggs currently

R.M. Bennett. R.J.P. Blaney! Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

purchased are from battery-cage production systems.
Thus, the proposed legislation would affect consumption of some 4724 million eggs per annum (393.6 million dozen eggs). Given a mean WTP of £0.41 per
dozen eggs, the estimated benefit of the legislation
would be approximately £161 million per annum. If
the extreme assumption of zero WTP for the legislation for all non-responders to the survey is applied,
and mean WTP is just £0.12 per dozen eggs, then the
estimated benefit of the legislation falls to just over
£48 million per annum.
This can be compared to an estimated cost of the
legislation to producers of £466 million quoted by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) 9
in the UK (MAFF, 200lb). This estimate considers a
12-year adjustment period and includes both adjustment costs for the industry (capital costs of equipment
and buildings replacement, etc.) and ongoing production costs due to the different production systems
used, giving an average annual cost of around £39
million over the 12-year period. This MAFF estimate
allows for the use of larger, 'enriched' cages by egg
producers as well as barn and free-range systems and
so provides an underestimate of the full costs of the
legislation presented to respondents. Nonetheless, it
gives some idea of the likely scale of the costs compared to the benefits estimated by the contingent valuation survey. This seems to suggest that the benefits
of the proposed legislation outweigh the costs, even
under the extreme assumption that non-responders to
the survey had a zero WTP.
Although there is likely to be a net gain in welfare
in the UK resulting from the implementation of the

9

Now the Department for Environment, Food and Rnral Affairs.

93

EU battery-cage ban, the costs and benefits will not
be spread evenly throughout society. Analysis of WTP
by socio-economic group indicates that WTP is nearly
twice as much amongst those with high incomes as
compared to those with low incomes. The latter also
buy more battery-cage eggs than those with high incomes (Corporate Intelligence, 1998). Thus, it appears that those benefiting most from the ban will
be on higher incomes. The amount of the adjustment
costs borne by consumers and/or battery egg producers will depend upon the pricing strategy of retailers.
If egg prices rise significantly then consumers in the
low-income group will face a net cost.
Legislation to protect and improve the welfare of
farm animals is essential. The market cannot be left
to safeguard animal welfare any more than it can be
left to safeguard the environment (Mishan, 1993). Before implementing legislation it is important that some
cost-benefit assessment is carried out. Contingent valuation is a useful technique for helping to assess the
benefits of legislation, for example to improve hen
welfare by phasing out the use of battery cages. Estimates of WTP from contingent valuation studies need
to be treated with caution, however. It is important that
such estimates are derived from carefully designed surveys and that the estimation method allows for various
biases.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous referees for
their valuable comments and suggestions.

R.M. Bennett, R.J.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

94

Appendix A. Specimen example of questionnaire
All answers that you give will be treated in strictest confidence. Thank you for your
help.
1.

To what extent are you concerned that farm animals may be mistreated or that
they may suffer in the process of producing our food and other agricultural
products? Please circle
Very
Concerned

2.

Somewhat
concerned

Neither concerned
nor unconcerned

Not really
concerned

Not at all
concerned

Do you purchase or avoid purchasing any particular farm animal products
because of your concerns about the welfare of the animals involved?
YES

NO

If YES, which products ........................................................... .

3.

To what extent are the following acceptable to you? Please score on a scale
from 1 to 10 ranging from: 1 =Very unacceptable to 10 =Completely
acceptable.
Score
Veal production with calves kept in separate confined 'crates'.
Battery egg production where hens are kept in small wire cages.
Transport of farm animals for up to 24 hours
(with food and water at 8 hr intervals)

4.

Are you concerned about any other aspects of the treatment offarm animals?
Please circle.
YES
NO
If YES please briefly state which aspects ........................................ ..

5.

6.

On average, how many eggs does your household purchase each week? ........ .

Of this roughly how many are:

(1) battery-cage eggs?

(If you have no idea, please put
"don't know")

(2) barn or perchery eggs?

(3) free-range eggs?
........... ..
How much would you estimate that your household spends on food in total
Each week for consumption at home and in restaurants, take-aways etc.?

£ ............. ..

R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

7.

Of this, how much do you spend each week on meat, dairy products and eggs?
£ .............. .

Most egg production in the European Union (EU) involves housing hens indoors in
wire-meshed cages. Cage sizes vary but usually hold up to six hens with up to six
levels of cages in a building. Because of the degree of confinement, birds commonly
have difficulty in moving, for example, to stretch their wings, make a nest or display
certain other 'natural' behaviours. Hens remain in these cages for about 12 months
before they are slaughtered. Around 320 million hens are kept in this way in the EU
(15 countries including the UK) and 32 million in the UK.
While considering your answers to the following questions, please bear in mind that
there may be many issues that you feel strongly about and, in principle, might be
willing to pay something toward. However, your budget is limited and any
payment toward one issue means that there is less money available to you to
contribute to other issues or to buy the things that you would like to.
Please imagine that the European Parliament is considering legislation to phase out
the use of battery cages for egg production within the EU (including the UK) by the
year 2005. From that date, no egg producer will be allowed to use battery cages to
produce eggs. (Note that the legislation relates only to the use of battery cages and
not directly to any other aspects of hen welfare). It is realised that this will involve
some cost and that people in EU countries will ultimately have to pay in some way.
8.

Would you support legislation which ensured that hens could no longer be
kept in battery cages in the European Union from 2005? Please circle one
only.
YES

9.

NO

NO OPINION

Would you be willing to pay ... 50 ... pence extra per dozen as a general
increase in the current price of eggs so that battery egg production could be
banned in the EU from the year 2005? (Note that eggs currently cost around
£1-50 per dozen in the shops). Please circle.
YES

NO

NO OPINION

10.

If you are willing to pay a higher price per dozen eggs, would this affect your
consumption of eggs generally? Please circle.
YES NO

11.

IMPORTANT: In order for us to interpret your responses correctly, please
briefly give your reasoning behind why you answered the way you have to
the willingness to pay questions above .............................................. .

95

96

12.

R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

To what extent do the following statements reflect your own feelings with
regards to the responses that you have given to the willingness to pay
questions. Please score below on a scale from 1 to 10 ranging from:
1 =Not at all true of my feelings to 10 =Very true of my feelings.
Score
The willingness to pay questions required very careful thought.
My willingness to pay is like a charitable donation to a worthy
cause.
My willingness to pay is not just for hen welfare but for farm
animal welfare generally.
Legislation is necessary to ensure that no hens are kept in
battery cages.
People should not have to pay more taxes to ban battery cages.
My willingness to pay reflects my personal satisfaction from
not consuming battery hens.
My willingness to pay reflects the satisfaction I would get
from knowing that others would not be reducing hen welfare
by consuming battery eggs.

13.

What is the maximum you would be willing to pay in terms of a weekly
increase in your household food bill (due to higher prices) to address all your
farm animal welfare concerns?

In order for us to see how representative of the general population our survey is,
please answer the following questions about yourself. Please remember that this
survey is completely confidential.
14.

Are you?

Please circle

15.

What is your age?

MALE

FEMALE

Please circle.

under 18 18-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 59-65 over 65
16.

At what age did you finish full-time education?

........ .... years

R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney/Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

17.

97

What is your approximate average household income (before taxes) for
1994/95?
Please circle.
£0-£5,000

£5-l 0,000

£10-15,000

£15-20,000

£20-20,000

£25-30,000

£30-35,000

£35-40,000

£40-45,000

£45-50,000

£50-55,000

£55,000+

18.

What is your occupation? (e.g. sales assistant, retired, student etc.) .............. .

19.

How many people in your household?
.......... adults

.......... children under 16

Thank you for completing this questionnaire. Your help is much appreciated.
Please return your completed questionnaire using the Reply Paid envelope
provided.

References
Andreoni, J., 1990. Impure altruism and donations to public goods:
a theory of warm glow giving. The Econ. J. 100, 464--477.
Arrow, K., Solow, R., Portney, P.R., Leamer, E.E., Radner, R.,
Schuman, H., 1993. Report of the US National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration Panel on Contingent Valuation.
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, 11 January.
Bateman, I.J., Langford, I.H., Rasbash, J., 1999. Willingness-to-pay
question format effects in contingent valuation studies. In:
Bateman, I.J., Willis, K.G. (Eds.), Valuing Environmental
Preferences: Theory and Practice of the Contingent Valuation
Method in the US, EU, and Developing Countries. Oxford
University press, Oxford, pp. 511-539.
Bennett, R.M., 1995. The value of farm animal welfare. J. Agric.
Econ. 46, 46-60.
Bennett, R.M., Larson, D., 1996. Contingent valuation of the
perceived benefits of farm animal welfare legislation: an
exploratory survey. J. Agric. Econ. 47, 224--235.
Bishop, R.C., Heberlein, T.A., 1979. Measuring values of
extra-market goods: are indirect methods biased? Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 61, 926-930.
Broome, D.M., 1998. Relationships between farmers' attitudes,
retailers' actions, legislation and welfare research. In:
Proceedings of the Paper Given at the International Society for
Applied Ethology Winter Meeting, 2 December 1998. Royal
Veterinary College, London.
CACI, 1993. ACORN User Guide. CACI Ltd., London.
Cameron, T.A., 1988. A new paradigm for valuing non-market
goods using referendum data: maximum likelihood estimation

by censored logistic regression. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 27,
218-234.
Carson, R.T., 2000. Contingent valuation: a user's guide. Environ.
Sci. Techno!. 34, 1413-1418.
Carson, R.T., Mitchell, R.C., 1995. Sequencing and nesting in
contingent valuation surveys. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 28,
155-173.
Carson, R.T., Flores, N.E., Meade, N.F., 2000a. Contingent
Valuation: Controversy and Evidence. Discussion Paper 96-36R.
University of California, San Diego, USA.
Carson, R.T., Groves, T., Machina, M.J., 2000b. Incentive and
Information Properties of Preference Questions. Department of
Economics. University of California, San Diego, USA, p. 508.
http://www.econ.ucsd.edu/rcarson/cgm.
CIWF, Compassion in World Farming, 2002. http://www.ciwf.co.
uk!Pubs/Briefings/BR6303.htrn.
Corporate Intelligence, 1998. Market Survey. 2. Eggs. Retail
Business 479, 33-56.
Eurogroup, 2002. http://www.eurogroupanimalwelfare.org/.
Feame, A., Lavelle, D., 1996. Segmenting the UK egg market:
results of a survey of consumers attitudes and perceptions. Brit.
Food J. 98, 7-12.
Harper, G.C., Henson, S.J., 2001. The Extent of Consumer Concerns about Animal Welfare-The Comparative Representative
Sample Survey. Centre for Food Economics Research, The
University of Reading, UK.
Hanemann, M., Kanninen, B., 1999. The statistical analysis of
discrete-response CV data. In: Bateman, I.J., Willis, K.G. (Eds.),
Valuing Environmental Preferences: Theory and Practice of the

98

R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney/ Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 85-98

Contingent Valuation Method in the US, EU, and Developing
Countries. Oxford University press, Oxford, pp. 302-441.
Hanemann, M., Loomis, J., Kanninen, B., 1991. Statistical
efficiency of double-bounded dichotomous choice contingent
valuation. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 73, 1255-1263.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J.L., 1992. Valuing public goods: the
purchase of moral satisfaction. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 22,
57-70.
King, A., 1995. Sorry, But in the End We Will Eat You. The Daily
Telegraph, 21 August, p. 4.
Market and Opinion Research International Ltd., 1999. Polls and
Surveys. http://www.mori.com/polls/1998/eurogrup.htm.
Mcinerney, J.P., 1993. Animal welfare: an economic perspective.
In: Proceedings of the Paper Presented at the Agricultural
Economics Society Conference, Oxford, UK.
MAFF, 2001a. Index of Statistics. Eggs. http://www.maff.
gov.uk/esg/m_index.htm.
MAFF, 2001b. The Welfare of Farmed Animals (England)
Amendment Regulations 2001-Partial Regulatory Impact Assessment. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London.

Mishan, E.J., 1993. Economists versus the Greens: an exposition
and critique. The Pol. Q. 64, 222-242.
Mitchell, R.C., Carson, R.T., 1989. Using Surveys to Value Public
Goods: the Contingent Valuation Method. Resources for the
Future. Washington, DC, 463 pp.
Morris, L., 1996. The Ethical Consumer: A New Force in the
Food Sector? Leatherhead Research Association, Leatherhead,
UK.
PETA, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, 2002.
http://www.peta.org/.
SAS Procedures Guide, 2000. Version 8, vol. 1 and 2. SAS Institute
Inc. Cary, NC, USA.
Thistlethwaite, P.C., Finlay, J., 1993. The impact of selected mail
response enhancement techniques on surveys of the mature
market: some new evidence. J. Professional Serv. Market. 8,
269-276.
Wilkins, D.B. (Ed.), 1999. Animal Welfare in Europe. European
Legislation and Concerns. Kluwer Law International, London,
423 pp.

