AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS
Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

Agricultural trade liberalization and economic development:
the role of downstream market power
Richard J. Sextona , Ian Sheldonb,∗ , Steve McCorristonc , Humei Wangd
a Department

of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
b Department of Agricultural, Environmental, and Development Economics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
c School of Business and Economics, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4PU, UK
d California Department of Health Services, Sacramento, CA 95899, USA
Received 5 July 2005; received in revised form 14 April 2006; accepted 10 August 2006

Abstract
A model is developed to characterize the vertically linked and concentrated nature of developed-country food markets. This model is then
parameterized and used to simulate the effects of varying food market structures on the benefits to developing-country exporters of agricultural
commodities from trade liberalization by developed countries. Results demonstrate that even relatively modest departures from perfect competition
can cause much of the benefits from trade liberalization to flow to marketing firms instead of producers in the developing country. The distributional
effects under downstream market power differ significantly from the perfectly competitive case and may result, somewhat paradoxically, in
developing countries receiving a lower share of the total value added within the food chain as trade reform occurs.
JEL Classification: F12, F13, O12
Keywords: Developing countries; Oligopoly; Oligopsony; Trade liberalization; Vertical market structure

1. Introduction
The Doha Round of trade negotiations in the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been labeled the “development round,”
a key part of which will be increasing developing countries’
access to developed-country markets (Anderson and Martin,
2005). This process will involve the reduction of tariffs on agricultural commodities, given that many developing countries
are still major agricultural exporters and that agriculture still
accounts for a large share of GDP, particularly in the poorest
developing countries. However, in terms of the potential benefits to developing countries, there are two interrelated issues.
First, recognizing the vertically linked nature of the food chain
among agriculture, food processing and retailing, the increasing
consolidation of the food industry in developed countries may
influence the magnitude of the benefits that developing countries receive from increased market access. Second, in terms
of the total value of the product that reaches consumers, the
raw agricultural component typically represents a small share.
This has caused many in developing countries as well as in
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: (614)-292-2194.
E-mail address: sheldon.1@osu.edu (Ian Sheldon).

c 2007 International Association of Agricultural Economists

international institutions to advocate diversification in developing countries, involving the processing of and adding value to
the raw agricultural commodity (UNCTAD, 2002a).
These issues can be related explicitly to the broader popular
debate about globalization. First, concerns have been expressed
that increasing concentration of the global food system harms
producers of export commodities critical to many developing
countries. For example, African countries such as Burundi,
Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Uganda are highly dependent on exports of coffee, yet all have faced a significant decline in real
prices over the past few years. 1 At the same time, in key export
markets such as Europe and the United States, global coffee
buyers, roasters, and retailers, who in total account for almost
60% of the share of final sales value of coffee, have benefited
from lower coffee bean prices (Oxfam, 2001). 2 Second, tariff
1 Over the period 1998–2001, real coffee prices fell by 50%. As a result, for a
country such as Ethiopia, where coffee represented 67% of the value of exports
in 1998, the decline in world coffee prices cost Ethiopia US$ 300 million in
export revenues, equivalent to 50% of its annual export earnings (Oxfam, 2001).
2 All three sectors are dominated by a small number of firms. For example, in
1995, 10 firms accounted for 62% of global coffee bean trade, while in 1998,
five firms accounted for 58%of sales of roasted coffee in the European market
(Fitter and Kaplinsky, 2001).

254

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

reduction and market access go right to the heart of the debate
over whether smallholder farmers in developing countries will
truly benefit from globalization. On the one hand, development
agencies such as the World Bank (2003), and NGOs such as Oxfam, have argued extensively that removal of trade distorting
agricultural policies in both the developed and developing countries has the “potential to act as a powerful catalyst for poverty
reduction” (Oxfam, 2003, p. 7) in the developing countries. On
the other hand, critics of globalization have argued that it may
generate negative effects for developing-country farmers.
The Mozambique cashew nut sector provides a good example
of this debate. In the early 1990s, Mozambique removed taxes
on the export of raw cashews in response to advice from the
World Bank. The World Bank (1995) forecast that cashew nut
farmers’ incomes would increase between US$ 17.4 and 27.9
million in the first 2 years of the reform. However, McMillan
et al. (2002) report that the actual gains to cashew nut farmers
were only US$ 5.3 million. At the same time, urban unemployment increased as labor released from cashew nut processing
failed to move into other activities. This case became a “cause
c´el`ebre” for the antiglobalization movement, and a focus for
attacking World Bank policies (McMillan et al., 2002, p. 1).
What the World Bank ignores in its estimates was that the
impact of reform in the Mozambique cashew nut sector was in
large part influenced by the characteristics of the downstream
sector which cashew nut farmers supplied. As McMillan et al.
(2002) note, traders downstream from farmers are competitive
in selling cashews, but have buying (monopsony) power in the
purchase of cashews. As a result, even though export prices
for raw cashew nuts did increase, as predicted by theory, export traders captured a relatively large share of the benefits
from removal of the export tax, reducing the income gains to
farmers. 3
Therefore, in analyzing the impact of trade liberalization on
developing countries, it is necessary to understand the vertical linkages that characterize food markets in many developed
countries. We argue in this article that the modern food marketing system in many industries is most appropriately characterized by a successive oligopoly/oligopsony structure, with
developing-country exporters of raw commodities entering at
the first stage, and show that the implication of reducing tariffs or export taxes under this structure may be much different
in magnitude from that implied by models that assume perfect
competition. Moreover, the distributional effects will also differ
relative to the perfectly competitive case and may result, somewhat paradoxically, in developing countries receiving a lower
share of the total value added within the food chain as trade
reform occurs.
3 Another example is Ivory Coast cocoa market liberalization (Wilcox and
Abbott, 2004). Prior to liberalization, para-statal marketing boards controlled
all levels of marketing of cocoa beans and also taxed cocoa bean exports.
Liberalization has resulted in backward integration by multinational cocoa
processor-exporters who now capture a portion of the rents previously collected
as export taxes.

We develop this theme by first presenting some evidence on
the structure of the food chain in developed economies, focusing specifically upon the European Union (EU) and the United
States. We then develop, in Section 3, a model that characterizes the vertically linked nature of developed-country food
markets. The model is based on a market setting in which a
primary agricultural product such as coffee is exported from
a developing economy, and is then processed and sold in a
developed economy. 4 The market structure in the developed
economy features independent processing and retailing sectors,
both of which may exhibit market power. Next, in Section 4,
we derive the implications of various combinations of market
structures in the processing and/or the retailing sector on total
market surplus, and the distribution of benefits from reducing
a per-unit tariff among consumers in the developed economy,
developing-country producers, and marketers (processors and
retailers), given price-taking behavior by farm producers and
consumers but possible oligopoly and/or oligopsony power exercised by the marketing sector. Some extensions are outlined
in Section 5, and in Section 6 we summarize and conclude.
2. Market structure of the food sector in developed
economies
As noted, the food industry is typically highly concentrated in
developed countries at both the retail and processing stages and,
further, concentration is rising over time. This is also becoming
a characteristic of the food sector in some developing countries.
By way of illustration, we focus specifically on these sectors in
the United States and the EU.
2.1. Food processing
In the United States, the top-20 food-manufacturing firms
accounted for 37% of value added in 1997, while the top-20
beverage- and tobacco-manufacturing firms accounted for 79%
of value added (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001). Using more disaggregated data at the four-digit SITC level, the average four-firm
concentration ratio (CR4) in U.S. food manufacturing was about
76% in 1997, ranging from 62% in sugar cane mills to 98% in
cigarettes.
Average seller concentration in the EU is higher than in the
United States, ranging from an average CR3 of 55% in Germany to 89% in Ireland, with an average CR3 across nine EU
countries of 67% (Cotterill, 1999). As in the United States,
these averages hide some high levels of seller concentration for
specific products in each EU country, most notably baby foods,
canned soup, pet food, and coffee. While seller concentration
at the product level is high in many individual EU country markets, there are few examples of firms that dominate sales across
EU countries as a whole (Cotterill, 1999).
4

As the focus of this article is on gains to developing country exporters
from trade liberalization, we abstract from any impacts on developed country
agricultural sectors.

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

2.2. Food retailing

Table 1
Estimates of market power and Lerner indices

Several important differences are apparent in the food retailing market structures in the United States and EU. Average
CR5 in food retailing at the national level in the EU is 65%,
much higher than in the United States, where the comparable
figure is 35% (Cotterill, 1999; McCorriston, 2002). However, at
the EU-wide level, CR5 is much lower at 26% (Hughes, 2002).
Because retail markets are localized in geographic scope, it is
important in considering retailer oligopoly power to examine
concentration at the local and regional level. In this regard, Cotterill reports that in 1998, CR4 in the United States averaged
74% across the top-100 U.S. cities.

Study

Industry

Appelbaum (1982)

U.S. textiles
U.S. tobacco
Canadian food processing
U.S. beef-packing
(1) oligopsony
(2) oligopoly
Rice export
U.S. meat (oligopoly)
U.S. livestock (oligopsony)
U.S. composite meat
processing
U.S. beefa
U.S. porka
Philippines coconut oil

2.3. Industry consolidation
An additional feature of market structure in the food industry
in recent years has been consolidation through mergers and
acquisitions, which has contributed to increasing concentration.
Domestic mergers and acquisitions in the food sector doubled
between 1990 and 2002 (McCorriston et al., 2004). Moreover,
international mergers and acquisitions have also been increasing
significantly. For example, EU-based retailers such as Royal
Ahold and Sainsbury have expanded into U.S. markets, and
Wal-Mart has expanded into the EU. As a result, food retailing
is becoming increasingly multinational with three food retailers
Wal-Mart, Carrefour, and Royal Ahold now appearing in the
world’s top-100 multinational corporations (UNCTAD, 2002b).
Although the high and rising concentration in the food sector
is not a debatable point, empirical evidence on the extent of
the actual exercise of manufacturer and retailer market power
in developed-country food sectors is rather mixed. Surveys of
the recent empirical work by Sexton (2000), Sexton and Lavoie
(2001), and Sheldon and Sperling (2003) reveal evidence of
only modest departures from perfect competition for a wide
range of products in the food manufacturing/processing sector.
Table 1 summarizes results of market power estimates for a
broad range of industries. The theoretical range for the market
power parameters in the table is from 0 (perfect competition) to
1 (monopoly or monopsony). Although a few estimates are in
the vicinity of 0.5 (market power equivalent to that of a homogeneous Cournot duopoly or duopsony) or higher, most are much
lower—0.25 (the market power equivalent of a homogeneous
four-firm Cournot oligopoly or oligopsony) or less.
3. Agricultural trade and importing country market
power
Despite the observation that the food sector would appear
to be imperfectly competitive at multiple stages, departures
from the competitive-markets paradigm have seldom been considered by economists conducting trade-policy analysis. Most
empirical studies assume perfect competition at a single stage,
e.g., the FAPRI (Devadoss et al., 1993) and AGLINK (OECD,

Lopez (1984)
Schroeter (1988)

Karp and Perloff (1989)
Azzam and Pagoulatos
(1990)

Schroeter and Azzam
(1990)
Buschena and Perloff
(1991)
Wann and Sexton (1992) U.S. grade pack pearsa
U.S. fruit cocktaila
Deodhar and Sheldon
German bananas
(1995)
Deodhar and Sheldon
German bananas
(1996)
Bhuyan and Lopez
U.S. food industriesb
U.S. tobacco industries
(1997)
Wilson (1997)
U.K. bread manufacturing
Genoseve and Mullin
U.S. sugar industry
(1998)
Steen and Salvanes
French fresh salmon
(1999)
Bettendorf and Verboven Dutch coffee roasting
(2000)
Gohin and Guyomard
French food retailing:
(2000)
(1) dairy productsa
(2) meat productsa
(3) other food productsa
Wilcox and Abbott
Ivory Coast cocoa exports:
(2004)
(1) government/exporters
(2) exporters

255

Market
Power
0.05∗
0.40∗
0.19∗
0.22∗

0.68c†
0.22∗
0.18∗

Lerner
Index††
0.07
0.65
0.50
0.01
0.04
0.11
0.46
1.10
0.74

0.05∗
0.06∗
0.58†

0.55
0.47
0.89

0.08∗
0.48∗
0.29†

0.15
1.41
0.26

0.20c†

0.18

0.18∗
0.18∗
0.31
0.04†

0.33
0.33
0.84
0.05

0.02–0.05d†

0.12-0.04

0.02–0.17e∗ 0.07-0.54

−0.02∗
−0.03∗
0.01∗

0.20
0.17
0.12

0.47–0.77a∗ 0.25—0.37
0.19–0.48a∗ 0.09–0.20

This is a revised version of a table from Sheldon and Sperling (2003)
Estimates based on joint oligopsony/oligopoly power; b Bhuyan and Lopez
(1997) also calculated Lerner indices for 40 4-digit SIC food industries, ranging
from 0.72 for cereal preparation to 0.08 for dried fruit and vegetables; c Estimate
based on a closed loop dynamic model; d Static and dynamic estimate; e Quadratic
and logarithmic demand estimates; ∗ Conjectural elasticity and † conjectural variation
–both parameters range from 0 for perfect competition to 1 for monopoly; †† The
Lerner index is defined as the conjectural elasticity divided by the elasticity of
supply (demand)
a

2005) policy forecasting models. Even the recent and widely
cited work on the impact of protectionism in the EU by Messerlin (2001) reports results that treat the agricultural sector as
perfectly competitive, with the exception of the bananas subsector. 5
Indeed, only in recent years have papers begun to consider
the role of vertical market structure in thinking about optimal
trade policy. Spencer and Jones (1992), Ishikawa and Spencer
5

Messerlin (2001) does acknowledge that a few large traders in grains and
sugar could result in imperfect competition in these subsectors, and that there
may be imperfect competition at the food retailing level.

256

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

(1999), and Sheldon et al. (2001) are examples of theoretical
models that extend the Brander and Spencer (1985) result on
export subsidies to vertical markets, while McCorriston and
Sheldon (1996) examine the incidence of reform of the EU banana regime in a vertical market setting of successive oligopoly.
Given this background, it is useful to consider a flexible
model setting that enables the impacts of a wide range of competitive outcomes to be studied. Specifically, we consider a
market setting in which a primary agricultural product such as
coffee, tea, or cocoa is exported from a developing economy,
and it is processed and sold in a developed economy. 6 The
market structure in the developed economy features independent processing and retailing sectors, both of which may exhibit
market power. 7
Consumers’ inverse excess demand in the developed economy for the retail product is

quasifixed proportions in the sense that no substitution is permitted between the raw farm input and other inputs in producing
the finished product. However, substitution among other processing and retailing inputs (e.g., labor and energy) is permitted.
In addition, we assume that retailers’ costs for the product under
investigation are separable from the costs of other products sold
at retail. For convenience and without further loss of generality,
we choose to measure units at the various stages in the market
so that Qf = Qw = Qr = Q, where the superscripts f, w, and
r denote the farm, wholesale or processing, and retail sectors,
respectively. Given these assumptions, changes in market concentration have no cost-side effects, enabling the analysis to
focus solely on the competition impacts. 10
Denote a representative processing firm’s volume of raw
product purchases by qf . Given our assumptions, the representative firm’s variable cost function can be written as

P r = D(Qr | X),

C w = cw (Vw )q f + (P f + T )q f ,

(1)

where Qr is the market quantity of the retail product, Pr is
the market price, and X denotes unspecified demand shifters.
Farmers in the developing country are assumed to be price
takers in their output market. Inverse excess farm supply of the
raw commodity is expressed as
P f = S(Qf | Y),

(2)

where Pf is the price received at the farm, Qf is the total volume
of farm shipments, and Y represents unspecified supply shifters.
The raw product is subject to a per-unit import tariff of T. 8
To focus the model on the implications of possible market
power in the marketing sector of the developed economy, we
make a number of simplifying assumptions about the technologies for the processing and retailing sectors. Both food processors and retailers are assumed to utilize a constant-returns
technology. 9 Further, we assume that these technologies are
6 The model need not be interpreted narrowly in the context of bilateral
trade. The excess demand function in (1) can refer to world demand for the
commodity produced in the developing economy, in which case market power
could arise due to the behavior of multinational firms and also state trading
agencies (Sexton and Lavoie, 2001).
7 This model is adapted from prior work by Huang and Sexton (1996), Alston
et al. (1997), and Sexton and Zhang (2001).
8 Our results, of course, also apply to the case of a per-unit export tax, and,
thus, to the debate regarding the impacts of openness vs. protectionism in trade
policies adopted by developing countries on their economic growth (Edwards,
1993).
9 Assuming a constant returns technology markedly simplifies the analysis
but is done at a cost in terms of generality. If firms’ technologies are not constant
returns but the firms are operating in the range of locally constant returns to scale
(i.e., they have exploited the available economies), our results are unaffected.
However, if firms are operating in the range of increasing returns to scale at the
equilibrium with the tariff in place, then its elimination would enable firms to
increase output and reduce costs, providing an additional benefit to producers
from trade liberalization. One might further argue that observing firms operating
in the range of increasing returns to scale is more likely in industries with high
concentration and market power. In this case, our results will miss a benefit to
tariff reduction that might increase as a function of downstream firms’ market
power.

(3)

where cw (Vw ) represents the constant processing costs per unit
of raw product processed, Vw is the vector of prices for variable
processing inputs, and Pf is the raw product price received by
producers in the developing economy.
Denote a representative retailer’s volume of wholesale purchases by qw . A representative retailer’s variable cost function
for selling the product is
C r = cr (Vr )q w + P w q w ,

(4)

where Pw is the wholesale price, cr (Vr ) represents the constant
retailing costs per unit of wholesale product sold, and Vr is the
vector of prices for variable retailing inputs.
We now derive the implications of various combinations of
oligopoly and oligopsony power in the processing and/or the
retailing sector for total market surplus, and the distribution
of surplus among consumers, producers, and marketers (i.e.,
processors and retailers), given price-taking behavior by farm
producers in the developing country and by consumers in the
importing country. To simplify notation, we drop further reference to the exogenous variables X, Y, Vw , and Vr .
3.1. Manufacturers or retailers may have both oligopsony and
oligopoly power
In this case we assume that either retailers or manufacturers
are price takers, i.e., given market power in one of the marketing sectors, the other sector is competitive. Given the model
10

The recent theoretical literature on trade, vertical markets and imperfect
competition consistently assumes a fixed proportions technology, and for many
agricultural commodities, e.g., coffee roasting (Bettendorf and Verboven, 2000)
the assumption seems very reasonable. In addition, studies appealing to a
variable-proportions technology typically use very aggregate data, e.g., Reed
and Clark (2000), where substitution relates to allocation of an agricultural
input among several end uses, causing Sexton (2000) to question whether this
approach is actually a very relevant way to define either product markets or
technology.

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

structure, the output, farm price, consumer price, and aggregate
welfare effects are identical for a given degree of market power
regardless of whether the power is held by food processors or
by food retailers. To simplify the exposition, we develop the
case in which food manufacturers may exercise market power
and retailers are competitive. In this case, the retail price is
Pr = Pw + cr .
A representative processing firm’s profit function can be expressed as
π = (D(Q ) − c )q − S Q q − (c + T )q,
w

w

r

f

w

(5)

where q = q = q is the firm’s level of output and volume of
farm product purchases. The first-order necessary condition for
maximizing Eq. (5) is
w

f

∂D(Qw ) ∂Qw
∂π w
= Pw +
q − (P f + cw + T )
∂q
∂Qw ∂q
−

∂S(Qf ) ∂Qf
q = 0.
∂Qf ∂q

(6)

Eq. (6) can be written in elasticity form as
Pw 1 −

ξw
η1w

= Pf 1 +

θf
εf

+ (cw + T ),

(6´)

∂Qf P f
is the market price elasticity of supply of the
∂P f Qf
w
Pw
w
product, η1 = − ∂Q
is the absolute value of the mar∂P w Qw

where εf =

farm
ket price elasticity of derived demand for the processed prodf q
uct when the retailer behaves competitively, and θ f = ∂Q
,
∂q Qf
w

q
are market-power parameters. Here θ f ∈ [0, 1]
ξ w = ∂Q
∂q Qw
measures the processing firm’s oligopsony market power in
procuring the farm product and ξ w ∈ [0,1] measures the firm’s
oligopoly power in selling the product to retailers. The parameter, θ f (ξ w ) is either interpreted as a “conjectural elasticity” or,
more simply, as a measure of the mark down (mark up) of the
input price (output price), relative to the marginal value product (marginal cost). 11 θ f = 0 (ξ w = 0) corresponds to perfect
competition, and θ f = 1 (ξ w = 1) represents pure monopsony
(monopoly). Intermediate values of θ f (ξ w ) in the open interval (0, 1) represent degrees of oligopsony (oligopoly) power,
with larger values of θ f and ξ w indicating greater departures
from competition. By focusing directly on the end product of
oligopsony/oligopoly power, as measured by the parameters θ f
and ξ w , we need not be concerned with particular market structures or oligopoly/oligopsony games. This makes the model a
very convenient tool for conducting simulations of alternative
competitive scenarios.
Aggregation from the firm to the industry is accomplished
readily within this model framework. Because firms produce
11 Due to the standard game-theoretic criticism of modeling firm behavior as
conjectural variations, it has become common to interpret these parameters as
measuring the wedge between price and marginal value product (marginal cost)
(Sheldon and Sperling, 2003).

257

a homogeneous product and have identical technologies, optimizing behavior compels that ex post all firms’ conjectures are
identical (Wann and Sexton, 1992). Eq. (6 ) thus represents an
equilibrium condition that in conjunction with the retail demand
and farm supply functions specified in (1) and (2), respectively,
and the retailer cost function, (4), yields equilibrium values for
Pr , Pw , Pf , and Q.
3.2. Market power at successive market stages
Now we consider scenarios in which retailers in the importing country may exercise oligopoly power over consumers
and domestic processors may exercise oligopsony power
over farmers in procuring the raw product, and, in addition,
processor–retailer interactions may be characterized by imperfect competition. We consider two alternative cases for
the processor–retailer interactions. The first involves processor oligopoly power and retailer price taking in the processor–
retailer interactions (successive oligopoly), and the second
involves retailer oligopsony power and processor price taking
(successive oligopsony) in the processor–retailer interactions.
The case in which both retailers and processors attempt to exercise market power in their mutual interactions must be studied
within a bargaining environment, which is beyond the scope of
the present study. 12
It should be noted that the exercise of market power at successive vertical stages in a market chain represents a market
failure that may, in principle, be corrected through vertical coordination across market stages. In particular, the solutions we
adduce evince the well-known “double-marginalization” problem noted first by Spengler (1950). If firms are able to coordinate vertically, they can eliminate the double-marginalization
problem and increase the total amount of profits to be shared
between them. Katz (1989) remains a good summary reference on the instruments of vertical control. Our results in this
subsection should, thus, be interpreted to apply in settings in
which instruments of vertical control are either unavailable,
prohibitively costly to implement, or illegal under prevailing
antitrust statutes, e.g., Viscusi et al. (2000). If manufacturers
and retailers with market power are able to solve their doublemarginalization problem, the results of the previous subsection
apply.
For the case of successive oligopoly power, a representative
retailer’s profit function can be expressed as
π r = D(Q)q − P w q − cr q,

(7)

12 One plausible outcome of processor–retailer bargaining is that they would
agree on the volume of trade that maximized their mutual benefit, with bargaining restricted to determining the division of surplus between the bargainers.
This outcome is identical in terms of output, retail price, farm price, and welfare
distribution to the equilibria described in the previous subsection when only
processors or retailers exercised market power.

258

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

The first-order condition for maximizing Eq. (7) with respect
to q is
P

r

ξr
1− r
η

=P +c .
w

r

(8)

Using the retail demand function, D(Q), to substitute for Pr in
(8), we can solve equation (8) for the retailer’s inverse derived
demand function for the processed product: Pw = Dw (Q | ξ r ,
cr ).
A representative processing firm’s profit function can then be
expressed as
π w = D w (Q | ξ r , cr )q − S(Q)q − (cw + T )q.

(9)

The first-order condition for maximizing Eq. (9) with respect
to q is
Pw 1 −

ξw
η2w

= Pf 1 +

θf
εf

+ (cw + T ),

(10)

where ξ w denotes the degree of the processors’ oligopoly
power, and ηw
2 is the elasticity of derived demand, given rew
tailer oligopoly power (in general, ηw
1 = η2 ). Eqs. (1), (2), (8),
and (10) define the market equilibrium for the case of successive oligopoly power, and, given functional forms for (1) and
(2), they can be solved for the endogenous variables, Pf , Pw ,
Pr , and Q.
For the case of successive oligopsony power, a representative
processor’s profit function can be expressed as
π w = P w q − S(Q)q − (cw + T )q.

(11)

The first-order condition for maximizing Eq. (11) with respect
to q is
Pw = Pf 1 +

θf
εf

+ (cw + T ).

(12)

Eq. (12) can be used in conjunction with the inverse farm supply
curve S(Q) to yield the inverse derived supply curve, Pw =
Sw (Q | θ f , cw , T).
A representative retailer’s profit function can be expressed as
π r = D(Q)q − S w (Q | θ f , cw , T )q − cr q.

(13)

The first-order condition for maximizing Eq. (13) with respect
to q is
Pr 1 −

ξr
ηr

= Pw 1 +

θw
εw

+ cr .

(14)

Market equilibrium for this case is defined by Eqs. (1), (2), (12),
and (14).

4. Simulation analysis
To conduct simulations, it is necessary to assign specific
functional forms for the retail excess demand and farm excess
supply functions specified in general form in equations (1) and
(2). We chose linear models for this purpose: 13
Qr = a − αP r , importing country excess demand at retail,
(1 )
P f = b + βQf , exporting country inverse farm excess supply.
(2 )
In addition, we invoke the normalizations that are available
without loss of generality by choosing units so that the quantity
and retail price in the competitive, no-tariff equilibrium, (Q c ,
P rc ), are each unity:
r
f
Q c = 1, P rc = 1, in which case P w
c = 1 − c , and P c =
r
w
1 − c − c = f where f is farmers’ revenue share under
the no-tariff competitive equilibrium, and, thus f measures the
intrinsic importance of the farm product in producing the final
product. Given the normalizations, the following relationships
among the model’s parameters are readily derived:
α = ηcr , β =

f
, a = 1 + α, b = f − β,
εcf

(15)

where ηrc is the absolute value of retail price elasticity of demand
and εfc is the price elasticity of farm supply, each evaluated at
the no-tariff, competitive equilibrium.
Introducing a per-unit tariff, T, charged to the farm product causes supply of the farm product to the domestic-country
processing sector to become:
P f + T = b + βQf + T .

(2 )

4.1. Equilibrium under processor oligopoly and/or
oligopsony power
We consider first the case in which either the processing
sector or the retailing sector may exercise oligopoly and/or
oligopsony power, but the other downstream sector is competitive. Given the structure of the model, equilibrium output, farm
13 Our simulation results are, of course, sensitive to the choice of a linear
functional form. For example, with imperfect competition and linear inverse
demand, there will be under-shifting of any reduction in the tariff. However,
it is well known from the public finance literature that the incidence of tariff
reduction will be a function of both the degree of imperfect competition and
the convexity/concavity of the inverse demand function (Hindriks and Myles,
2006). Concavity of inverse demand results in under-shifting of changes in the
tariff, sufficient convexity results in over-shifting, while over-shifting always
occurs with a constant elasticity of demand function. Given that functional
form choices must be made, we chose to proceed with linear functions because
they are both weakly concave and weakly convex and thus represent a “middle
ground” choice.

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

price, retail price, and distribution of welfare among producers,
marketers (i.e., processors and retailers), and consumers are
identical if the same magnitudes of market power are exercised
by either the retail sector or the manufacturing sector. The same
results also hold for the rather plausible case in which processors exercise oligopsony power over farmers and retailers
exercise oligopoly power over consumers, but the interactions
between processors and retailers are conducted under conditions of perfect competition.
For consistency with the prior section, we develop the case
in which retailers behave competitively, and processors may
exercise market power. Thus, Pr = Pw + cr , and we can solve
(1 ), (2 ), and (6 ) simultaneously to obtain the following equilibrium solutions for the linear model:
1 + α(β − T )

Q1 =

1

P1r

=

+c ,

P1w

r

,

P1w =

a − Q1
− cr ,
α

P1f = b + βQ1 ,

(16)

where 1 = (1 + ξ w ) + (1 + θ f )αβ = (1 + ξ w ) + (1 +
θ f )f ηrc /εfc . The expression 1 measures the total distortion due
to oligopoly and oligopsony power in the linear model, and
Q 1 < 1 = Q c whenever either θ f or ξ w is positive.
Fig. 1 illustrates the model. It relies on Melnick and Shalit’s
(1985) observation that an industry with oligopoly power acts
as if it faces a perceived marginal revenue (PMR) curve that
consists of a linear combination of the monopoly marginal revenue curve, MR (Q) = ∂[D(Q)Q]/∂Q, and the market demand
curve, D(Q), with ξ representing the weight attributed to the
marginal revenue curve and (1 − ξ ) representing the weight
attributed to the demand curve: PMR(Q) = ξ MR(Q) + (1 −
ξ ) D(Q). Similarly, for an industry with oligopsony power, the
perceived marginal factor cost curve is PMC(Q) = θ MC(Q) +
(1 − θ ) S(Q), where MC = ∂[S(Q) Q]/∂Q denotes the monopoly
marginal factor cost curve. Industry equilibrium output, Q 1 , is
found in Fig. 1 at the intersection of the PMRw and PMCw
curves. The competitive equilibrium, output Q c in Fig. 1, is the
special case where ξ w = θ f = 0.
Economic surplus (ES) under processor market power is distributed as follows:
CS1 =

a/α

(a − αP )dP =

P1r

(a − αP1r )2
2α

consumer surplus,
(17)

P1f

PS1 =
b
1

=

w
1

P −b
(P f − b)2
dP = 1
β
2β

+

r
1

producer surplus,

Given the constant-cost characterization of the marketing sector (processing and retailing), the sector earns zero profits in
competitive equilibrium: c1 = 0.
In the linear version of the model, the market equilibrium
prices, output, and distribution of economic welfare are determined by six parameters: ξ w (seller oligopoly power), θ f
(buyer oligopsony power), ηrc (price elasticity of retail demand
f
evaluated at the no-tariff competitive equilibrium), εc (price
elasticity of farm supply evaluated at the no-tariff competitive
equilibrium, f (farm revenue share in the no-tariff competitive
equilibrium), and T (magnitude of the per-unit tariff). In this
model, the per-unit tariff functions identically to the constant
per-unit costs, cr and cw , incurred by retailers and processors,
respectively. The larger is T, ceteris paribus, the less important is processor oligopsony power as a factor in determining
the market equilibrium. Intuitively, T represents an additional
wedge (along with processor and retailer costs) between consumers and farm producers. When the farm input price is a
small component of retail value, the structure of the market for
procurement of the input does not matter much in determining
the market equilibrium at retail.
4.2. Market power at successive vertical stages
We focus on the case of successive oligopoly power. For
the linear version of the model, the market equilibrium under
successive oligopoly power is defined by Eqs. (1 ), (2 ), (8),
and (10):
Q2 =

1 + α(β − T )
2

P2r =

a − Q2
,
α

,

P2w = b + βQ2 + cw ,

P2f = b + βQ2 ,

(21)

where 2 = (1 + ξ r )(1 + ξ w ) + (1 + θ f )αβ = (1 + ξ r )(1 +
ξ w ) + (1 + θ f )f ηrc /εfc . In this case the market equilibrium and
welfare distribution are determined by seven parameters: ξ r , ξ w ,
f
θ f , ηrc , εc , f, and T. In addition to the parameters contained in the
preceding case, a second ξ parameter reflects the degree of seller
market power at successive stages of the market chain. Fig. 2
illustrates this scenario. The curve Pw = PMRr – cr represents
the retail sector’s derived demand for the farm product at the
wholesale level, given the retailers’ oligopoly power, ξ r , where
PMR r = ξ r MR (Q) + (1 − ξ r )D(Q). Processors then recognize
a PMR curve, PMRw , based on Pw , given their oligopoly power,
ξ w . The reduction in output from Q 1 to Q 2 in Fig. 2 represents
the incremental distortion to output from successive oligopoly
power. 14

= [P1r − P1f − 1 + f − T ]Q1

processor/retailer profit,
R1 = TQ1

(18)

259

tax revenue,

ES1 = CS1 + PS1 + P1 + R1

(19)
(20)

total surplus.

(21)

14

The formal derivation of the successive oligopsony case is a straightforward
adaptation of the successive oligopoly case and, thus, is omitted. The linear
version of the successive oligopsony model is represented by Eqs. (1 ), (2 ),
(12), and (14), and the model solution is characterized by seven parameters,
with the additional parameter in this case reflecting the possible exercise of
oligopsony power by processors in the market for the farm product, θ f , and by
retailers in the wholesaler market, θ w .

260

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

PMCw = θfMCf + (1 – θf)Pf + cw + T
Pf + cw + T
P1r

Pf(Q)

Pcr
P1w

Pcw
Pcf

Pr(Q)

P1f
Pw = Pr – cr

PMRw =ξwMRw + (1 – ξw)Pw

Q1

Qc

Fig. 1. Market equilibrium under processor oligopoly and oligopsony power (ξ w = θ w = 0.5).

In structuring simulations for these various competition scenarios, we have chosen base parameter values to resemble
some key developing-country export scenarios. The parameter f, the farm share of revenue under the no-tariff competitive equilibrium, was fixed at f = 1 − cw − cr = 0.2. For
example, farm share for coffee and bananas is about 10%
(FAO, 2004) and for cocoa about 5% (Oxfam, 2002). In the
market power and tariff scenarios contained in the simulations, the farm share drops well below the 0.2 competitivebenchmark share, so setting the benchmark at 0.2 enables
the simulations to depict the even lower shares observed in
reality. 15
The primary effect of f in the model is to influence the importance of oligopsony power in determining output and welfare
in the market. When f is small, the farm input is not important as a determinant of the final product value relative to the
costs incurred by processors and retailers, and, thus, oligopsony power in the farm sector has only a minor impact on total
market output and consumer welfare. The presence of a tariff
diminishes the farm share of the total retail expenditure under
any form of competition, and, thus, also reduces the relative
15

To provide just one illustration of this point, the farm share of the consumer
food dollar for the case of modest successive market power represented by
ξ w = ξ r = θ f = 0.2 is 0.071%, given the base competitive markets share
of f = 0.2, precisely in the range indicated for key developing-country export
commodities.

importance of processor oligopsony power in determining the
market equilibrium.
f
We consider ηrc = εc = 0.6 as base cases for the retaildemand and farm-supply elasticities, respectively, each evaluated at the no-tariff competitive equilibrium. 16 The choices
reflect the inelasticity of both consumer demand and farm supply that is considered typical for agricultural commodities. 17
For example, Bhuyan and Lopez (1997) report price elasticities of demand for roasted coffee and chocolate and cocoa in
the U.S. of 0.53 and 0.52, respectively. Abbott et al. (2005)
report an aggregate price elasticity of demand of 0.24 for
bulk cocoa and 0.53 for fair-trade cocoa products. The former number compares closely to the estimate of 0.19 reported
by Gilbert and Varangis (2003). In terms of supply elasticities,
Abbott, et al. report short-run price elasticities of supply in the
range of 0.3–0.5 for cocoa, a range that comports well with
the point estimate of 0.45 reported by Gilbert and Varangis
(2003).
16 The distortion from a given degree of market power is always proportional
to the elasticity of the demand curve (in the case of oligopoly power) or supply
f
curve (in the case of oligopsony power) that is being exploited. Setting ηrc = ε c
has the virtue that the relative importance of oligopoly vs. oligopsony power
is not distorted by differences in the underlying elasticities of retail demand or
farm supply.
17 Given ε f = 0.6 and f = 0.2, the retail supply elasticity evaluated at the
c
competitive equilibrium is εrc = 3.0.

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

261

PMCw = θfMCf + (1 – θf)Pf + cw + T
Pf + cw + T
r
2

P

Pf(Q)

Pcr

P2w
Pcw

Pr(Q)

Pcf

P2f
Pr – cr
Pw = PMRr – cr

PMRw = ξwMRw + (1 – ξw)Pw
Q2 Q1

Qc

Fig. 2. Successive oligopoly power with processor oligopsony power (ξ w = ξ r = θ f = 0.5).

Given the linear retail supply and farm demand curves, the
elasticities change as output changes along the curves to reflect alternative forms of imperfectly competitive equilibria.
However, the relative magnitudes of alternative elasticity specifications are the same across the various imperfect competition
equilibria, and, thus, it suffices to fix the elasticities at a particular point, such as the competitive equilibrium, to simulate the
effects of alternative elasticity specifications.
The most important parameters for the purposes of the simulation analysis are the market power parameters, θ and ξ . As
noted and illustrated in Table 1 most empirical estimates have
revealed rather modest departures from competition, with point
estimates of θ and/or ξ falling typically in the range of 0.25
or less (Sheldon and Sperling, 2003). However, Bhuyan and
Lopez (1997) obtained estimates of ξ that were considerably
higher for some industries in their ambitious study of oligopoly
power for all U.S. four-digit SIC food and beverage industries. For example, 2043 cereal preparation, 2041 flour & grain
mills, 2075 soybean oil mills yielded estimates of ξ of about
0.5.
Given the recent increases in consolidation of food manufacturing and food retailing in many countries, the past studies may
understate current levels of market power. In addition, Sexton
(2000) has argued that the limitations of the extant empirical
literature probably serve on balance to understate the extent
of market power. For example, this conclusion would apply
to (i) analysis of inappropriately broad product markets, (ii)

failure to account for the possibility of market power upstream
or downstream from the stage being analyzed, and (iii) failure
to account properly for technical change and/or economies of
scale in costs.
Thus, to gain a broad perspective of the effects of market
power on the impacts of tariff reduction, we conduct simulations over the interval θ , ξ ∈ [0, 0.5]. 18 However, to facilitate
a graphical presentation of results, we always consider equal
relative departures from competition for each sector that is exercising market power in the simulation. For example, in simulating market behavior under successive oligopsony and retailer
oligopoly, we will always set θ f = θ w = ξ r .
4.3. Simulation results
It is first useful to gain a perspective as to how market power,
including market power at successive vertical stages, can affect market performance. Fig. 3 depicts the effect of market
power on producer welfare as the% change in producer welfare relative to perfect competition as a function of the degree
of downstream market power. Five market power scenarios are
considered: (i) oligopsony only, (ii) both oligopoly, and oligopsony, (iii) successive oligopsony and retailer oligopsony, and
(iv) successive oligopoly and processor oligopsony.
18 Values of 0.5 for ξ and θ indicate the market power obtained in a symmetric
firm duopoly and duopsony, respectively.

262

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270
0

-10

Producer Surplus Change (%)

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

-70

-80

-90
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Oligopsony

Oligopsony & Oligopoly

Successive Oligopsony with Oligopoly

Successive Oligopoly with Oligopsony

Fig. 3. The effect of market power on producer welfare.
0

Total Welfare Change (%)

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

-30
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Oligopsony

Oligopsony & Oligopoly

Successive Oligopsony with Oligopoly

Successive Oligopoly with Oligopsony

Fig. 4. The effect of market power on total welfare.

A given degree of downstream oligopoly power is always
more damaging to producer welfare than the same degree of
downstream oligopsony power because the oligopoly power
affects the entire final product, whereas the oligopsony power
applies only to the raw product input. 19 Thus, ceteris paribus,
a given degree of oligopoly power will always reduce market
output more than will a given degree of oligopsony power.
Fig. 3 makes clear that, even modest levels of market power,
such as have been found in the empirical literature, can in
19 In the base simulation, the farm share of the final product value under perfect competition is 0.2, and, thus, the other inputs used by the marketing sector
to produce the final product constitute 80% of the retail value under perfect
competition. These inputs implicitly are assumed to be acquired competitively.

combination have a very damaging impact upon the welfare of
producers in the developing economy. For example, successive
oligopoly power combined with processor oligopsony power of
0.2 (ξ r = ξ w = θ f = 0.2) combine to reduce producer surplus
by about 49% relative to perfect competition in all downstream
sectors.
Fig. 4 illustrates the effect of downstream market power on
total ES (the sum of producer surplus, consumer surplus, and
marketer profits) in the market. Fig. 5 illustrates the distribution
of ES among producers, consumers and marketers for the case
of processor oligopsony combined with retailer oligopoly (but
no successive market power). Figs. 4 and 5 combine to illustrate
some important points regarding the efficiency and distributional impacts of market power in a vertical market chain. First,

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

263

90

80

70

Share (%)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Consumer

Producer

Marketer

Fig. 5. The effect of market power on the distribution of welfare: processor oligopsony and retail oligopoly.

modest levels of market power have small efficiency effects.
Fig. 4 shows that even successive oligopoly plus oligopsony or
successive oligopsony plus oligopoly generate efficiency losses
relative to perfect competition of 10% or less for modest levels
of market power—θ and ξ values of 0.2 or less, results consistent with prior work, dating back to the original work by
Harberger (1954). However, Fig. 4 also illustrates that markets
with large departures from competition that are repeated across
multiple vertical stages can have large efficiency losses. For example, the case of successive oligopoly plus oligopsony where
ξ r = ξ w = θ f = 0.5 (i.e., Cournot duopolies and duopsony)
reduces the total ES in the market by about 28%.
Fig. 5, however, shows that the distributional effects of market power are large even for modest departures from competition. Perfectly competitive marketers earn only normal profits
in this model, but ξ r = θ f = 0.2 or more enables the marketing
sector’s surplus to exceed the surplus earned by the producing
sector, and ξ r = θ f = 0.4 or more enables marketers’ surplus to
exceed consumers’ surplus.
Now consider trade liberalization in terms of eliminating the
per-unit tariff T = 0.2 (a 20% tariff at the competitive equilibrium). Fig. 6 depicts the absolute change in farm price from
removing the tariff for alternative competition scenarios. Given
εrc = 3 > ηrc = 0.6, producers bear only one sixth of the incidence of the tariff in competitive equilibrium. Thus, abolishing
the tariff raises the farm price by Pf = 0.2/6 = 0.033 in the
competitive equilibrium. Pf is a decreasing function of the
degree of downstream market power because an imperfectly
competitive marketing sector always captures a share of the
benefits of an exogenous shock of this type. For example, in
the case of successive oligopoly power plus processor oligopsony, modest market power represented by ξ r = ξ w = θ f = 0.2

reduces the farm price increase from tariff removal by 29%,
while the more extreme scenario of ξ r = ξ w = θ f = 0.5 reduces
the price increase by 53%.
The effect of market power on the increase in producer welfare caused by trade liberalization depicted in Fig. 7 is more
pronounced than the effect on price, because producer surplus
is determined both by the change in farm price and the change in
output, and market power diminishes both. Consider again the
case of successive oligopoly plus processor oligopsony power.
The modest market power case represented by ξ r = ξ w = θ f
= 0.2 reduces the producer surplus increase from trade liberalization by 48%, while ξ r = ξ w = θ f = 0.5 reduces it by
78%.
Next consider the distribution of benefits from trade liberalization across producers, consumers, and marketers depicted in
Figs. 8 and 9. Fig. 8 represents the case of processor oligopsony and retailer oligopoly, while Fig. 9 represents successive
oligopoly plus processor oligopsony. Producer and consumer
welfare both decline monotonically in the degree of market
power exercised. Marketers’ profit rises monotonically as a
function of ξ r = θ f in the case of simple oligopoly and oligopsony power illustrated in Fig. 8, but marketers’ profit actually
declines in the successive-oligopoly-plus-oligopsony case (Fig.
9) for high values of ξ r = ξ w = θ f , illustrating an important
feature of market power generally and of successive market
power in particular. Agents who exercise market power always
impose a negative externality on the other participants in the
market. A straightforward manifestation of this phenomenon is
the declining surplus to producers and consumers as a function
of marketers’ power. In the successive market power case, rising
values of ξ r = ξ w = θ f represent higher absolute levels of market power exercised by marketers, but the negative externality

264

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270
0.0350

0.0300

Farm Price Change

0.0250

0.0200

0.0150

0.0100

0.0050

0.0000
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index

Oligopsony

Oligopsony & Oligopoly

Successive Oligopsony with Oligopoly

Successive Oligopoly with Oligopsony

Fig. 6. Change in farm price and trade liberalization.
0.04

0.03

Producer Surplus Change

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01

0.00
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Oligopsony

Oligopsony & Oligopoly

Successive Oligopsony with Oligopoly

Successive Oligopoly with Oligopsony

Fig. 7. Change in producer surplus from trade liberalization.

imposed on processors’ profits when retailers increase their
market power (and vice versa) can dominate the higher profits
earned by the retailer, causing overall marketing sector profits
to fall for high levels of market power exercised at successive
stages. 20 Both Figs. 8 and 9 demonstrate that the distributional
effects of market power are quite dramatic. Even rather modest
levels of market power enable the marketing sector to capture
the largest share of the benefits from trade liberalization, and,
when market power occurs at successive stages of the market
20

This result provides an incentive for vertical coordination in the marketing
chain to internalize these external effects.

chain, as illustrated in Fig. 9, even rather modest levels of market power at each stage enable the marketing sector to capture
the lion’s share of the benefits. Clearly, the presence of downstream market power is an important issue when considering
the impacts of trade liberalization.

5. Extensions
Many extensions and generalizations of this simulation
framework are possible, and we mention only a few here. First,
the results discussed here are conditional upon the base values

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

265

Producer Surplus, Consumer Surplus, Marketers' Profits

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Producer Surplus

Consumer Surplus

Marketers' Profits

Fig. 8. Change in producer surplus, consumer surplus, and marketer profit from trade liberalization: processor oligopsony and retailer oligopoly.

Producer Surplus, Consumer Surplus, Marketers' Profits

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Producer Surplus

Consumer Surplus

Marketers' Profits

Fig. 9. Change in producer surplus, consumer surplus, and marketer profit from trade liberalization: successive oligopoly and processor oligopsony.
f

of εc = ηrc = 0.6, and f = 0.2. Although the specific results
change as these base values change, the qualitative conclusions
do not change for reasonable perturbations of the base parameters. The effects of market power on producer benefits from
trade liberalization for alternative values of the base elasticities are illustrated in Figs. 10 and 11 for the case of processor
oligopsony power and retailer oligopoly power (i.e., no successive market power). Fig. 10 holds the supply elasticity constant
f
at the base value, εc = 0.6,and simulates the change in producer surplus ( PS) from trade liberalization for alternative
values of the demand elasticity: ηrc = 0.3 (one-half base), ηrc
= 0.6 (base) and ηrc = 1.2 (two-times base), evaluated at the
competitive equilibrium in all cases. Fig. 11 presents a similar

analysis holding the demand elasticity constant at the base ηrc =
0.6 and alternatively setting the competitive-equilibrium supply
elasticity at 0.3, 0.6, and 1.2.
Changing the base value of the one elasticity while holding the other elasticity constant introduces two effects: (i) the
impact on farm (retail) price due to oligopsony (oligopoly)
power increases as supply (demand) becomes more inelastic;
(ii) the relative incidence of the tariff on producers and consumers changes as the relative values of the elasticities change.
For example, the incidence of the tariff on producers increases
as supply becomes more inelastic, and, thus, holding market
power constant, producers benefit more from removal of the
tariff via trade liberalization in these settings. This incidence

266

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270
0.06

Producer Surplus Change

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Demand Elasticity=0.3

Demand Elasticity=0.6

Demand Elasticity=1.2

Fig. 10. Change in producer surplus from trade liberalization for alternative retail demand elasticities.
0.06

Producer Surplus Change

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Supply Elasticity=0.3

Supply Elasticity=0.6

Supply Elasticity=1.2

Fig. 11. Change in producer surplus from trade liberalization for alternative farm supply elasticities.

effect is manifest in Fig. 11 (10) in terms of PS from trade
liberalization being greater for any values of market power the
less (more) elastic is the supply (demand) curve.
Whereas a competitive marketing sector with a constantreturns technology bears none of the incidence of the tariff,
downstream firms with market power always rationally absorb
a portion of any increase in their costs, including the cost of
a per-unit tariff, so as to distribute optimally the impact of the
cost increase between lower quantities and higher prices. The

fraction that is absorbed is an increasing function of the degree of market power. For example, when θ = ξ = 0.5, the
marketing sector absorbs one-third of the tariff regardless of
f
the base values of εc and ηrc . 21 Therefore, the magnitude of
the total benefit from trade liberalization to be divided between
21 To say that downstream firms with market power rationally bear some of
the incidence of a tariff is the equivalent of saying that they capture some of
the benefit from abolition of the tariff.

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

267

0.08

0.07

Change in Producer Benefit

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index
Farm Share=0.2

Farm Share=0.4

Farm Share=0.6

Fig. 12. Change in producer surplus from trade liberalization for alternative farm shares.

developing-country producers and industrialized-country consumers is reduced as a function of downstream firms’ market
power. This fact is illustrated in Figs. 10 and 11 in terms of PS
from trade liberalization declining in all instances as a function
of the degree of downstream market power. The impact of market power on the benefits from trade liberalization is naturally
more severe on the sector (consumers or producers) bearing a
greater incidence of the tariff. Thus, the slope of the PScurves
in Figs. 10a and 10b is steepest for the cases where producers
f
bear the brunt of the tariff’s incidence (εc = 0.6, ηrc = 1.2 in
f
Fig. 10, and εc = 0.3, ηrc = 0.6 in Fig. 11).
The effects of a larger farm share on the producer benefits
from trade liberalization for alternative levels of market power
are illustrated in Fig. 12. Two effects are at work. The producer
benefit under perfect competition from removal of the tariff
is greater the larger is the farm share, f, and, accordingly, the
potential for loss in producer benefit from market power is
greater as well. Second, the impact of oligopsony power on
producer benefits is magnified the more important the farm
input is in determining the final product. Both factors, thus,
contribute to a greater loss in producer benefits from trade
liberalization due to market power the higher is the base farm
share.
Next, consider the question of whether a developing country
can increase ES by integrating downstream into the processing of its agricultural product. Working against the viability
of developing-country integration is the possibility that processing in the developing country will be less efficient (i.e.,
incur higher costs) in producing processed or semiprocessed
products than processors in developed countries. 22 However,
22

Tybout (2000) is an excellent source on the distinctive features affecting the manufacturing environment in developing countries. He cites onerous
regulations, credit market imperfections, underdeveloped infrastructure and

offsetting any cost penalty is that home-country processing removes the exporting country’s exposure to oligopsony power by
importing-country processors, enhancing the appeal of vertical
integration. 23
Fig. 13 gives a sense of the interplay between these offsetting
factors. It depicts iso-welfare lines—welfare-neutral combinations from the perspective of the developing country of higher
per-unit processing costs, cw , on the vertical axis incurred by
the developing country and levels of oligopsony power, θ , on
the horizontal axis in the importing country’s processing sector that is avoided by downstream integration. We assume that
developing-country integration removes the production sector’s
exposure to processor oligopsony power, but that any market
power exercised further downstream by the importing country’s
retailing sector remains.
Two alternative scenarios for retail sector market power are
depicted in Fig. 13: (i) on the top line, the retailing sector exercises both oligopsony and oligopoly power in a magnitude that
is equivalent to the oligopsony power exercised by the importing country’s processing sector (and avoided by downstream
institutions, and limited human capital as key competitive disadvantages faced
by developing-country manufacturers.
23 The processing sector that evolves in a developing economy may itself be
oligopsonistic, but at least the oligopsony profits may be captured locally, e.g.,
the Mozambique cashew nut case (McMillan et al., 2000). Processor oligopsony power is also an issue when processing is undertaken by multinational
firms through direct foreign investment. Downstream processing is most beneficial to the developing economy if it takes place under conditions of perfect
competition. For example, in Nigeria, the cocoa marketing sector is characterized by many local exporters, which contrasts with the Ivory Coast where
multinational exporting firms dominate (Wilcox and Abbott, 2004). One way
to induce competitive behavior in the processing sector is to organize it around
zero-profit, producer-owned cooperatives, which in the context of the present
model results in an equilibrium that is analytically equivalent to the competitive
equilibrium.

268

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

Increase in Developing-Country Processing Cost

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Market Power Index

Oligopsony & Oligopoly

Successive Oligopsony with Oligopoly

Fig. 13. Welfare-enhancing vertical integration, given a developing-country per-unit processing cost penalty and importing-country oligopsony power.

integration), and (ii) on the bottom line, the retailing sector exercises only oligopoly power that is equivalent to the processing
sector’s oligopsony power. For example, in a setting of successive oligopsony power plus oligopoly power in the downstream
processing and retailing sectors of magnitude θ f = θ w = ξ r
= 0.3, a developing country could improve its economic welfare by undertaking processing of its raw material and thereby
avoiding processor oligopsony power, as long as its processing
cost penalty is 0.15 (relative to total processing plus retailing
costs of 0.8 for the developed economy in the base simulation)
or less. All points below an iso-welfare line in Fig. 13 represent
combinations of processing cost penalty and oligopsony power
where the developing economy enhances its economic welfare
by integrating into the processing sector despite incurring the
cost penalty, given the extent of processor oligopsony power it
avoids by doing so. 24
Finally, we have modeled the case of a constant per-unit tariff or export tax, but many tariffs are ad valorem. Simulating
the impacts of removing an ad valorem tariff would add some
complications to the modeling relative to a per-unit tariff. In
particular, because the ad valorem tariff affects the slope of
the downstream supply functions derived from the farm supply
function, the simple proportional relationship between price
elasticity at the farm level and at retail (εr = εf /f ), that holds
for the per-unit tariff, does not hold for the ad valorem tariff.
Indeed, an ad valorem tariff makes the downstream supply relationships less elastic, ceteris paribus, and, thus, can exacerbate
24 The range of parameter combinations where exporting-country integration
are beneficial is greater for the case of successive oligopsony and oligopoly.
The distortions caused by market power are convex in the total magnitude of
market power exercised. Thus, removing a layer, processor oligopsony, has a
greater benefit, the greater the magnitude of market power exercised further
downstream.

the distortion from oligopsony power in the retailer–processor
interaction. Removing the tariff actually reduces the distortion
from a given degree of retailer oligopsony power, which provides an additional welfare benefit from trade liberalization.

6. Summary and conclusions
Taken together, the vertically related, highly concentrated nature of the food sector in developed countries raises many issues
for developing countries attempting to increase market access
and the returns from exporting agricultural and food products.
Policymakers and economists have mostly ignored these issues
when they provide estimates about what further trade reform
may bring to developing countries. Consequently, to fully understand the implications of trade reform for raw commodity
exporters, further attention needs to be paid to the issue of
imperfect competition in developed-country food markets.
In this context, two key implications can be drawn from
this article. First, if developing country exporters face a
marketing system characterized by a structure of successive
oligopoly/oligopsony, reduction of import tariffs, while increasing raw commodity prices, will not result in exporters obtaining a larger share of the consumer’s food “dollar” in developed
countries. This conclusion follows from the fact that firms with
market power in the food retailing and processing sectors are
able to capture most of the benefits of a reduction in the tariff on the imported raw agricultural commodity. This implies
that developing country exporters will benefit less from trade
liberalization by developed countries than is being forecast by
development agencies such as the World Bank (2003), and nongovernmental organizations such as Oxfam (2003). However, a
corollary to this result is that export taxes will be borne in part

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

by marketing firms with market power and, thus, represent a
potential tool for developing countries to extract rents from an
oligopolistic and/or oligopsonistic marketing sector.
Second, increasing concentration and reduced competition in
the food processing and retailing sector will reduce even further
the share of commodity exporters in the available rents in the
food marketing system. This conclusion generates the key policy implication that developing country exporters may benefit
from vertically integrating into food processing and other valueadding activities further down the vertical marketing chain, in
order to capture more of the rents from trade liberalization. This
outcome holds despite the possibility that developing countries
may suffer a cost disadvantage in food processing.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the helpful comments of two
anonymous reviewers on earlier versions of this article, along
with comments of audience members at the IATRC theme day,
San Antonio, Texas, the AAEA meetings, Denver, Colorado,
and seminars at Ohio State and North Carolina State Universities where the article was presented. Thanks are also due to Tina
Saitone, University of California, Davis, for her invaluable research assistance. Ian Sheldon would also like to acknowledge
financial support through a grant from the Food System Research Group at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
References
Abbot, P.C., Wilcox, M.D., Muir, W.A., 2005. Corporate social responsibility
in international cocoa trade. Selected Paper, 15th Annual World Food and
Agribusiness Forum, Symposium and Case Conference, Chicago, IL.
Alston, J.M., Sexton, R.J., Zhang, M., 1997. The effects of imperfect competition on the size and distribution of research benefits. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 79,
1252–1265.
Anderson, K., Martin, W., 2005. Agricultural trade reform and the Doha development agenda. World Econ. 28, 1301–1327.
Appelbaum, E. 1982. The estimation of the degree of oligopoly power. J.
Econometrics 19, 287–299.
Azzam, A., Pagoulatos, E., 1990. Testing oligopolistic and oligopsonistic behavior: an application to the US meat packing industry. J. Agr. Econ. 41,
362–370.
Bettendorf, L., Verboven, F., 2000. Incomplete transmission of coffee bean
prices: evidence from the Netherlands. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 27, 1–16.
Bhuyan, S., Lopez, R.A., 1997. Oligopoly power in the food and tobacco
industries. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 79, 1035–1043.
Brander, J.A., Spencer, B.J., 1985. Export subsidies and international market
share rivalry. J. Int. Econ. 18, 83–100.
Buschena, D.E., Perloff, J.M., 1991. The creation of dominant firm market
power in the coconut oil export market. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 73, 1000–1008.
Cotterill, R.W., 1999. Continuing concentration in food industries globally:
strategic challenges to an unstable status quo, Food Marketing Policy Center.
Research Report No. 49, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT.
Deodhar, S.Y., Sheldon, I.M. 1995. Is foreign trade (im)perfectly competitive?
An analysis of the German market for banana imports. J. Agr. Econ. 46,
336–348.
Deodhar, S.Y., Sheldon, I.M. 1996. Estimation of imperfect competition in food
marketing: a dynamic analysis of the German banana market. J. Food Dist.
Res. 27, 1–10.

269

Devadoss, S.D., Westhoff, P.C., Helmar, M.D., Grundmeier, E. Skold, K., Meyers, W.H., Johnson, S.R., 1993. The FAPRI modeling system: a documentation summary. In: Taylor, C.R., Reichelderfer, K.H., Johnson, S.R., (Eds.),
Agricultural Sector Models for the United States: Descriptions and Selected
Policy Applications. Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA.
Edwards, S., 1993. Openness, trade liberalization, and growth in developing
countries. J. Econ. Lit. 31, 1358–1393.
FAO, 2004. The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets. FAO, Rome.
Fitter, R., Kaplinsky, R., 2001. Can an agricultural ‘commodity’ be decommodified, and if so, who is to gain? Institute of Development Studies,
Discussion Paper 380, University of Sussex, Falmer.
Genoseve, D., Mullin, W.P., 1998. Testing static oligopoly models: conduct and
cost in the sugar industry, 1890–1914. Rand J. Econ. 29, 335–377.
Gilbert, C.L., Varangis, P., 2003. Globalization and international commodity
trade with specific reference to the West African cocoa producers. NBER
Working Paper 9668, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Gohin, A., Guyomard, H., 2000. Measuring market power for food retail activities: French evidence. J. Agr. Econ. 51, 181–195.
Harberger, A., 1954. Monopoly and resource allocation. Am. Econ. Rev. 44,
77–87.
Hindriks, J., Myles, G.D., 2006. Intermediate Public Economics. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Huang, S-Y., Sexton, R.J., 1996. Measuring returns to an innovation in an
imperfectly competitive market: application to mechanical harvesting of
processing tomatoes in Taiwan. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 78, 558–571.
Hughes, D., 2002. Grocery retailing in Europe and emerging routes to the
consumer. EuroChoices 1, 12–16.
Ishikawa, J., Spencer, B.J., 1999. Rent-shifting export subsidies with an imported intermediate product. J. Int. Econ. 48, 199–232.
Karp, L.S. and Perloff, J.M., 1989. Dynamic oligopoly in the rice export market,
Rev. Econ. Stat. 71, 462–470.
Katz, M., 1989. Vertical contractual relations. In: Schmalensee, R., Willig, R.
(Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Lopez, R.E., 1984. Measuring oligopoly power and production responses of
the Canadian food processing industry. J. Agr. Econ. 35, 219–230.
McCorriston, S. 2002. Why should imperfect competition matter to agricultural
economists? Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 29, 349–372.
McCorriston, S., Sheldon, I.M., 1996. Trade policy in vertically-related markets. Oxford Econ. Pap. 48, 664–672.
McCorriston, S., Sexton, R.J., Sheldon, I.M., 2004. Vertical market structure,
commodity exports, and trade reform. 7th Annual Conference on Global
Economic Analysis, World Bank, Washington, DC.
McMillan, M., Rodrik, D., Welch, K.H., 2002. When economic reform goes
wrong: cashews in Mozambique. NBER Working Paper 9117, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Melnick, R., Shalit, H., 1985. Estimating the market for tomatoes. Am. J. Agr.
Econ 67, 574–582.
Messerlin, P., 2001. Measuring the Costs of Protection in Europe. Institute for
International Economics, Washington DC.
OECD, 2005. The OECD–FAO Agricultural Outlook 2005–2014. Directorate
for Food Agriculture and Fisheries, OECD, Paris.
Oxfam, 2001. Bitter coffee: how the poor are paying for the slump in coffee
prices. Oxfam, Oxford.
Oxfam, 2002. The cocoa market—a background study. Oxfam, Oxford.
Oxfam, 2003. Running into the sand: why failure at the Cancun trade talks
threatens the world’s poorest people. Oxfam, Oxford.
Reed, A.J., Clark, J.S., 2000. Structural change and competition in seven US
food markets, US Department of Agriculture. Economic Research Service,
Technical Bulletin No. 1881, Washington DC.
Schroeter, J.R., 1988. Estimating the degree of market power in the beef packing
industry. Rev. Econ. Stat. 70, 158–162.
Schroeter, J.R., Azzam, A., 1990. Measuring market power in multi-product
oligopolies. Appl. Econ. 22, 1365–1376.
Sexton, R.J., 2000. Industrialization and consolidation in the U.S. food sector:
implications for competition and welfare. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 82, 1087–
1104.

270

R. J. Sexton et al. / Agricultural Economics 36 (2007) 253–270

Sexton, R.J., Lavoie, N., 2001. Food processing and distribution: an industrial
organization approach. In: Gardner, B.L., Rausser, G.C. (Eds.), Handbook
of Agricultural Economics, North Holland, Amsterdam.
Sexton, R.J., Zhang, M., 2001. An assessment of the impact of food industry
market power on U.S. consumers. Agribusiness 17, 59–79.
Sheldon, I.M., Pick, D.H., McCorriston, S., 2001. Export subsidies and profitshifting in vertical markets. J. Agr. Res. Econ. 26, 125–141.
Sheldon, I., Sperling, R., 2003. Estimating the extent of imperfect competition in the food industry: what have we learned? J. Agr. Econ. 54, 89–
110.
Spencer, B.J., Jones, R. W. 1992. Trade and protection in vertically-related
markets. J. Int. Econ. 32, 31–55.
Spengler, J., 1950. Vertical integration and anti-trust policy. J. Polit. Econ. 58,
347–352.
Steen, F., Salvenas, K.J., 1999. Testing for market power using a dynamic
oligopoly model. Int. J. Ind. Org. 17, 147–177.
Tybout, J., 2000. Manufacturing firms in developing countries: how well do
they do, and why? J. Econ. Lit. 38, 11–44.
UNCTAD, 2002a. Export diversification, market access and competitiveness.
United Nations, UNCTAD/TD/B/COM./ 1(54), Geneva.

UNCTAD, 2002b. World Investment Report 2002: Transnational Corporations
and Export Competitiveness, United Nations, Geneva.
U.S. Census Bureau, 2001. Concentration Ratios in Manufacturing, US Department of Commerce. US Census Bureau, Washington DC.
Viscusi, W.K., Vernon, J.M., Harrington, Jr., J.E., 2000. Economics of Regulation and Antitrust. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wann, J.J., Sexton, R.J., 1992. Imperfect competition in multiproduct food
industries with application to pear processing. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 74, 980–
990.
Wilcox, M.D., Abbott, P.C., 2004. Market power and structural adjustment: the
case of West African cocoa market liberalization, Selected Paper. Annual
Meetings of the American Agricultural Economics Association, Denver,
CO.
Wilson, P., 1997. Imperfect Competition and Price Transmission in the Food
Chain. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle.
World Bank, 1995. Mozambique: impediments to industrial sector recovery.
World Bank, Report no. 13752-MOZ, Washington DC.
World Bank, 2003. Global Economic Prospects: Realizing the Development
Promise of the Doha Agenda. World Bank, Washington DC.

