World Developmenr, Vol. 22, No. 11, pp. 1613-1625,

1994
Copyright 0 1994 Elsevier Science Ltd
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved
0305-750x/94
$7.00 + 0.00

Pergamon

0305-750x(94)00075-1

Markets in Tradable Water Rights: Potential for
Efficiency Gains in Developing Country Water
Resource Allocation

International

MARK W. ROSEGRANT
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington DC, U.S.A.
and
HANS P. BINSWANGER”
The World Bank, Washington DC, U.S.A.

Summary. - Establishment of tradable water rights could play an important role in improving the efficiency, equity, and sustainability of water use in developing countries. Well-defined tradable rights for-

malize and secure the existing water rights held by water users; economize on transactions costs; induce
water users to consider the full opportunity cost of water; and provide incentives for water users to internalize and reduce many of the negative externalities inherent in irrigation. The institutional requirements,
potential and feasibility of developing markets in tradable water rights should receive increased attention
from researchers

and policy makers.

1. INTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, the cost of new irrigation
investment has been rapidly increasing. Existing systems have often performed poorly and have degraded
through waterlogging,
salinization, and mining of
groundwater aquifers. Growth in crop productivity in
irrigated areas has slowed, and competition for water
for nonagricultural uses has increased. These developments create strong demands to develop water
resource policies to maintain growth in irrigated agricultural production, facilitate efficient allocation of
water across sectors and final demands, and reverse
the ongoing degradation of the water resource base.
What water policies can lead to efficient increases in
irrigated production while reducing resource degradation in the irrigated areas in developing countries and
releasing water for growing nonagricultural demands?
Four broad categories of policy prescriptions have
been employed: technological solutions, reform of
public management of irrigation systems, communal
irrigation management, and the establishment of tradable property rights in water and development of markets in these rights. The first three broad prescriptions
have been widely utilized by international lenders and
national governments. The design and implementation of policies to encourage the establishment of tradable property rights and markets in water have not,
however, been pursued vigorously.

This paper explores the reasons why allocation of
water rights through markets has not been a prominent
solution in developing countries. We argue that, with
the rapid economic growth and increasing competition
for water in many developing countries, policies to
encourage development of markets in tradable water
rights should receive increasing emphasis from policy
makers and researchers. Furthermore, reform of water
rights would in many cases enhance the effectiveness
of the more traditional water policy initiatives. In the
remainder of this paper, recent trends in technological
solutions, reform of public management, and communal irrigation management will be briefly reviewed, a
more detailed presentation of issues related to water
market development will then be provided, and conclusions will be summarized.

2. POLICY OPTIONS FOR ARRESTING
DEGRADATION AND IMPROVING
PRODUCTIVITY IN IRRIGATED AREAS
(a) Technological solutions
Technological approaches to expanded irrigated
crop production and reduced degradation include con-

*Final revision accepted: June 7, 1994.

1613

1614

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

struction of new irrigation systems, rehabilitation and
modernization of existing systems, canal lining and
drainage, and field drainage. Investment in new construction and rehabilitation, while still substantial, has
declined dramatically, over the past decade. Recent
projections of world commodity prices indicate continued declines in the real world prices of cereals, the
main users of irrigation water in developing countries
(Mitchell and Ingco, 1994; Rosegrant and Agcaoli,
1994). These projected price trends, combined with
continued escalation of the capital costs of new irrigation, make a return to the investment levels of the
1970s unlikely.
Review of the record of rehabilitation projects
shows highly variable net benefits (Rosegrant and
Svendsen, 1993). Perhaps the only straightforward
conclusion is the importance of selectivity. Many
rehabilitations have been large-scale, capital-intensive
projects which aim at a thorough remake of the system. These investments are subject to the same type
of rent-seeking, delays, and cost overruns that characterize much construction of new systems. Greater
selectivity in investment in irrigation rehabilitation,
modernization, and other technological interventions
is needed to improve the efficiency and performance
of irrigation systems. The future success of technological investments could be significantly improved by
reform of water rights. It is argued below that establishment of tradable water rights provides incentives
to involve water users in investment decisions, which
could greatly improve selection of investments in
technology. Investments in improved irrigation technology will in turn improve the efficiency of markets
in water rights.

(b) Reform of public management of irrigation
systems
Policies undertaken in this area (often in conjunction with technological interventions) include modification of water distribution methods (such as shifting
from continuous flow to rotational flow water allocation); implementation of water pricing policies; and
institutional reform of public irrigation bureaucracies.
Similar to the case for rehabilitation, reform of water
management methods within existing systems has
shown mixed results, with some interventions having
high rates of return (Aluwihare arid Kikuchi, 1990)
while others
have been much less effective
(Rosegrant, 1990; Rosegrant and Svendsen, 1993).
Attempts to implement efficiency pricing of water,
where all users are charged the social opportunity cost
of water, have been relatively rare (Sampath, 1992).
Various forms of marginal cost pricing of water under
centralized management, however, have been proposed, supplemented
by taxes and/or subsidies to
account for externalities.
For surface water, they

include direct pricing based on volume of water:
quasi-direct pricing based on delivery “turns” or duration of delivery; and indirect pricing through productivity-based taxes on land. For groundwater. they
include direct pricing through charges on water
pumped; quasi-direct pricing through charges on the
time the pump is in operation; and indirect pricing,
through taxes or subsidies on electricity or fuel used
by pumps. Efficiency pricing of water is discussed in
more detail below in conjunction with water markets.
Institutional reform of public irrigation agencies
has received increasing attention in recent years, and
holds considerable promise for long-term progress in
improving system performance. Just as changes in
available technology alone are insufficient to generate
significant improvements in irrigation performance, it
is likewise becoming increasingly clear that management innovations, by themselves, will not suffice for
the task. Attention is shifting to the sectoral policies
and institutional forms which shape the operation of
irrigation agencies. Examination of the personal and
institutional rewards and incentives which operate
within public irrigation bureaucracies suggest that
more fundamental changes in policies and institutions
are needed to permit “the will to manage” to emerge
(Uphoff, Ramamurthy, and Steiner, 1991; Small and
Carruthers, 1991; Svendsen, Adriano, and Martin
1990). Possible reforms include shifting from a line
department to a semi-independent
or public utility
mode, applying financial viability criteria to irrigation agencies, franchising rights to operate publicly
constructed irrigation facilities, and strengthening
accountability
mechanisms such as providing for
farmer oversight of operating agencies. Many of these
reforms can be seen as introducing quasi-market
incentives into the management of public irrigation
systems. We argue below that establishment of tradable water rights, by strengthening the security and
bargaining power of water users, is highly complementary with improved management of main systems.

(c) Communal water management
The practice of involving farmers more directly in
both the processes of system management and system
improvement
has received increasing prominence
over the past two decades. “Farmer participation” has
by now become virtually its own discipline, and
spawned a large volume of conceptual papers and case
studies. It is applied both as a means of directly
improving tertiary-level water management and maintenance of system facilities. It is also used in conjunction with activities aimed at main system managers. as
a way of building a grassroots structure which can link
with the irrigation bureaucracy to facilitate improved
management
of whole systems (Rosegrant
and
Svendsen, 1993). Noted examples of this approach

MARKETS

IN TRADABLE

come from the Philippines (Korten and Siy, 1988; de
10s Reyes and Jopillo, 1986), but experience now
exists in a number of countries in Asia, Africa, and
Latin America. Uphoff (1986) reviewed 50 case studies of farmer participation in irrigation management
and found that farmers were willing and able to discharge greater responsibility in irrigation management
than is traditionally believed and their involvement to
be highly beneficial. Nevertheless, it has been difficult
to establish that communal approaches to water management have actually increased farm production and
income.
Water rights approaches should be highly complementary
with group management.
In practice,
turnover of irrigation systems has legitimized the
transfer of the responsibilities for operations and management to farmers, thereby reducing the costs of
financially
strapped
public bureaucracies,
The
turnover of costs and responsibilities, however, has
not been accompanied by improved access to water
through the establishment and granting of tradable
water rights, nor has it been accompanied by a clear
demarcation of duties between the government irrigation bureaucracy and the private water user groups. As
a result, there has been no change in the fundamental
incentives governing water use. If well-defined tradable water rights are granted, water user groups would
have the incentive to economize on water use, and
would have the legal standing to bargain forcefully
with the water conveyance bureaucracy for timely and
efficient service.

(d) Establishment of tradable property rights in
water and development of markets in water rights
For most commodities and inputs, allocation by
means of markets has been the favored solution of
economists. Coase (1960) formalized this contention,
showing that market allocation will be efficient, given
well-defined and nonattenuated initial property rights
and zero transactions costs. Well-defined and nonattenuated property rights are completely specified,
exclusive, transferable, and enforceable.
Obviously, the assumption of zero transactions
costs does not hold true in markets for water rights,
where information, conveyance,
and enforcement
costs may in fact be higher than in most input markets.
Even in a world of transactions costs, however, markets in tradable water rights may lead to considerable
efficiency gains and other benefits.
The first benefit is empowerment of water users by
requiring their consent to any reallocation of water
and compensation for any water transferred. The second is to provide security of water rights tenure to the
water users. If well-defined rights are established, the
water users could invest in water-saving technology
knowing that they would benefit from the investment.

WATER

RIGHTS

1615

Third, a system of marketable rights to water would
induce water users to consider the full opportunity
cost of water, including its value in alternative uses,
thus providing incentives to efficiently use water and
to gain additional income through the sale of saved
water. Fourth, a system of tradable water rights would
provide incentives for water users to take account of
the external costs imposed by their water use, reducing
the pressure to degrade resources. Fifth, compared to
the often-recommended
volumetric pricing of irrigation water, the rights-based approach would be more
acceptable to farmers. Imposition of volumetric pricing would be seen by farmers as expropriation of traditional water rights, which would create capital
losses in established irrigated farms. Establishment of
transferable water rights would instead formalize
existing rights to water. Finally, allocation of water
through tradable rights provides maximum flexibility
in responding to changes in crop prices and water values as demand patterns and comparative advantage
change and diversification of cropping proceeds. The
market-based system is more responsive than centralized allocation of water.
Given that markets may have significant advantages over alternative allocative mechanisms, why has
centralized allocation of irrigation water been most
commonly used? Why has relatively little attention
been given to tradable property rights and markets in
irrigation water? Is there a potential for gains in productivity and reduced resource degradation through
development of markets in transferable water rights?
Much of the basic research to understand these issues
in a developing country context has yet to be done, but
a critical review of issues and evidence can provide
some insights.

3. WATER MARKETS:
CONCEPTS AND ISSUES
First, it must be stressed that usufructuary rights
to water already exist in most developing countries,
either implicitly (through custom) or explicitly
(through bodies of law and regulations). Establishment of transferable property rights is a matter of
reforming or modifying existing water rights systems.
Water rights are generally based on one of three systems: riparian rights, public allocation, and prior
(appropriative) rights (Sampath, 1992): riparian rights
link ownership of or reasonable use of water to ownership of the adjacent or overlying lands; public allocation involves administered distribution of water; and
prior rights are based on the appropriation doctrine,
under which the water right is acquired by actual use
over time.
None of these systems of rights fulfills the conditions for well-defined
property rights to water.
Riparian rights are the most restrictive of transfers,

1616

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

because they limit use of water to adjacent or overlying lands, but even appropriative rights can be highly
restrictive, building in a bias toward maintaining
existing, possibly inefficient uses of water. Under
many appropriative rights systems, selling of water is
risky because the transfer may be evidence of nonbeneficial use and therefore be grounds for revocation of
water rights (Frederick, 1986).
The basic case against establishing markets in tradable water rights is that the transactions and equity
costs exceed the social benefits. The transactions costs
include not only the charges in physical hardware to
convey the traded water, but also the analytical, legal,
and institutional framework to assure both buyer and
seller the exact quantities transferred, and to confirm
the absence of externalities imposed on third parties
due to the trade. Jt is also argued that equity could
worsen within the irrigated sector or across sectors.
The social benefits include the net income gains generated through water trade and induced efficiency
gains, taking account of positive and negative externalities. For developing countries, Sampath (I 992),
OECD (I 987), and Young ( 1986) have further elaborated this basic criticism.
First, transactions costs are particularly high in
developing-country
irrigation, which is characterized
by large systems serving numerous small farmers. The
variable nature of water how makes it especially difticult and costly to achieve the necessary certainty in
transferable rights, which must be well defined in
terms of quantity, quality, location, and time of use.
The establishment of tradable property rights in water
therefore would require high investment costs in tcchnology and management to implement improved conveyance for on-demand delivery of water, water
metering and enforcement of contracts. Second, the
high costs of investment needed to develop water markcts are exacerbated by the relatively low value of
water due to the low value of the principal irrigated
crops in developing countries, rice and wheat. Third,
the presence of significant externalities imposed on
third parties, i.e. spillover effects on other people’s
welfare from water trades, makes it difhcult to enforce
and regulate trade in water. Fourth, tradability of
water to nonagricultural uses lead to an excessive
transfer of water out of agriculture, reducing food production and farm income. Fifth, the process of allocating water rights and of operating water markets favor
the rich over the poor and be characterized by monopoly rents, leading to worsening of the income or
wealth distribution.
We will address these criticisms and related issues
by making the following points: (i) as a consequence
of increasing scarcity of water, the benefits from reallocating it to the highest valued uses are increasing
rapidly. (ii) Three alternative processes for reahocating water exist (allocation by water management
authorities through administrative and/or negotiation

processes, opportunity cost pricing of water, and
water markets). Each of these processes has its own
transactions costs, but the similarities are more striking than the differences in institutional requirements.
(iii) The key difference between tradable water rights
and opportunity cost pricing is in who obtains the
scarcity rents of water, and this influences the political
feasibility of the two options. (iv) Tradable property
rights may reduce, rather than increase externalities.
(v) If farms are very small, property rights to water
may be allocated to associations or communities of
beneficiaries rather than to individuals, and communities may be given the right for internal water allocation
and external trading. (vi) Tradable water rights will
lead to greater involvement of users in investment
decisions than the other approaches, increasing the
efticiency of investment. (vii) Variability in water
supply does not preclude clear definition of rights or
constrain the usefulness of water markets. (viii)
Tradable water rights should not lead to large reductions in agricultural production or income due to
diversions of water from agriculture to nonagricultural
uses. (ix) Emerging water markets in developing
countries are characterized by a great deal of competition among sellers, rather than monopolistic power.

(a) Inueasing

henejts,fiom

reallocating water

As economies grow, and competition for water and
the value of water increase, the benefits from reallocating water increase significantly. Randalt (1983)
argues that, as “water economies” move from the
expansionary phase to the mature phase, conditions
for establishment of property rights emerge: the longrun supply of impounded or diverted water becomes
inelastic; the demand for delivered water increases
rapidly; competition for water among agricultural,
industrial, and urban, and instream uses increases;
externality problems, including rising water tables,
land salinization, and groundwater salinization and
depletion become increasingly important. All of these
factors increase the value of water and therefore the
benetits from efficient allocation of water.
Does the increasing value and scarcity of water
induce water trading and establishment of water markets? The evidence from the western United States
clearly indicates that this process is occurring, despite
water laws (see above) that often discourage formation of water markets. Young (1986) Fisher and
Fisher (19X4), Gardner and Miller (1983) Martin
(1986) and Saliba, Martin and Bush (1985) document
the rapid increase in water trading and market development in several western states.
More important, evidence from developing countries indicates that, to an increasing extent, the value of
water is no longer determined by its value in IOWvalued crop production, but by its value in high-

MARKETS

IN TRADABLE

valued crops and urban and industrial uses. In Jordan,
water sold to high-valued greenhouse cultivation
fetches prices to the water seller of $O.lS/cubic
meter (m3) (Shatanawi, Al-Jayousi and Orabi, 1994).
Groundwater formerly used for paddy production in
Tamil Nadu, India, is purchased from the well owner
at an average of $0.08/m3 for urban household consumption (Palanisami, 1994). In Mexico, recent water
sales from agriculture to urban uses have received
prices of $0.05-0.08/m
(Rosegrant and Gazmuri,
1994). These prices can be compared to the price of
$0.10/m) paid for agricultural water by the California
Drought Emergency Water Bank in 1991. In Chile,
permanent sales from agricultural to urban users of a
water share of one liter/second (enough to irrigate
about 0.5 ha annually) are sold at prices in the range of
$1,000 to $2,000, depending on location and demand
pressure (Gazmuri and Rosegrant, 1994).
Thus, as development proceeds and the value of
water increases, conditions are becoming more favorable to establishment of water markets. The first country with a comprehensive water law that established a
system of tradable property rights, beginning in 1976,
was Chile. In December 1992, Mexico also passed a
water law recognizing the transferability of water, and
Peru is in the process of reforming water law to permit
tradability.
In other developing countries, formal tradable
rights have not been established, but, as in the Jordan
and Tamil Nadu cases noted above, there has been
considerable expansion in informal water trading and
water markets. Market development appears to be
highest in groundwater: Shah (1991) estimates that as
much as one-half of the gross area irrigated by tubewells in India belongs to buyers of water; MeinzenDick (1992) and Chaudhry (1990) document the rapid
development of markets for groundwater in Pakistan.
Water trading within surface water systems is also
expanding. A recent survey in Pakistan found active
water markets (trading or purchasing of water) in 70%
of watercourses studied (Pakistan Water and Power
Development
Authority, 1990). In addition, there
appears to be synergy in market development when
conjunctive use of ground and surface water is possible. The availability of supplemental water supply
from groundwater reduces the uncertainty of trade in
surface water, encouraging development of markets in
surface water (Renfro and Sparling, 1986).

(b) Transactions costs and institutional
requirements of alternative mechanisms of
reallocating water
Even if water values are rising rapidly with
increasing scarcity, high transactions costs could
greatly limit the gains from trading. The evidence
above shows that markets are developing even where

WATER

RIGHTS

1617

not sanctioned by law, so transaction costs are not prohibitive. Are transactions nevertheless
higher for
water markets than for other allocation mechanisms?
Water can potentially
be reallocated
via three
processes. Under administrative allocation, a public or
quasi-public water authority (e.g. a river basin commission, or a national or regional water authority)
would identify water demands or alternative uses and
simply reallocate existing water allocations or rights
to higher valued uses. Since the losers will undoubtedly protest, the authority will have to negotiate with
the users and find some way of compensating the
losers. Opportunity-cost pricing of water and tradable
water rights, on the other hand, use the price response
of users to reallocate water. With rising prices all users
have an incentive to increase their water use efficiency, and low-valued uses will give up water to
higher valued uses in a decentralized decision-making
process involving the individual users.
Transaction costs arise whatever the process by
which water is reallocated. Transaction costs include:
the cost of identifying profitable opportunities for
transferring water; the costs of negotiating or administratively deciding on the water transfer; the cost of
monitoring possible third-party effects and other
externalities; the infrastructure cost of actually conveying the water and monitoring the transfers; and the
infrastructure and institutional cost of monitoring,
mitigating, or eliminating possible third-party effects
and externalities.
No empirical research exists comparing these cost
elements under alternative systems. It is possible,
however, to discuss the initial incidence of these costs,
i.e. who will bear the costs, as is done in Table 1.
Under administrative allocations, all processes are
carried out by the authority or the utilities which operate within thejurisdiction of an authority. Other actors
become involved in some of the components. For
example, the users would share in the cost of negotiation and conflict resolution, and the courts would
likely play a role in conflict resolution.
With tradable rights users would bear the costs of
identifying opportunities and negotiating the transfers. The costs of conveyance of water and of mitigating third-party effects would fall on the buyers. The
authority would bear the cost of monitoring thirdparty effects and would be involved in conflict resolution, perhaps along with the courts.
Under opportunity cost pricing, transfers are not
negotiated. Therefore it is not clear how third-party
effects would be handled. Suppose a farmer decides to
stop buying water whose price increases. Who would
compensate the downstream user for reduced return
flows is not clear. On the other hand, conveyance costs
would in the first instance be borne by the authority or
the utilities, who would recover the costs through the
water charges.

1618

WORLD

DEVELOPMENT

Allocation

Costs of
Identifying
opportunities
Negotiating
transfer.\

Administrative

Opportunity
cost pricing

Tradable
rights

Authority

Users

Users

N0ne

None

Authority.

Monitoring thirdparty effects

Authority

Conveyance

Authority

Mitigation of
third-party
effects

Authority

Resolving
conflict

Process

users

Authority, courts.
“Set-5

Based on (I priori reasoning some remarks about
the costs can be made. With tradable rights, since buyers will bear the costs of conveyance and mitigation,
they would attempt to find those trades which minimize the total of purchase price, conveyance, and
mitigation costs. Administrative
allocation, on the
other hand, may be subject to political pressures, and
authorities may not have the same incentive to minimize the total cost of the transfer as a buyer would. On
the other hand an authority may face lower conveyance costs than a buyer if conveyance requires
large-scale construction and the authority has the right
of eminent domain to acquire the right of way for the
structures.
It should also be stressed that, when comparing the
transactions costs of water markets with alternative
allocation mechanisms,
the “hidden” transactions
costs of the latter must also be taken into account.
Wade (1982) shows the very high costs of private rentseeking by the managers of publicly administered irrgation systems in India. Allocation of water through
markets in well-detined property rights in water will
economize on rent-seeking costs.
We have seen that establishment of a system of
tradable rights requires an organizational and physical
structure to convey and deliver irrigation water; and a
regulatory structure to enforce contracts, protect thirdparty interests, and resolve conflicts. Arc highly
sophisticated irrigation and conveyance technology
required to make water markets work? In Chile, markets in tradable water rights have been operating
effectively
with relatively
unsophisticated
conveyance technology. Water is usually measured only
in the main channels. and thereafter, simple proportional division devices are used, which divide the
water into the assigned shares in proportion to canal
flow. The question of technology is more a matter of

‘)
Authority

‘F
Authority. courts.
users

Authority
Buyer

Buyer
Authoriiy.
courts,
users

degree than an either/or situation: better technology
will improve the efficiency of water markets, and
increase the benefits of markets by reducing the transactions costs of trading, but significant gains from
trade can be realized without highly sophisticated
technology. Moreover, there is synergy between markets and technological improvement in conveyance:
technological
innovations
in water delivery and
metering will reduce transactions cost and encourage
market-oriented
reform in allocative mechanisms,
while markets in turn can induce technological change
by increasing the returns to investments (Young.
1986).
Public institutions must also protect the poor
against the development of market power, protect
against third-party impairment from water trades, and
resolve conflicts arising from water trades. In Chile.
any transfer of rights of use requires prior authorization, with trades monitored at two Icvels, the local
water-user
association,
and the National Water
Authority. Issues of third-party impairment and conflicts over water trades can be resolved at either level.
If agreement is not reached at these levels, conflicts
arc moved to the court systcrn (Gazmuri and
Rosegrant, 1994). Similarly. in Mexico, water trades
must first be approved by the water-user association
and/or irrigation district, with appeals to the Comision
National del Agua (CNA-National
Water Commission), and linal recourse to the courts (Roscgrant and
Gazmuri, 1994).
Are institutional failures in developing countries a
prohibitive barrier to enforcement of tradable propcrty
rights in water? As illustrated in the Table I, any water
allocation regime requires an institutional support system to handle transactions costs. and it is not clear that
resolution of equity issues and conflicts is more difficult to achieve under a tradable property rights regime.

MARKETS

IN TRADABLE

Existing water allocation regimes in developing
countries have in many cases been ineffective at protecting the rights of poor farmers or protecting against
third-party impairment (Bymes, 1992; Maass and
Anderson, 1978). In fact, establishment
of welldefined tradable property rights may ease the institutional burden of conflict resolution by reducing uncertainty in rights. Gazmuri (1992) reports that the
establishment
of the system of transferable water
rights in Chile has greatly reduced the number of
water conflicts reaching courts, with a large share of
conflicts being resolved at the level of the water-user
associations.
A continuing debate remains over the transactions
costs and third-party effects of the definition of water
rights as either consumptive use or full diversion
rights. In most western US states, water rights are
based on consumptive use, with protection of thirdparty rights to return fows (Johnson, Gisser, and
Werner, 1981). This system protects prior rights to
return flows, but significantly increases the transactions costs of water trading, because of the difficulty
in measuring consumptive use and return flows. In
practice, farmers often must demonstrate fallowing of
land to release consumptive water use for sale. In
the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District
(NCWCD), however, rights are proportional to streamflow and rights to return flow are retained by the
district. Return flows are made available to water users
at no charge, but no rights are established to these
flows. Changes in patterns of return flows due to trades
are therefore not actionable. By defining away thirdparty rights to return flows, the NCWCD has greatly
reduced transactions costs to trades, resulting in a very
active water market (Howe, Schurmeier and Shaw,
1986; Cummings and Nercissiantz, 1992).
Chile and Mexico have in effect followed the
NCWCD model by defining rights as full diversion
rights which are proportional to stream or canal flow.
Rights to return flow do not exist. In Chile, return
flows to neighboring areas may be used by the recipients without the need to establish a right of use. Use of
this water, however, is contingent upon the flow of the
main waterways and usage rates of the rights holder.
There is no obligation to supply return flows and such
flows are thus not permanent (Gazmuri and Rosegrant,
1994). In Mexico, the initial concession of water
rights is based on the normal previous consumption of
water by the individual or group. It is clear in the law,
however, that this “consumption” is not the “consumptive use” rights with obligation to maintain a specific amount of return flow which are common in the
western United States, but rather is the full diversion
right (Rosegrant and Gazmuri, 1994). If initial water
rights can be allocated equitably (see discussion
below), proportional rights with no rights to return
flow should facilitate efficient allocation without compromising equity.

WATER

RIGHTS

1619

(c) Markets in water rights vs. water pricing
The establishment
of administered
efficiencybased pricing of water is often advocated as an intermediate policy between managed quantity allocation
and water markets. Efficient allocation of resources
usually requires that marginal units of water are priced
at their marginal cost. Although complications arise
due to economies of scale and lumpiness of investment in irrigation, it is theoretically possible to design
and implement a system of administered
prices
which would lead to efficient allocation of water
(Chakravorty and Roumasset, 1991). The information
requirements for an efficient system of administered
prices are demanding, however, and much of this
information would necessarily be gathered by trialand-error
experimentation
(Phelps,
Moore and
Graubard, 1978). Information is expensive and mistakes made in the trial-and-error process may be
costly. If prices are set too low, demand for water
would be excessive, and if prices are set too high,
water would be wasted to drainage.
Perhaps even more important, in existing irrigation
systems, the value of prevailing usufructuary water
rights (formal or informal) has already been capitalized into the value of irrigated land. Imposition of
administered pricing is correctly perceived by rights
holders as expropriation of those rights, which would
create capital losses in established irrigation farms.
Attempts to establish administered efficiency prices
are thus met with strong opposition from established
irrigators, which makes it difficult to institute and
maintain an efficiency-oriented
system of administered prices (Randall, 1983).
Markets in tradable water rights thus have two
major advantages compared to administered efticiency pricing. First, as noted above, information
costs would be reduced, because the market, composed of water users with expert knowledge of the
value of water as an input in the production process,
would bear the costs and generate the necessary
information on the value of marginal product and
opportunity costs of water. Second, establishment of
transferable property rights would formalize existing
rights to water, rather than being seen as an expropriation of these rights, and is therefore politically
more feasible.

(d) Property rights and externalities
As noted above, a key argument against the property rights approach is the existence of externalities in
the use of water, which may undermine the theoretical
argument that markets are efficient. But appropriately
defined property rights will in many instances cause
farmers to internalize and thereby eliminate extemalities. For example, one of the primary externalities

1620

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

arising from the use of surface water is the overuse of
unpriced or underpriced irrigation water by farmers
near the head of the system, which leads to waterlogging and salinization, and to deprivation of downstream farmers. This externality will be mitigated by
establishment
of tradable property rights in water,
which will induce the “overuse?
to consider the
opportunity cost of water to other water users when
determining his own use of water. The upstream
farmer can increase his income by economizing
on his use of water and trading the excess (lowproductivity) water to downstream farmers, who will
be willing to pay a price higher than the marginal
value of additional water application at the head of
the system.
Another classic externality in irrigation occurs
with exploitation of groundwater. Individual pump
irrigators have no incentive to optimize long-run
extraction rates, because the value of water left in the
ground can be captured by other irrigators or potential
future irrigators. The resulting tendency for overdraft
or mining of groundwater at a rate higher than
recharge can cause several externalities. including
increased pumping lifts and costs for other irrigators
due to the lowered water table, land subsidence.
degradation of water quality, and exclusion of other
potential irrigators from access to water.
Well-defined tradable property rights in stocks and
flows of groundwater.
however, would promote
efficiency. because users would have an inccntivc lo
compare the opportunity costs of both different types
of water use and current vs. future uses of water. A
holder of a title to a stock of water could still face
increasing extraction costs imposed by the usage rates
of other pumpers, but these effects could bc rcduccd
a contractual
arrangement
that
with unitization,
evolved in oil recovery to mitigate common-pool
problems. With unitization. all pumpers contract to
use agreed-upon methods of extraction and delivery
and to share the costs. Each pumper’s share of the lift
costs would be based on his usage rate, so unitization
might entail higher delivery costs, but it would also
provide incentives for increased water conservation
and thus lower lift costs (Anderson and Leal, 1991).
Broader protection of the environment can also be
incorporated in a system of markets in tradable water
rights. In Mexico, the new water law establishes
explicit protection of the environment for the first
time. The quality of discharge for nonagricultural uses
must be specified in the granting of the water right,
and the CNA can invoke restrictions over water use in
the event of severe water shortages, damage to ecosystems, overexploitation of aquifers, and other environmental impacts. In Chile, general environmental
protection beyond direct third-party effects is lacking
in the water law, but the recently passed Environmental Protection Law should significantly improve
the situation. In neither case, however, has the institu-

tional commitment
tion been tested.

to broader environmental

protec-

(e) Individual L’S,cwnmunal propert~~ rights

It has been argued that establishment of tradable
property rights in water is somehow antithetical to traditional community values, and inimical to communal
management of water (Young, 1986; Mummc and
Ingram, 198.5). Tradable property rights can, however.
be assigned to communal groups or water-user associations as well as to individuals. Assignment of tradable property rights to communal groups should in
fact enhance the control of these groups over water
resources. insuring better access to water than is often
the case with existing water user groups. Assignment
of tradable property rights in water to communal
groups may be more cost effective than assigning
rights to individuals in instances where internalizing
bargaining within the group reduces the infonnation.
contractual. and enforcement costs relative to pairwise bargaining by individuals. To prevent domination of groups by powerful individuals would require
the establishment
of transparent decision-making
mechanisms within the community. It is essential in
either case that the assignment of property rights is
congruent with the structure of decision making with
respect to allocation of water.
In both Chile and Mexico, strong water-user associations play a major role in allocation of water. In
Chile, user associations manage the physical infrastructure. monitor the allocation of water, approve
water transfers, and provide the initial (and usually
final) forum for conflict resolution (Gazmuri and
Rosegrant, 1994). In Mexico, the turnover of irrigation districts to newly organized water-user associations is fundamental to the establishment of water
rights. Under law, water rights can be provided to individuals or groups, but there appears to be a strong preference for concessions to be made to groups, with the
groups then granting subsidiary water rights to their
mcmbcrs through internal processes to be authorized
by the CNA (Rosegrant and Gazmuri. 1994).

Economies of scale in tinancing of large-scale
irrigation systems imply that the organization of
financing and construction of such systems will likely
remain the responsibility of governments in developing countries. The principles for efficient and equitable financing and recovery of the capital cost of
irrigation systems extend beyond the issue of tradable
property rights to include identification of direct and
indirect beneficiaries and the efficiency of taxation

MARKETS

IN TRADABLE

and resource mobilization (Small and Carruthers,
1991; Sampath, 1992, 1983).
Small and Carruthers (1991) point out, however,
the importance of involving potential water users in
the new irrigation system investment decision and
financing process, in order to promote financial discipline and realistic economic appraisals. Establishment
of tradable property rights to water is conducive to
farmer input into the investment process: creation of
water rights prior to construction of an irrigation system, and requirement of consultation and approval for
construction plans, together with participation in the
capital cost by prospective rights holders, establishes
strong incentives for cost-effective investments in irrigation. The water law in Chile mandates this type of
participation by prospective water rights holders.
Publicly funded irrigation construction requires active
participation by potential users, commitment of at
least one-third of prospective users for project development, and commitment by one-half of prospective
users to acquire the infrastructure prior to the start of
construction (Gazmuri and Rosegrant, 1994).
For the case of existing irrigation systems, Randall
(198 1) suggests that fixed costs should be written off,
with no attempt to capture fixed costs through
increases in charges to irrigators upon establishment
of tradable water rights. Attempts to capture sunk
costs through increased water conveyance charges
would likely lead to the same type of political opposition which has met the attempts to implement full cost
recovery or efficiency pricing. If a properly administered system of tradable property rights is established,
however, that ensures that farmers will receive the full
opportunity cost of their water, then the variable costs
of operations and maintenance, including full conveyance cost, should be paid by the irrigators. To preserve the marginal rules for efficiency, the final user of
the water should pay the full conveyance charges to
his farm, so that when a trade of water is made, the
purchaser of the water will be responsible to the water
authority for conveyance charges to his farm.

WATER

RIGHTS

1621

technically specified in volumetric terms, rather than
in proportion to streamflow; but the irrigation districts
and water-user associations are charged with developing procedures to allocate surplus and deficit water
within their boundaries. Indications are that surpluses
and deficits will simply be allocated proportionally
across all existing rights, so that, for example if
streamflow is 20% below normal, each rights holder
will receive 20% less water. This procedure effectively converts the volumetric right to a proportion of
streamflow right. In Chile, water rights are also
expressed in terms of water volume per unit of time,
but are proportional if water is insufficient to satisfy
all rights.
The commonly practiced prior rights systems in
developing countries are wholly dependent on variable streamflow, offer no mechanisms for sharing risk
through trades, and typically impose greater risk on
farmers farther from the source of water, since nearby
farmers often increase their share of water flow during
periods of low streamflow. Assigning tradable property rights in terms of proportions of flows should
therefore be at least as secure as existing formal and
informal prior rights systems in surface irrigation in
developing countries.
To preserve the flexibility of the government to
protect societal interests, both the Mexican and
Chilean laws also permit suspension of tradability and
imposition of centralized water allocation in the event
of severe droughts. Under the Mexican law, the CNA
may regulate the extraction and utilization of water,
and establish restricted areas or reserves by reasons of
public interest: to prevent overexploitation of aquifers,
to protect or restore an ecosystem, to preserve sources
of potable water or protect them against pollution, to
preserve and control water quality and in case of
unusual water shortages or drought. Under these provisions, the CNA has full control over extraction, discharge, and transfer of water in affected areas, so the
government retains strong authority to manage water
for the public interest under situations of severe
drought (Rosegrant and Gazmuri, 1994).

(g) Variability in water supply and the design of
water rights
While distributions of water over time are a continuous function, for conceptual purposes two main types
of variability in water can be identified: normal
seasonal and year-to-year fluctuations, and drastic
occurrences such as extended droughts. The water
laws in Mexico and Chile show how the definition of
tradable water rights can deal with both of these problems. To handle normal variability, rights are at least
de,fucto defined as proportional to streamflow or canal
flow in both countries. This system is more flexible in
allocating water, and particularly deficits, than a
straight volumetric right. In Mexico, water rights are

(h) Competition between agricultural and
nonagricultural demandfor water
A further critique of tradable property rights in
water is that this allocation system will lead to an
excessive transfer of water out of agriculture and into
industrial, power, and municipal uses. Bumess and
Quirk (1979) point out that this critique is implicitly
embedded in water laws of the western United States,
as limitations on transfers of a water right from irrigation to industrial or power use tend to be much stricter
than limitations on transfers within the agricultural
sector.

1622

WORLD

DEVELOPMENT

It is not clear in what sense transfers out of agriculture are expected to be excessive:
there appears to be
an almost Jeffersonian
argument
that water used in
agriculture
is morally
superior
to water used clsewhere, combined
with a concern that wealth and social
power differences
between large private firms or public utilities in the nonagricultural
sector and widely
dispersed
small farmers will allow the former to take
advantage
of the latter. Evidence
from Chile, where
active markets exist, however,
shows that this has not
happened.
Offers to purchase
water and prices for
water are advertised
in newspapers,
and water-user
associations
and farmers’
societies
maintain
up-todate information
on water prices in recent transactions
(Gazmuri and Roscgrant,
1994).
The actual impact on the overall availability
and
productivity
of water in agriculture
if trades to nonagriculture
are permitted
is not well known,
particularly
in developing
countries.
In most countries.
however, agricultural
use accounts for 80% or more of
consumptive
use, so relatively
modest
transfers
of
water from agricultural
could meet growing urban and
industrial
demands.
Moreover,
there is considerable
evidence
of price responsiveness
in both municipal
and industrial
demand for water. Higher water prices
induce conservation
and recycling of water in industry
and conservation
in domestic
demand (El-Ashry
and
Gibbons,
1986). In developing
countries,
wastage
from industrial
and municipal
uses of cheap water is
very high (Keller,
1992), indicating
the potential
for
considerable
reductions
in losses if users must pay the
full opportunity
cost of tradable
water. With signiticant savings possible in both nonagricultural
uses, and
in agriculture
through the use of more eflicient irrigation methods, and through shifts to higher valued, less
water-intensive
crops as the true scarcity
value of
water is internalized,
there may be no net reduction
in
effective availability
of irrigation water and no decline
in the value of irrigated production
or farmer income
as a result of establishment
of tradable water rights.
Vaux and Howitt (I 984) simulate a liberalization
of interregional
water trading in California,
and find a
sharp increase
in the value of agricultural
water, a
reduction
in total water use. and large increases in net
welfare in both agriculture
and nonagriculture
due to
gains from trade of water from the agricultural
sector
to municipal
and industrial
sectors. Dinar and Letey
( I99 I ), using a micro-level
production
model applied
to conditions
in the San Joaquin Valley of California,
show that establishment
of a water market
would
induce the farmer to invest in improved
irrigation
technology
and would increase
farm income
while
transferring
a portion of agricultural
water to urban
uses. In Chile, it appears that the establishment
of tradable property
rights in water has facilitated
the shift
from water-intensive
crops such as corn and oilsecds,
to higher valued, less water-intensive
crops such as
fruits and vegetables
(Gazmuri
and Rosegrant.
lYY4).

In addition to intersectoral
equity, there has been
considerable
conccm
over the cmergcnce
of market
power within the agricultural
sector, both in the initial
assignment
of rights, and in the subsequent
trading
of rights. In Mexico and Chile, the initial assignments
of water rights have been largely based on historical
water use. The assignment
of rights is formalized
through recording
in public registries
in each country.
In Mexico, the fundamental
basis for initial allocation
of water rights is the existing informal or formal water
right already held. Previous
water use can be cstablishcd by certification
from an Irrigation
District or
cjido administrator,
or by testimony
of neighbors
as to
the individual’s
land and water rights under previous
law. Although
granting
of concessions
is at an early
stage, discussions
with farmers and officials
do not
indicate
much concern
that the initial
allocation
process
is inequitable.
Titling of land rights in the
same areas as water rights is well underway.
The prior
completion
of land titling, together with the close linkage of initial water concessions
to land, has facilitated
allocation
of water rights (Roscgrant
and Gazmuri,
1994). In Chile, the establishment
of tradable
water
rights beginning
in 1976 was linked to the reprivai/.ation of land that had been collecrivized
in 1966.
Land and the proportional
right to water was rctumcd.
40% to former owners and 60% to former workers on
the lands: the assignment
of water rights was seen as
an improvement
in equity (Gazmuri
and Rosegrant.
1994).
There has been considerable
criticism
that the
dcvclopmcnt
of private groundwater
irrigation
will
subject small farmers to monopolistic
prices for the
use of water because
lumpiness
and relatively
high
COSI of tubewell investment
will preclude
investment
by small farmers. Chaudhry
(1990) shows, however,
that in Pakistan,
this has not happened.
Instead. the
development
of a hire market in tubcwell services has
stimulated
the emergence
of a new entrepreneurial
class in the rural areas. Inequalities
in rural income in
areas of high tubewcll penetration
arc dwindling
and
benefits emanating
from new technology
arc widely
shared with small and medium fanners.
Similarly,
Shah ( I99 I ) details the development
of highly competitive
water markets
in India. Competition among sellers contains
arbitrary
or collusive
behavior and ensures access to groundwater
by landpoor farmers who cannot afford to invest in their own
wells. Groundwater
prices are responsive
to changes
in energy costs and to the availability
of canal water.
On equity as well as efficiency
grounds,
these highly
devclopcd
groundwater
markets
have attractive
and
socially desirable propertics.
As would be expected,
the evidence
indicates that
grearcr numbers of pumps and availability
of alterna-

MARKETS

IN TRADABLE

tive water sources lead to increased competition and
lower water prices. The clear implication is that policies that encourage development of markets in tradable water rights would improve access of the poor to
water, not discourage it.

4. CONCLUSIONS
Technological solutions, reform of public management of irrigation systems, and communal water management by users associations are major initiatives to
increase the productivity, allocation efficiency, and
sustainability of water use in developing counrries.
Establishment of tradable water rights may be another
important policy reform to achieve these goals. Far
from being competitive with initiatives in these other
components, successful introduction of markets in
tradable water rights would be highly complementary
to improvement in technology and reform of public or
communal management.
While the relatively low value of water and high
transaction costs have slowed development of markets
in tradable rights to water in developing countries in
the past, the growing scarcity of water as economic
growth proceeds will be conducive to market development. Existing property rights systems are restrictive
of water transfers, because they limit the use of water
to adjacent or overlying lands, or build in a bias
toward maintaining existing, possibly inefficient uses
of water. As water becomes scarcer, markets in tradable water rights could have several major advantages
over alternative allocation mechanisms: establishment
of well-defined tradable rights formalizes and secures
the existing water rights held by farmers; markets may
economize on transactions costs, reducing the information costs of a centralized managing institution,
with the market generating the necessary information

WATER RIGHTS

1623

and market users bearing the information costs; markets in tradable rights induce water users to consider
the full opportunity cost of water, including its value
in alternative uses, thereby increasing efficiency; tradable water rights provide incentives for irrigators to
internalize many of the externalities inherent in irrigation; and increase the flexibility of resource allocation.
A number of serious issues arise in the process of
establishing markets in tradable water rights. Laws,
institutions, and contracts must be reformed or developed to deal with variability of water delivery, to protect the poor against the development
of market
power, and to protect against third-party impairment
from water trades. Development of markets cannot
proceed in an isolated fashion from the real-world
institutional and technological context of developingcountry irrigation. Effective development of markets
in tradable property rights will be enhanced by
improvement in irrigation technology for conveyance,
diversion, and metering; institutional improvement in
management of the irrigation systems; and in many
cases, development of community organizations to
manage water allocation.
The questions about the potentials and constraints
of markets in tradable property rights to water in
developing countries are fundamentally empirical in
nature. It is time to move beyond debate over principles to active empirical research in developing
countries into the costs and benefits of including welldefined tradable property rights to water. The benefits
of water market development will not be uniform
across regions. The costs and benefits from alternative
institutions, and policies to remove constraints on
water transfers are likely to vary across underlying
conditions and regions, in terms of agroclimatic
zones, relative water supply, level of agricultural
intensification, and degree of intersectoral competition for water.

REFERENCES
Aluwihare, P. B., and M. Kikuchi, “Irrigation investment
trends in Sri Lanka: New construction and beyond,”
(Columbo,
Sri
Lanka:
International
Jrrigation
Management Institute, 1990).
Anderson,
T. L., and D. R. Leal, Free Market
Environmentalism. Pacific Research Institute for Public
Policy (San Francisco: Westview Press, 1991).
Bumess, H. S., and J. P. Quirk, “Appropriate water rights and
efficient allocation of resources,” American Economic
Review. Vol. 69, No. I (1979). pp. 25-37.
Bymes, K. H., “Water users associations in World BankAssisted Irrigation Projects in Pakistan,” World Bank
Technical Paper, No. 173 (Washington, DC: The World
Bank, 1992).
Chakravorty, V., and J. Roumasset, “Efficient spatial allocation of irrigation,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, Vol. 73, No. I (1991), pp. 165-173.
Chaudhry, M. J., “The adoption of tubewell technology in

Pakistan,” The Pakistan Development

Review, Vol. 29
(199O),pp. 291-304.
Coase, R., “The problem of social cost,” Journal /fl,fLaw and
Economics. Vol. 3, No. 1 (1960), pp. I-44.
Cummings, R. G., and V. Nercissiantz, “The use of water
pricing as a means for enhancing water use efficiency in
irrigation: case studies in Mexico and the United States,”
Natural Resources Journal, Vol. 32, No. 4 (1992). pp.
731-75s.
de 10s Reyes, R., and S. Jopillo, “An evaluation of the
Philippine participatory
communal irrigation program”
(Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de
Manila University, 1986).
Dinar, A., and J. Letey, “Agricultural
water marketing,
allocative efficiency, and drainage reduction,” Jourrral of
Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 20
(1991), pp. 210-223.

WORLD DEVELOPMENT

Ih2-l

El-Ashry, M. T., and D. C. Gibbons, “Troubled waters: New
politics for managing water in the American West.” Study
6 (Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, 1986).
Fisher, W. H.. and W. R. Fisher. “Title and valuation of water
rights,” Roc$r Mountain Mineral Law’ In.~~tute. Vol. I6
(1984). pp. I -36.
Frederick, K. D., “Overview” in K. D. Frederick, (Ed.) with
D. C. Gibbons, Sccrrce Water. and Institrrtioncrl Change
(Washington. DC: Resources for the Future Inc., 19X6).
pp. l-24.
Gardner. R. L.. and T. A. Miller, “Price behavior in the water
market of Northwestern
Colorado,”
Wutw Rr.mrtr-cc,
Bullrtin, Vol. 19 (1983). pp. 557-566.
Gazmuri. R.. “Chilean water policy experience,” Paper presented at the World Bank’s Ninth Annual lrrigation and
Drainage Seminar (College Park, MD: The World Bank,
December, 1992).
Ga/.muri, R. S., and M. W. Rosegrant, “Markets in tradable
water
rights:
the
Chilean
Experience,”
Mimeo
(Washington,
DC: International Food Policy Research
Institute, 1994).
Howe. C. W., D. R. Schurmeier. and W. D. Shaw, Jr.,
“innovative approaches to water allocation: The potential
for water markets,” Water Resources Reseurch. Vol. 22,
No. 4 (1986) pp. 439445.
Johnson, R. N., M. Gisser and M. Werner, “The definition of
a surface water right and transferability,” Journal of LUM
crud Ewnonks,
Vol. 24 (198 I), pp. 273-288.
Keller, J., “Implications of improving agricultural water use
efficiency on Egypt’s water and salinity balances.” Paper
presented at the Roundtable on Egyptian Water Policy
(Cairo: Winrock International, April 1 l-13, 1992).
Korten. F. F.. and R. Y. Siy, Jr. (Eds.), Trutufiwmirrg
a
Buwaut racy: The Eqx4encc
of the Philippine Nutionrr/
Irrigution
Adminktration
(West Hartford, CT: Kumarian

Press, 198X).
Martin, W. E., “Evolving water institutions in an urbat+ing
west: Discussion,”
Rmuriwrl
.Jourtw/ 14 Agricu[turul
Economic~.s. Vol. 68, No. S (19X6), pp. I 1.52-l 154.
Maass, A., and R. Anderson,
cmd the Desert .%I// Rejoin:
Cm//k/.

C;robvth.

und

.lu.\tic~e rn Arid

En,vrormwnt.v

(Cambridge, MA:MIT Prcas. 1978).
Meimcn-Dick. R., “Water markets in Pakistan: Participation
and productivity,” Draft research report under USALD to
Pakistan Grant No. 3Yl-0492-G-00- I7Y l-00 for the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Mimeo (Washington
DC: Government
of Pakistan and International
Food
Policy Re\carch Institute. 1992).
Mitchell, D. O., and M. D. Ingco. “Global and regional food
demand and supply prospects,” paper prepared for the
Roundtable on Population and Food in the Early 21st
Century: Meeting Future Food Needs for Increasing
World Population (Washington, DC: International Food
Policy Research Institute. February 1994).
Mumme, S. P.. and H. M. Ingram, “Community values in
Southwestern water management, ” Policy St&es ReSew.
Vol. 5 (IYXS), pp. 36s.-3X1.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
“Pricing of water services” (Paris: OECD. 19X7).
Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority, “Trading
of canal and tubewell water for irrigation purposes.” P&l
Puh. No. 358 (Islamabad: PWPDA, 1990).
Palanisami, K. P., “Water market: Evolution of tradable
water rights in irrigation \ectors, Tamil Nadu. India.”

Mimeo (Coimbatore, India: Water Technology Centre,
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University. 1994).
Phelps, C. N. Moore, and M. Graubard, “Efficient water use
in California: Water rights, water districts and water transfers” (Santa Monica, CA: The Rand Corporation, 197X).
Randall, A.. “The problem of market failure,” NatmA
Rcww~~es Journcc~, Vol. 23 (1983). pp. I3 I-148.
Randall, A., “Property entitlements and pricing policies for a
maturmg
water economy,”
Australian
Journul
of
Apxulturul
Ewnomics. Vol. 25 t IYXI ). pp. lYS-212.
Renfro, R. Z. H. and E. W. Sparling. “Private tubewell and
canal water trade on Pakistan Punjab watercourses,” in K.
W. Easter (Ed.), Irrigation
Invr.wnent,
Technology, and
Munu,yunent
St)-ategie.s for Dcvel~~ppment (Boulder, CO:
Westvtew Press, lYX6), pp. 193-210.
Rosegrant, M. W., “Production and income effects of rotational irrigation and rehabilitation of irrigated systems in
the Philippines,” in R. K. Sampath, and R. A. Young
(Eds.), Socictl. Ewnomic, and fnstitutionul issues in Third
Wwld irrigation
Manugement (Boulder, CO: Westview
Press. 1990), pp. 41 I-436.
Rosegrant, M. W., and M. Svendsen, “Asian food production
in the 1990s: Irrigation investment and management policy,” Feud Policy. Vol. IX, No. 2 (1993). pp. 13-32.
Rosegrant, M. W.. and M. C. Agcaoili, “Global and regional
food demand, supply and trade prospects to 2010,” paper
presented at the Roundtable on Population and Food in the
Early 2lst Century: Meeting Future Food Needs for
Increasing World Population (Washington,
DC: International Food Policy Research Institute, 1994).
Rosegrant? M. W., and R. Gazmuri S.. “Establishing tradable
water rights: Implementation of the Mexican water law,”
Mimeo (Washington,
DC: lntemational
Food Policy
Research Institute, 1994).
Saliba, 9. C.. W. E. Martin and D. 9. Bush, “Southwest water
markets as indicators of value,” Final report to the U.S.
Forest Service. Contract No. 2X-G4-336. Department of
Agriculttnaal Economics (Tucson: University of Arizona.
19X.5).
Sampath.
R. K.. “Issues in irrigation pricing in developing
countries.” W&d Dewlopment,
Vol. 20, No. 7 (I 992).
pp. 961--977.
Sampath. K. K., “Returns to public irrigation development: A
Journul
of Agric~ultwul
theoretical
note,” Amcrrum
Ecwmmic~. Vol. 65, No. 2 (10X3), pp. 332-336.
Shah. T., “Managing conjunctive water use in canal commands: Analysis for Mahi Right Bank Canal, Gujarat.” in
Ruth MeinLcn-Dick and Mark Svendsen (Ed%), Future
Diret~tions fiw Indiun
Irrigcrtion
(Washington,
DC:
lntemationol
Food Policy Research Institute, 1991).
pp. 2X7 -306.
Shatanawi, M.. 0. Al-Jayousi. and G. A. Orabi, “Water rights
in Jordan,” Mimeo, (Amman. Jordan: University of
Jordan, Water and hvironmentdi
Research and Study
Center. 1904).
Small. L., and I. Cdrruthers, Farmer-Fvmrwd
Iwigcrtion.
The Ewnomk
of’ Rcfbrm (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 199 I).
Svcndsen, M., M. Adriano. and E. Martin. “Financing irrigation services: A Philippine case study of policy and
response.” Mimeo (Washington, DC: International Food
Policy Research Institute. 1990).

MARKETS

IN TRADABLE

(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1986).
Uphoff, N. with P. Ramamurthy, and R. Steiner, Managing
Irrigation: Analyzing and Improving the Pegormance of
Bureaucracies (New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1991).
Vaux, H. J., Jr. and R. E. Howitt, “Managing water scarcity:
An evaluation
of interregional
transfers,”
Water
Resources Research, Vol. 20 (1984), pp. 785592.

WATER RIGHTS

1625

Wade, R., “The system of administrative and political corruptions: Canal irrigation in South India,” The Journal of
Development Studies, Vol. 18, No. 3 (1982), pp. 287-325.
Young, R. A., “Why are there so few transactions among
water
users?” American
Journal
of Agricultural
Economics, Vo. 68, No. 5 (1986), pp. 1143-l 15 1.

