Agricultural Economics, 7 (1992) 185-208
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam

185

Frontier production functions and technical
efficiency: a survey of empirical applications
in agricultural economics
George E. Battese
Department of Econometrics, University of New England, Armidale,
New South Wales, Australia
(Accepted 13 February 1992)

ABSTRACT
Battese, G.E., 1992. Frontier production functions and technical efficiency: a survey of
empirical applications in agricultural economics. Agric. Econ., 7: 185-208.
The modelling and estimation of frontier production functions has been an important
area of econometric research during the last two decades. Forsund, Lovell and Schmidt
(1980) and Schmidt (1986) present reviews of the concepts and models involved and cite
some of the empirical applications which had appeared to their respective times of
publication.
This paper seeks to update the econometric modelling of frontier production functions
associated with the estimation of technical efficiency of individual firms. A survey of
empirical applications in agricultural economics is an important part of the paper.

1. INTRODUCTION

In microeconomic theory a production function is defined in terms of the
maximum output that can be produced from a specified set of inputs, given
the existing technology available to the firms involved. However, up until
the late 1960's, most empirical studies used traditional least-squares methCorrespondence to: G.E. Battese, Dep. Econometrics, University of New England, Armidale,
N.S.W. 2351, Australia.
This paper is a revision of that presented at the 35th Annual Conference of the
Australian Agricultural Economics Society, University of New England, Armidale, 11-14
February, 1991. I have appreciated comments from Tim Coelli and Phil Dawson.
0169-5150j92j$05.00 © 1992 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

186

G.E. BATTESE

Xr/Y
X

Unit

x~ Observed input-output ratios

!~
X
X

A
TE of Firm at A

=OB/OA

Xz/Y

Fig. 1. Technical efficiency of firms in relative input space.

ods to estimate production functions. Hence the estimated functions could
be more appropriately described as response (or average) functions.
Econometric modelling of production functions, as traditionally defined,
was stimulated by the seminal paper of Farrell (1957). Given that the
production function to be estimated had constant returns to scale, Farrell
(1957) assumed that observed input-per-unit-of-output values for firms
would be above the so-called unit isoquant. Figure 1 depicts the situation in
which firms use two inputs of production, X 1 and X 2 , to produce their
output, Y, such that the points, defined by the input-per-unit-of-output
ratios, (X 1 jY, X 2 jY), are above the curve, II'. The unit isoquant defines
the input-per-unit-of-output ratios associated with the most efficient use of
the inputs to produce the output involved. The deviation of observed
input-per-unit-of-output ratios from the unit isoquant was considered to be
associated with technical inefficiency of the firms involved. Farrell (1957)
defined the ratio, OB jOA, to be the technical efficiency of the firm with
input-per-unit-of-output values at point A.
Farrell (1957) suggested that the efficient unit isoquant be estimated by
programming methods such that the convex function involved was never
above any of the observed input-per-unit-of-output ratios.
A more general presentation of Farrell's concept of the production
function (or frontier) is depicted in Fig. 2 involving the original input and
output values. The horizontal axis represents the (vector of) inputs, X,
associated with producing the output, Y. The observed input-output values
are below the production frontier, given that firms do not attain the
maximum output possible for the inputs involved, given the technology

187

FRONTIER PRODUCflON FUNCflONS

Production frontier
X

Output
y
X

x

X XX

'

--+---~-·Observed input-output values
A= (x,y)
TE of Firm at A
= y/y*

o~------------~~------------X

Inputs, X

Fig. 2. Technical efficiency of firms in input-output space.

available. A measure of the technical efficiency of the firm which produces
output, y, with inputs, x, denoted by point A, is given by y /Y *, where y *
is the 'frontier output' associated with the level of inputs, x (see point B).
This is a measure of technical efficiency which is conditional on the levels
of the inputs involved.
The existence of technical inefficiency of firms engaged in production
has been a subject of considerable debate in economics. For example,
Muller (1974) states (p. 731): "However, little is known about the role of
non-physical inputs, especially information or knowledge, which influence
the firm's ability to use its available technology set fully .... This suggests
how relative and artificial the concept of the frontier itself is. . . . Once all
inputs are taken into account, measured productivity differences should
disappear except for random disturbances. In this case the frontier and the
average function are identical. They only diverge if significant inputs have
been left out in the estimation". Upton (1979) also raised important
problems associated with empirical production function analysis. However,
despite these criticisms, we believe that the econometric modelling of
frontier production functions, which is surveyed below, provides useful
insights into best-practice technology and measures by which the productive efficiency of different firms may be compared.
2. ECONOMETRIC MODELS

Production frontier models are reviewed in three sub-sections involving
deterministic frontiers, stochastic frontiers and panel data models. For

188

G.E. BATTESE

convenience of exposition, these models are presented such that the
dependent variable is the original output of the production process, denoted by Y, which is assumed to be expressed in terms of the product of a
known function of a vector, x, of the inputs of production and a function of
unobservable random variables and stochastic errors.

2.1

Deterministic frontiers

The deterministic frontier model is defined by:
i=1,2, ... ,N
Y; = f(x;; f3) exp( -u;)
(1)
where Y; represents the possible production level for the ith sample firm;

f(x;; {3) is a suitable function (e.g., Cobb-Douglas or TRANSLOG) of the
vector, X;, of inputs for the ith firm and a vector, {3, of unknown parameters; u; is a non-negative random variable associated with firm-specific
factors which contribute to the ith firm not attaining maximum efficiency
of production; and N represents the number of firms involved in a
cross-sectional survey of the industry.
The presence of the non-negative random variable, u;, in model (1), is
associated with the technical inefficiency of the firm and implies that the
random variable, exp(- u;), has values between zero and one. Thus it
follows that the possible production, Y;, is bounded above by the non-stochastic (i.e., deterministic) quantity, f(x;; {3). Hence the model (1) is
referred to as a deterministic frontier production function. The inequality
relationships:
i = 1, 2, ... , N

(2)

were first specified by Aigner and Chu (1968) in the context of a CobbDouglas model. It was suggested that the parameters of the model be
estimated by applying linear or quadratic programming algorithms. Aigner
and Chu (1968) suggested (p. 838) that chance-constrained programming
could be applied to the inequality restrictions (2) so that some output
observations could be permitted to lie above the estimated frontier. Timmer (1971) took up this suggestion to obtain the so-called probabilistic
frontier production functions, for which a small proportion of the observations is permitted to exceed the frontier. Although this feature was considered desirable because of the likely incidence of outlier observations, it
obviously lacks any statistical or economic rationale.
The frontier model (1) was first presented by Afriat (1972, p. 576).
Richmond (1974) further considered the model under the assumption that
u; had gamma distribution with parameters, r = n and A = 1 [see Mood,
Graybill and Boes (1974, p. 112)]. Schmidt (1976) stated that the

FRONTIER PRODUCriON FUNCI'IONS

189

maximum-likelihood estimates for the J3-parameters of the model could be
obtained by linear and quadratic programming techniques if the random
variables had exponential or half-normal distributions, respectively. 1
The technical efficiency of a given firm is defined to be the factor by
which the level of production for the firm is less than its frontier output.
Given the deterministic frontier model (1), the frontier output for the ith
firm is Y; * = f(x ;; J3) and so the technical efficiency for the ith firm,
denoted byTE;, is:
TE; = Y;/Y;*
=

f(x;; J3) exp( -U;)/f(x;; J3)

= exp(- U;)

(3)

Technical efficiencies for individual firms in the context of the deterministic frontier production function (1) are predicted by obtaining the ratio of
the observed production values to the corresponding estimated frontier
values, TE; = Yjf(x;; #), where ti is either the maximum-likelihood estimator or the corrected ordinary least-squares (COLS) estimator for J3. 2
If the U;-random variables of the deterministic frontier (1) have exponential or half-normal distribution, inference about the J3-parameters cannot
be obtained from the maximum-likelihood estimators because the wellknown regularity conditions (see Theil, 1971, p. 392) are not satisfied.
Greene (1980) presented sufficient conditions for the distribution of the
U;'s for which the maximum-likelihood estimators have the usual asymptotic properties, upon which large-sample inference for the J3-parameters
can be obtained. Greene (1980) proved that if the U;'s were independent
Given that the {3-parameters of model (1) are expressible as a linear function when
logarithms are taken, it follows that the maximum-likelihood estimates for the {3-parameters
when ll; has exponential or half-normal distributions are defined by minimizing the
absolute sum or the sum of squares of the deviations of the logarithms of production from
the corresponding frontier values, subject to the linear constraints obtained by applying
logarithms to (2). However, the non-negativity restrictions on the parameter estimates, which
are normally associated with linear and quadratic programming problems, are not required.
Although non-negative estimates for the partial elasticities in Cobb-Douglas models are
generally reasonable, it does not follow that non-negativity restrictions should be applied for
such functional forms as the TRANSLOG model.
2 Given that the model (1) has the form of a linear model (with an intercept) when
logarithms are taken, then the COLS estimator for f3 is defined by the OLS estimators for
the coefficients of {3, except the intercept, and the OLS estimator for the intercept plus the
largest residual required to make all deviations of the production observations from the
estimated frontier non-positive. Greene (1980) showed that the COLS estimator is consistent, given that the ll;-random variables are independent and identically distributed.
1

190

G.E. BATTESE

and identically distributed as gamma random variables, with parameters
r > 2 and A > 0, then the required regularity conditions are satisfied.
2.2

Stochastic frontiers

The stochastic frontier production function is defined by:
Y; = f ( x;; {3) exp (
U;)
i = 1, 2, ... , N
( 4)
where
is a random error having zero mean, which is associated with
random factors (e.g., measurement errors in production, weather, industrial
action, etc.) not under the control of the firm.
This stochastic frontier model was independently proposed by Aigner,
Lovell and Schmidt (1977) and Meeusen and Van den Broeck (1977). The
model is such that the possible production, Y;, is bounded above by the
stochastic quantity, f(x;; {3) exp(V); hence the term stochastic frontier.
The random errors,
i = 1, 2, ... , N, were assumed to be independently
and identically distributed as N(O, cr3) random variables, independent of
the U;'s, which were assumed to be non-negative truncations of the N(O, cr 2 )
distribution (i.e., half-normal distribution) or have exponential distribution.
Meeusen and Van den Broeck (1977) considered only the case in which the
U;'s had exponential distribution (i.e., gamma distribution with parameters
r = 1 and A > 0) and noted that the model was not as restrictive as the
one-parameter gamma distribution (i.e., gamma distribution with parameters r = n and A= 1) considered by Richmond (1974).
The basic structure of the stochastic frontier model (4) is depicted in Fig.
3 in which the productive activities of two firms, represented by i and j, are
considered. Firm i uses inputs with values given by (the vector) X; and
obtains the output, Y;, but the frontier output, Y; *, exceeds the value on
the deterministic production function, f(x;; {3), because its productive
activity is associated with 'favourable' conditions for which the random
error, V;, is positive. However, firm j uses inputs with values given by (the
vector) xj and obtains the output, Yj, which has corresponding frontier
output, Yj *, which is less than the value on the deterministic production
function, f(xj; {3), because its productive activity is associated with 'unfavourable' conditions for which the random error, Vj, is negative. In both
cases the observed production values are less than the corresponding
frontier values, but the (unobservable) frontier production values would lie
around the deterministic production function associated with the firms
involved. 3

v;

v; -

v;,

=

3 It is possible that both the observed and frontier production values, Y; and Y; *
f(x;; {3) exp(Vj), lie above the corresponding value of the deterministic production function,
f(x;; {3), if Vi>~· This case is not depicted in Fig. 3.

191

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

Deterministic production
function, y =f(x ; ~)

I

f(xi ;~)

Output

y

I

X
I
I

Observed
output
Yj

oL-----------~~----~~-------X;

Xj

Inputs, X

Fig. 3. Stochastic frontier production function.

Given the assumptions of the stochastic frontier model (4), inference
about the parameters of the model can be based on the maximum-likelihood estimators because the standard regularity conditions hold. Aigner,
Lovell and Schmidt (1977) suggested that the maximum-likelihood estimates of the parameters of the model be obtained in terms of the
parameterization, o-~ + o- 2 = a-J and A= a- fo-v. Rather than use the nonnegative parameter, A (i.e., the ratio of the standard deviation of the
N(O, o- 2 ) distribution involved in specifying the distribution of the nonnegative U;'s to the standard deviation of the symmetric errors, V), Battese
and Carra (1977) considered the parameter, y = o- 2 j(o-l + o- 2 ), which is
bounded between zero and one.
Technical efficiency of an individual firm is defined in terms of the ratio
of the observed output to the corresponding frontier output, conditional on
the levels of inputs used by that firm. 4 Thus the technical efficiency of firm
i in the context of the stochastic frontier production function (4) is the

4 Battese and Coelli (1988) suggest (p. 389) that the technical efficiency of firm i, associated
with a panel data model with time-invariant firm effects, be defined as the ratio of its mean
production, conditional on its levels of inputs and its realized firm effect, U;, to the
corresponding mean production if the firm effect, U;, had value zero (and so the firm was
fully efficient). This definition yields the same measure of technical efficiency as that given
in the text.

192

G.E. BA1TESE

same expression as for the deterministic frontier model (1), namely
exp(- U), i.e.
TE;

TE;

=

= Y;JY;*
= f(x;; f3) exp(~- ~)lf(x;; /3) exp(~)
=exp(-~)

Although the technical efficiency of a firm associated with the deterministic and stochastic frontier models are the same, it is important to note
that they have different values for the two models. Considering Fig. 3, it is
evident that the technical efficiency of firm j is greater under the stochastic frontier model than for the deterministic frontier, i.e., Oj/}j*) >
[}j/f(xj; {3)]. That is, firm j is judged technically more efficient relative to
the unfavourable conditions associated with its productive activity (i.e.,
~ < 0) than if its production is judged relative to the maximum associated
with the value of the deterministic function, f(xj; {3). Further, firm i is
judged technically less efficient relative to its favourable conditions than if
its production is judged relative to the maximum associated with the value
of the deterministic function, f(x;; {3). However, for a given set of data, the
estimated technical efficiencies obtained by fitting a deterministic frontier
will be less than those obtained by fitting a stochastic frontier, because the
deterministic frontier will be estimated so that no output values will exceed
it.
Stevenson (1980) suggested that an alternative model for the ~'s in the
stochastic frontier (4) was the non-negative truncation of the N(f.L, a- 2 )
distribution. This generalization includes the cases in which there may be
low probability of obtaining ~'s close to zero (i.e., when there is considerable technical inefficiency present in the firms involved).
Aigner and Schmidt (1980) contains several other important papers
dealing with the deterministic and stochastic frontier models.
The prediction of the technical efficiencies of individual firms associated
with the stochastic frontier production function (4), defined by TE; =
exp(- U), i = 1, 2 ... , N, was considered impossible until the appearance
of Jondrow, Lovell, Materov and Schmidt (1982). This paper focussed
attention on the conditional distribution of the non-negative random variable, ~' given that the random variable, E; = ~- ~, was observable.
Jondrow et al. (1982) suggested that ~ be predicted by the conditional
expectation of ~' given the value of the random variable, E; ~ ~- This
expectation was derived for the cases that the ~'s had half-normal and
exponential distributions. Jondrow et al. (1982) used 1 - E(~ I~- ~) to
predict the technical inefficiency of the ith firm. However, given the
multiplicative production frontier model (4), Battese and Coelli (1988)

= -

193

FRONTIER PRODUcriON FUNcriONS

=

pointed out that the technical efficiency of the ith firm, TEi exp(- U), is
best predicted by using the conditional expectation ofexp(- U), given the
value of the random variable, Ei V; - ~- This latter result was calculated
for the more general stochastic frontier model involving panel data and the
Stevenson (1980) model for the ~'s.

=

2.3

Panel data models

The deterministic and stochastic frontier production functions (1) and
(4) are defined for cross-sectional data (i.e., data on a cross-section of N
firms at some particular time period). If time-series observations are
available for the sample firms involved, then the data are referred to as
panel data. Pitt and Lee (1981) considered the estimation of a stochastic
frontier production function associated with N firms over T time periods.
The model is defined by:
~,=[(xu;

f3) exp(V;,-

~1 )

i= 1, 2, ... ,N
t = 1, 2, ... , T

(5)

where ~~ represents the possible production for the ith firm at the tth
time period.
Pitt and Lee (1981) considered three basic models, defined in terms of
the assumptions made about the non-negative ~/s. Model I assumed that
the ~/s were time-invariant effects, i.e., ~~ = ~' t = 1, 2, ... , T. Model II
specified that the ~/s were uncorrelated. Model III permitted the ~/s to
be correlated for given firms. 5
The time-invariant model for the non-negative firm effects was considered by Battese and Coelli (1988) for the case in which the firm effects
were non-negative truncations of the N(f.J-, 17 2 ) distribution. Battese, Coelli
and Colby (1989) considered the case in which the numbers of time-series
observations on the different firms were not all equal. Coelli (1989) wrote
the computer program, FRONTIER, for obtaining the maximum-likelihood estimates and the predictions for the technical efficiencies of the
firms involved.
More recently stochastic frontier models for panel data have been
presented in which time-varying firm effects have been specified. Cornwell,
Schmidt and Sickles (1990) considered a panel data model in which the
firm effects at different time periods were a quadratic function of time, in
Pitt and Lee (1981, p. 46) incorrectly defined Model II as specifying E(U;, Lf;,,)=O i=j
and t=t'. Model III is defined by Cov(U;,,Cf;,,)=u11 , and Cov(U;,Lf;,,)=O if ii=j=
1,2, ... ,N.

5

194

G.E. BATTESE

which the coefficients varied over firms according to the specifications of a
multivariate distribution. The parameters of the model were estimated
using instrumental-variable methods.
Kumbhakar (1990) presented a model in which the non-negative firm
effects, ~~, were the product of an exponential function of time (involving
two parameters) and a time-invariant (non-negative) random variable. This
latter model permits the time-varying firm effects to be monotone decreasing (or increasing) or convex (or concave) functions over time [i.e., the
technical efficiency of firms in the industry involved could monotonically
increase (or decrease) or increase and then decrease (or vice versa)].
Battese and Coelli (1992) suggested a time-varying firm effects model for
incomplete panel data, such that the technical efficiencies of firms either
monotonically increased or decreased or remained constant over time. This
time-varying model assumes that the firm effects are an exponential function of time which involves only one additional parameter to the time-invariant model of Battese and Coelli (1988).
3. EMPIRICAL APPLICATIONS

Frontier production function models have been applied in a considerable
number of empirical studies in agricultural economics. Publications have
appeared in the all major agricultural economics journals and a considerable number of other economic journals. The Journal of Agricultural Economics has published the most papers (at least seven, cited below) dealing
with frontier production functions. Other journals which have published at
least two applied production frontier papers are the Canadian Journal of
Agricultural Economics (4), the American Journal of Agricultural Economics
(2) and the Southern Journal of Agricultural Economics (2). At least one
frontier production function paper involving farm-level data has appeared
in the Australian Journal of Agricultural Economics, the European Review
of Agricultural Economics, the North Central Journal of Agricultural Economics and the Western Journal of Agricultural Economics. Several papers
have appeared in development economics journals as well as econometric
and other applied economics journals.
The empirical studies are surveyed under the three headings involved in
the above section, depending on the type of frontier production function
estimated.

3.1

Deterministic frontiers

Russell and Young (1983) estimated a deterministic Cobb-Douglas
frontier using corrected ordinary least-squares regression with a cross-sec-

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

195

tion of 56 farms in the North-West region of England during 1977-78. The
dependent variable was total revenue obtained from the crop, livestock and
miscellaneous activities on the farms involved. Technical efficiencies for
the individual farms were obtained using both the Timmer and Kopp
measures. 6 These two measures of technical efficiency gave approximately
the same values and the same rankings for the 56 farms involved. The
Timmer technical efficiencies ranged from 0.42 to 1.00, with average 0.73
and sample standard deviation 0.11. Russell and Young (1983) did not
make any strong conclusions as to the policy implications of these results.
Kontos and Young (1983) conducted similar frontier analyses to those of
Russell and Young (1983) for a data set for 83 Greek farms for the
1980-81 harvest year. Kontos and Young (1983) applied a Box-Cox transformation to the variables of the model and obtained similar elasticities to
those obtained by estimating the Cobb-Douglas production function by
ordinary least-squares regression. Since the likelihood ratio test indicated
that the Box-Cox model was not significantly different from the traditional
Cobb-Douglas model, the deterministic frontier model was estimated by
corrected ordinary least-squares regression. The estimated frontier model
was used to obtain the values of the Kopp measure of technical efficiency
for the individual farms involved. These technical efficiencies ranged from
about 0.30 to 1.00, with an average of 0.57, indicating that considerable
technical inefficiencies existed in the Greek farms surveyed.
Dawson (1985) analysed 4 years of data for the 56 farms involved in the
paper by Russell and Young (1983). Three estimators for the technical
efficiency of the individual farms were presented which involved a two-step,
ordinary least-squares procedure, an analysis-of-covariance method and the
linear programming procedure suggested by Aigner and Chu (1968). The
technical efficiency measures obtained by the three methods exhibited wide
variation and the estimated correlation coefficients were quite small. Dawson (1985) claimed that there was indication that the technical efficiencies
were directly related to the size of the farm operation.
Taylor, Drummond and Gomes (1986) considered a deterministic
Cobb-Douglas frontier production function for Brazilian farmers to investigate the effectiveness of a World Bank sponsored agricultural credit
programme in the State of Minas Gerais. The parameters of the frontier
The Timmer measure of technical efficiency is the measure discussed above in Section 3.
The Kopp measure of technical efficiency, introduced by Kopp (1981), involves the ratio of
the frontier input levels which would be required to produce the observed level of output
(the input ratios being constant) if the farm was fully technically efficient, to the actual
input levels used. These two measures are not equivalent unless the production frontier has
constant returns to scale.
6

196

G.E. BATIESE

model were estimated by corrected ordinary least-squares regression and
the maximum-likelihood method under the assumption that the non-negative farm effects had gamma distribution. The authors did not report
estimates for different frontier functions for participant and non-participant farmers in the agricultural credit programme and test if the
frontiers were homogeneous. It appears that the technical efficiencies of
participant and non-participant farmers were estimated from the common
production frontier reported in the paper. The average technical efficiencies for participant and non-participant farmers were reported to be 0.18
and 0.17, respectively. 7 The authors concluded that these values were not
significantly different and that the agricultural credit programme did not
appear to have any significant effect on the technical efficiencies of
participant farmers.
Bravo-Ureta (1986) estimated the technical efficiencies of dairy farms in
the New England region of the United States using a deterministic CobbDouglas frontier production function. The parameters of the production
frontier were estimated by linear programming methods involving the
probabilistic frontier approach. Using the 96% probabilistic frontier estimates, Bravo-Ureta (1986) obtained technical efficiencies which ranged
from 0.58 to 1.00, with an average of 0.82. He concluded that technical
efficiency of individual farms was statistically independent of size of the
dairy farm operation, as measured by the number of cows.
Aly, Belbase, Grabowski and Kraft (1987) investigated the technical
efficiency of a sample of Illinois grain farms by using a deterministic
frontier production function of ray-homothetic type. The authors presented
a concise summary of the different approaches to frontier production
functions, including stochastic frontiers. The deterministic ray-homothetic
frontier, which was estimated by corrected ordinary least-squares regression, had the output and input variables expressed in revenue terms rather
than in physical units. Hence the technical efficiencies also reflected
allocative efficiencies. The mean technical efficiency for the 88 grain farms
involved was 0.58 which indicated that considerable inefficiency existed in
Illinois grain farms. The authors found that larger farms tended to be more
technically efficient than smaller ones, irrespective of whether acreage
cultivated or gross revenue was used to classify the farms by size of
operation.

If Taylor, Drummond and Gomes (1986) had estimated separate production frontiers for
participant and non-participant farmers, then the mean technical efficiencies of the farmers
in the different groups could be estimated by [A /(A+ 1)]', where A and r are the
parameters of the gamma distribution involved.
7

FRONTIER PRODUCfiON FUNCfiONS

197

Ali and Chaudhry (1990) estimated deterministic frontier production
functions in their analyses of a cross-section of farms in four regions of
Pakistan's Punjab. The parameters of the Cobb-Douglas frontier functions
for the four regions were estimated by linear programming methods.
Although the frontier functions were not homogeneous among the different regions, the technical efficiencies in the four regions ranged from 0.80
to 0.87 but did not appear to be significantly different.

3.2

Stochastic frontiers

Aigner, Lovell and Schmidt (1977) applied the stochastic frontier production function in the analysis of aggregative data on the U.S. primary
metals industry (involving 28 states) and US agricultural data for 6 years
and the 48 coterminous states. For these applications, the stochastic
frontier was not significantly different from the average response function.
Similar results were obtained by Meeusen and Van den Broeck (1977) in
their analyses for ten French manufacturing industries. 8
The first application of the stochastic frontier model to farm-level
agricultural data was presented by Battese and Corra (1977). Data from the
1973-74 Australian Grazing Industry Survey were used to estimate deterministic and stochastic Cobb-Douglas production frontiers for the three
states included in the Pastoral Zone of Eastern Australia. The variance of
the farm effects was found to be a highly significant proportion of the total
variability of the logarithm of the value of sheep production in all states.
The y-parameter estimates exceeded 0.95 in all cases. Hence the stochastic
frontier production functions were significantly different from their corresponding deterministic frontiers. Technical efficiency of farms in the regions was not addressed in Battese and Corra (1977).
Kalirajan (1981) estimated a stochastic frontier Cobb-Douglas production function using data from 70 rice farmers for the rabi season in a
district in India. The variance of farm effects was found to be a highly
significant component in describing the variability of rice yields (the estimate for the y-parameter was 0.81). Kalirajan (1981) proceeded to investigate the relationship between the difference between the estimated 'maximum yield function' and the observed rice yields and such variables as
farmer's experience, educational level, number of visits by extension workSince that time there have been a large number of empirical applications of the stochastic
frontier model in production and cost functions involving industrial and manufacturing
industries in which the model was significantly different from the average response function
and the corresponding deterministic frontier. These are not included in this survey.

8

198

G.E. BATIESE

°

ers, etc. 9 In this second-stage analysis, 1 Kalirajan (1981) noted the policy
implications of these findings for improving crop yields of farmers.
Kalirajan (1982) estimated a similar stochastic frontier production function to that in Kalirajan (1981) in the analysis of data from 91 rice farmers
for the kharif season in the same district of India as in his earlier paper.
The farm effects in the model were again found to be very highly significant (with y = 0.93).
Bagi (1982a) used the stochastic frontier Cobb-Douglas production
function model to determine whether there were any significant differences
in the technical efficiencies of small and large crop and mixed-enterprise
farms in West Tennessee.' The variability of farm effects were found to be
highly significant and the mean technical efficiency of mixed-enterprise
farms was smaller than that for crop farms (about 0.76 versus 0.85,
respectively). However, there did not appear to be significant differences in
mean technical efficiency for small and large farms, irrespective of whether
the farms were classified according to acreage or value of farm sales. 11
Bagi (1984) considered the same data set as in Bagi (1982a) to investigate
whether there were any significant differences in the mean technical
efficiencies of part-time and full-time farmers. No significant differences
were apparent, irrespective of whether the part-time and full-time farmers
were engaged in mixed farming or crop-only farms.
Bagi and Huang (1983) estimated a translogarithmic stochastic frontier
production function using the same data on the Tennessee farms considered in Bagi (1982a). The Cobb-Douglas stochastic frontier model was
found not to be an adequate representation of the data, given the specifications of the translog model for both crop and mixed farms. The parameters

9 It is possible for observed yield to exceed the corresponding value of the 'maximum yield
function' because the latter is obtained by using the estimated f3-parameters of the
stochastic frontier production function. Negative differences are explicitly reported in
Kalirajan (1982) in Table 2 (p. 233). Under the assumptions of the stochastic frontier
production function (4) the observed yields cannot exceed the corresponding stochastic
frontier yields, but the latter are not observable values.
10 Kalirajan (1981, p. 289) states that the parameters of the second-stage model involving
differences between estimated maximum yields and observed yields were estimated by the
maximum-likelihood method associated with the stochastic frontier model. However, the
assumptions of the stochastic model (4) would not hold when the estimated yield function
from the first-stage analysis is involved.
11 Bagi erroneously (p. 142) claimed that the estimate for the y-parameter in the stochastic
frontier model [see the reference to Battese and Corra (1977) in Section 2(ii) above] of 0.72
implies that 72% of the discrepancy between the observed and maximum (frontier) output
results from technical inefficiency.

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

199

of the model were estimated by corrected ordinary least-squares regression.
The mean technical efficiencies of crop and mixed farms were estimated to
be 0.73 and 0.67, respectively. Individual technical efficiencies of the farms
were predicted using the predictor exp(- ~), where ~ is the estimated
conditional mean of the ith farm effect (suggested by Jondrow, Lovell,
Materov and Schmidt, 1982). These technical efficiencies varied from 0.35
to 0.92 for mixed farms and 0.52 to 0.91 for crop farms.
Bagi (1982b) included empirical results on the estimation of a translog
stochastic frontier production function using data from 34 share cropping
farms in India. The parameters of the model were estimated using corrected ordinary least-squares regression. The Cobb-Douglas functional
form was judged not to be an adequate representation of the data given the
assumptions of the translog model. For these Indian farm data, the
variance of the non-negative farm effects was only a small proportion of the
total variance of farm outputs ( .Y = 0.15). The individual farm technical
efficiencies were predicted to be between 0.92 and 0.95. These high
technical efficiencies are consistent with the relatively low variance of farm
effects which implies that the stochastic frontier and the average production function are expected to be quite similar.
Kalirajan and Flinn (1983) outlined the methodology by which the
individual firm effects can be predicted (as discussed above with reference
to Jondrow et al., 1982) and applied the approach in their analysis of data
on 79 rice farmers in the Philippines. A translog stochastic frontier production function was assumed to explain the variation in rice output in terms
of several input variables. The parameters of the model were estimated by
the method of maximum likelihood. The Cobb-Douglas model was found
to be an inadequate representation for the farm-level data. The individual
technical efficiencies ranged from 0.38 to 0.91. The predicted technical
efficiencies were regressed on several farm-level variables and farmerspecific characteristics. It was concluded that the practice of transplanting
rice seedlings, incidence of fertilization, years of farming and number of
extension contacts had significant influence on the variation of the estimated farm technical efficiencies.
Huang and Bagi (1984) assumed a modified translogarithmic stochastic
frontier production function to estimate the technical efficiencies of individual farms in India. It was found that the Cobb-Douglas stochastic
frontier was not an adequate representation for describing the value of
farm products, given the specifications of the translog model. The variance
of the random effects was a significant component of the variability of
value of farm outputs. Individual technical efficiencies ranged from about
0.75 to 0.95, but there appeared to be no significant differences in the
technical efficiencies of small and large farms.

200

G.E. BA1TESE

Taylor and Shonkwiler (1986) estimated both deterministic and stochastic production frontiers of Cobb-Douglas type for participants and nonparticipants of the World Bank sponsored credit programme (PRODEMATA) for farmers in Brazil. The parameters of the frontiers involved
were estimated by maximum-likelihood methods, given the assumptions
that the farm effects had gamma distribution in the deterministic frontier
and half-normal for the stochastic frontier. The authors did not report that
statistical tests had been conducted on the homogeneity of the frontiers for
participants and non-participant farmers. Farm-level technical efficiencies
were estimated for all the frontiers, as suggested by Jondrow et al. (1982).
Given the stochastic frontiers, the average technical efficiencies for participants and non-participants were 0.714 and 0.704, respectively, and were not
significantly different. However, given the assumptions of the deterministic
frontiers, the average technical efficiencies were 0.185 and 0.059, respectively, and were significantly different. Taylor and Shonkwiler (1986) concluded that their results indicated somewhat confusing results as to the
impact of the PRODEMATA ·programme on participant farmers in
Brazil. 12
Huang, Tang and Bagi (1986) adopted a stochastic profit function
approach to investigate the economic efficiency of small and large farms in
two states in India. The variability of farm effects was highly significant and
individual farm economic efficiencies tended to be greater for large farms
than small farms (the average economic efficiencies being 0.84 and 0.80 for
large and small farms, respectively). The authors also considered the
determination of optimal demand for hired labour under conditions of
uncertainty.
Kalirajan and Shand (1986) investigated the technical efficiency of rice
farmers within and without the Kemubu Irrigation Project in Malaysia
during 1980. Given the specifications of a translog stochastic frontier
production function for the output of the rice farmers, the Cobb-Douglas
model was not an adequate representation of the data. Maximum-likelihood methods were used for estimation of the parameters of the models
and the frontiers for the two groups of farmers were significantly different.
Kalirajan and Shand (1986) reported that the individual technical efficiencies ranged from about 0.40 to 0.90, such that the efficiencies for those
12 However, given the relatively large estimated standard errors for the variances of the
random errors in the stochastic frontiers, it may be the case that the stochastic model is not
significantly different from the deterministic model. Hence this would suggest that the
results obtained from the deterministic frontiers are more encouraging as to the positive
impact of the credit programme on participant farmers, even though the absolute levels of
technical efficiencies were quite small.

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

201

outside the Kemubu Irrigation Project were slightly narrower. They concluded that their results indicated that the introduction of new technology
for farmers does not necessarily result in significantly increased technical
efficiencies over those for traditional farmers.
Ekanayake and Jayasuriya (1987) estimated both deterministic and
stochastic frontier production functions of Cobb-Douglas type for two
groups of rice farmers in an irrigated area in Sri Lanka. The parameters of
the two frontiers were estimated by maximum-likelihood and corrected
ordinary least-squares methods. In only the 'tail reach' irrigated area, the
stochastic frontier appeared to be significantly different from the deterministic model. Individual farm technical efficiencies were estimated for both
regions. The estimates obtained for the farms in the 'head reach' area (for
which the stochastic frontier appeared not to be significantly different from
the deterministic frontier) were vastly different for the two different
stochastic frontiers. These results are not intuitively reasonable.
Ekayanake (1987) 13 further discusses the data considered by Ekanayake
and Jayasuriya (1987) and used regression analysis to determine the
farmer-specific variables which had significant effects in describing the
variability in the individual farm technical efficiencies in the 'tail reach' of
the irrigation area involved. Allocative efficiency was also considered in the
empirical analysis.
Kalirajan (1989) predicted technical efficiencies of individual farmers
(which he called "human capital") involved in rice production in two
regions in the Philippines in 1984-85. A Cobb-Douglas stochastic frontier
model was assumed to be appropriate in the empirical analysis. The
predicted technical efficiencies were regressed on several farm- and
farmer-specific variables to discover what variables had significant effects
on the variation in the technical efficiencies.
Ali and Flinn (1989) estimated a stochastic profit frontier of modified
translog type 14 for Basmati rice farmers in Pakistan's Punjab. After
estimating the technical efficiency of individual farmers, the losses in profit
due to technical inefficiency were obtained and regressed on various
farmer- and farm-specific variables. Factors which were significant in
describing the variability in profit losses were level of education, off-farm
employment, unavailability of credit and various constraints associated with
irrigation and fertilizer application.
13 The author was incorrectly listed as S.A.B. Ekayanake by the Journal of Development
Studies. The correct spelling of the author's name is "Ekanayake".
I 4 Ali and Flinn (1989) deleted variables in the translog stochastic profit frontier which had
coefficiencies which were not individually significantly different from zero. This is not a
recommended applied econometric methodology.

202

G.E. BATTESE

Dawson and Lingard (1989) used a Cobb-Douglas stochastic frontier
production function to estimate technical efficiencies of Philippine rice
farmers using four years of data. The four stochastic frontiers estimated
were significantly different from the corresponding deterministic frontiers,
but the authors did not adopt any panel-data approach or test if the
frontiers had homogeneous elasticities. The individual technical efficiencies
ranged between 0.10 and 0.99, with the means between 0.60 and 0.70 for
the 4 years involved.
Bailey, Biswas, Kumbhakar and Schulthies (1989) estimated a stochastic
model involving technical, allocative and scale inefficiencies for cross-sectional data on 68 Ecuadorian dairy farms. The technical inefficiencies of
individual farms were about 12%, with little variation being displayed by
individual farms. However, the authors found that the losses in profits due
to technical inefficiencies ranged from 20% to 25%.
Kumbhakar, Biswas and Bailey (1989) used a system approach to estimate technical, allocative and scale inefficiencies for Utah dairy farmers.
The stochastic frontier production function which was specified included
both endogenous and exogenous variables. The endogenous variables included were labour (including family and hired labour) and capital (the
opportunity cost of capital expenses on the farm), whereas the exogenous
variables included level of formal education, off-farm income and measures
of farm size for the farmers involved. Both types of explanatory variables
were found to have significant effects on the variation of farm production.
Technical efficiency of farms was found to be positively related to farm
size.
Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1990) estimated both deterministic and
stochastic frontier production functions for a large sample of dairy farms in
the northeastern states of the U.S.A for the years 1982 and 1983. The
Cobb-Douglas functional form was assumed to be appropriate. The parameters of the deterministic frontiers were estimated by linear programming, corrected ordinary least-squares regression and maximum-likelihood
methods (assuming that the non-negative farm effects had gamma distribution). The stochastic frontier model was estimated by maximum-likelihood
techniques (given that the farm effects had half-normal distribution). The
stochastic frontier model had significant farm effects for 1982 but it was
apparently not significantly different from the deterministic frontier in
1983. The estimated technical efficiencies of farms obtained from the three
different methods used for the deterministic model showed considerable
variability but were generally less than those obtained by use of the
stochastic frontier model. However, Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1990) found
that the technical efficiencies obtained by the different methods were
highly correlated and gave similar ordinal rankings of the farms.

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

3.3

203

Panel data models

Battese and Coelli (1988) applied their panel-data model in the analysis
of data for dairy farms in New South Wales and Victoria for the three
years - 1978-79, 1979-80 and 1980-81. Given the specifications of the
stochastic frontier Cobb-Douglas production function involved, the hypothesis that the non-negative farm effects had half-normal distribution
was rejected for both states. Individual farm technical efficiencies ranged
from 0.55 to 0.93 for New South Wales farms, whereas the range was 0.30
to 0.93 for Victorian farms.
Battese, Coelli and Colby (1989) estimated a stochastic frontier production function for farms in an Indian village for which data were available
for up to ten years. Although the stochastic frontier was significantly
different from the corresponding deterministic frontier, the hypothesis that
the non-negative farm effects had half-normal distribution was not rejected. Technical efficiencies ranged from 0.66 to 0.91, with the mean
efficiency estimated by 0.84.
Kalirajan and Shand (1989) estimated the time-invariant panel-data
model using data for Indian rice farmers over five consecutive harvest
periods. The farm effects were found to be a highly significant component
of the variability of rice output, given the specifications of a translog
stochastic frontier production function. Individual technical efficiencies
were estimated to range from 0.64 to 0.91, with average 0.70. A regression
of the estimated technical efficiencies on farm-specific variables indicated
that farming experience, level of education, access to credit and extension
contacts had significant influences on the variation of the farm efficiencies.
Battese and Coelli (1992) applied their panel-data model incorporating
time-varying firm effects in the analysis of data for paddy farmers in an
Indian village who were observed for up to ten years. Given the specifications of a stochastic frontier production function with time-invariant parameters, the hypothesis of time-invariant technical efficiencies of the
paddy farmers was rejected. However, given that a linear time trend was
included in the stochastic frontier model (Hicksian neutral technical
change), then the hypothesis of time-invariant technical efficiencies was
accepted. In addition, the stochastic frontier production function with the
time trend included was not significantly different from the average response function (i.e., technical inefficiences could be considered absent
from the model. 15 The empirical results were obtained using the computer
15 However, in other empirical applications of the time-varying model which have been
conducted, the inclusion of a time-trend variable in the stochastic frontier production
function has not necessarily resulted in time-invariant technical inefficienies or the conclusion that technical inefficiency does not exist (see Battese and Tessema, 1992).

204

G.E. BATTESE

program, FRONTIER, which has been updated to estimate the time-varying model presented by Battese and Coelli (1991). 16
4. CONCLUSIONS

Frontier production functions have been applied in the analysis of
farm-level data in a large number of developed and developing countries.
The survey of empirical applications in agricultural economics given in this
paper is obviously incomplete. Only publications in the major agricultural
economics journals and a few other economic journals are cited. Ali and
Byerlee (1991) cite several other publications involving technical efficiency
of farmers in developing countries. Ley (1990) presents an extensive bibliography of papers dealing with production and efficiency analysis (659
references) and Beck (1991) gives a lengthy bibliography of empirical
applications of frontier functions (266 references). The publications listed
in these bibliographies are in refereed journals, working papers, research
reports and dissertations involving a wide range of areas of application,
including agricultural studies.
Frontier production functions have permitted sophisticated analyses of
technical efficiency. Many empirical studies may be described as illustrative
of the econometric models and estimators which have been suggested for
application. These studies may be open to criticism for not including some
relevant inputs or firm-specific variables or for not involving more appropriate functional forms. Superior empirical analyses must obviously involve
a careful specification of all these aspects. The stochastic behaviour of the
random variables involved in frontier production functions is obviously only
part of the modelling exercise.
The use of frontier production functions for the prediction of the
technical efficiencies of farmers involves several problems which require
further research. Although frontier production functions can be estimated
by different methods (other than maximum likelihood), it appears that
distributional assumptions are basic to obtaining predictions for technical
efficiencies. The robustness of predictors when different distributional
assumptions are made is an issue for further study. The precision of
predictors for individual technical efficiencies is also an area requiring
careful research.

FRONTIER was written in Fortran 77 by Tim Coelli. The source code and executable
program are available on a 5.25 inch disk from Tim Coelli, Department of Econometrics,
University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W. 2351 Australia.
16

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

205

Philosophical issues concerning the existence of technical inefficiency for
individual farm operators and the measurement of managerial ability are
likely to involve considerable debate among economists in the future.
However, it is clear that frontier production functions are quite significant
for the investigation of causes of inefficiency in production and indicating
means by which inefficiency may be reduced and production increased,
given the level of technology involved. Very high levels of technical efficiencies indicate that increasing production would require new innovations
or a higher level of technology to be introduced.
The rather sophisticated nature of the econometric models for frontier
production functions and the predictors for technical efficiencies is likely to
discourage many researchers from applying them in empirical studies.
However, the computer program, FRONTIER, can be readily used for
estimating both time-invariant and time-varying models of technical efficiency with panel data or applied in the analysis of cross-sectional data (see
Coelli, 1992). More general frontier models are being investigated 17 and
will be incorporated into the program, FRONTIER, as they are developed.
The development of less-restrictive frontier models and the corresponding
computer software will offer significant stimulus to better empirical analysis of the efficiency of production.
REFERENCES
Afriat, S.N., 1972. Efficiency estimation of production functions. Int. Econ. Rev., 13:
568-598.
Aigner, D.J. and Chu, S.F., 1968. On estimating the industry production function. Am.
Econ. Rev., 58: 826-839.
Aigner, D.J. and Schmidt, P. (Editors), 1980. Specification and estimation of frontier
production, profit and cost functions. J. Econometrics, 13 (Suppl.).
Aigner, D.J., Lovell, C.A.K. and Schmidt, P., 1977. Formulation and estimation of stochastic
frontier production function models. J. Econometrics, 6: 21-37.
Ali, M. and Byerlee, D., 1991. Economic efficiency of small farmers in a changing world: a
survey of recent evidence. J. Int. Dev., 3: 1-17.
Ali, M. and Chaudhry, M.A., 1990. Inter-regional farm efficiency in Pakistan's Punjab: a
frontier production function study. J. Agric. Econ., 41: 62-74.
Ali, M. and Flinn, J.C., 1989. Profit efficiency among Basmati rice producers in Pakistan
Punjab. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 71: 303-310.

17 A stochastic frontier production function with flexible risk properties has recently been
suggested by Wan and Battese (1992). This model incorporates the risk properties which
Just and Prope (1978) indicated as desirable for many applications in agricultural economics.

206

G.E. BATTESE

Aly, H.Y., Belbase, K., Grabowski, R. and Kraft, S., 1987. The technical efficiency of Illinois
grain farms: an application of a ray-homothetic production function. South. J. Agric.
Econ., 19: 69-78.
Bagi, F.S., 1982a. Relationship between farm size and technical efficiency in west Tennessee
agriculture. South. J. Agric. Econ., 14: 139-144.
Bagi, F.S., 1982b. Economic efficiency of sharecropping: reply and some further results.
Malay. Econ. Rev., 27: 86-95.
Bagi, F.S., 1984. Stochastic frontier production function and farm-level technical efficiency
of full-time and part-time farms in west Tennessee. N. Cent. J. Agric. Econ., 6: 48-55.
Bagi, F.S .. and Huang, C.J., 1983. Estimating production technical efficiency for individual
farms in Tennessee. Can. J. Agric. Econ., 31: 249-256.
Bailey, D.V., Biswas, B., Kumbhakar, S.C. and Schulthies, B.K., 1989. An analysis of
technical, allocative, and scale inefficiency: the case of Ecuadorian dairy farms. West. J.
Agric. Econ., 14: 30-37.
Battese, G.E. and Coelli, T.J., 1988. Prediction of firm-level technical efficiencies with a
generalized frontier production function and panel data. J. Econometrics, 38: 387-399.
Battese, G.E. and Coelli, T.J., 1992. Frontier production functions, technical efficiency and
panel data: with application to paddy farmers in India. J. Prod. Anal., 3: 153-169.
Battese, G.E. and Corra, G.S., 1977. Estimation of a production frontier model: with
application to the pastoral zone of eastern Australia. Aust. J. Agric. Econ., 21: 169-179.
Battese, G.E. and Tessema, G.A., 1992. Estimation of stochastic frontier production
functions with time-varying parameters and technical efficiencies using panel data from
Indian villages. Work. Pap. Econometrics Appl. Stat. 64, Department of Econometrics,
University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W., 31 pp.
Battese, G.E., Coelli, T.J. and Colby, T.C., 1989. Estimation of frontier production functions and the efficiencies of Indian farms using panel data from ICRISAT's village level
studies. J. Quant. Econ., 5: 327-348.
Beck, M., 1991. Empirical applications of frontier functions: a bibliography. Mimeo,
Joachim-Ringelnatz-Str. 20, W-6200 Wiesbaden, Germany, 9 pp.
Bravo-Ureta, B.E., 1986. Technical efficiency measures for dairy farms based on a probabilistic frontier function model. Can. J. Agric. Econ., 34: 399-415.
Bravo-Ureta, B.E. and Rieger, L., 1990. Alternative production frontier methodologies and
dairy farm efficiencies. J. Agric. Econ., 41: 215-226.
Coelli, T.J., 1989. Estimation of frontier production functions: a guide to the computer
program, FRONTIER. Work. Pap. Econometrics Appl. Stat. 34, Department of Econometrics, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W., 31 pp.
Coelli, T.J., 1991. Maximum-likelihood estimation of stochastic frontier production functions with time-varying technical efficiency using the computer program, FRONTIER,
Version 2.0. Work. Pap. Econometrics Appl. Stat. 57, Department of Econometrics,
University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W., 54 pp.
Coelli, T.J., 1992. A computer program for frontier production function estimation. Econ.
Letters (in press).
Cornwell, C., Schmidt, P. and Sickles, R.C., 1990. Production frontiers with cross-sectional
and time-series variation in efficiency levels. J. Econometrics, 46: 185-200.
Dawson, P.J., 1985. Measuring technical efficiency from production functions: some further
estimates. J. Agric. Econ., 36: 31-40.
Dawson, P.J. and Lingard, J., 1989. Measuring farm efficiency over time on Philippine rice
farms. J. Agric. Econ., 40: 168-177.

FRONTIER PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS

207

Ekanayake, S.A.B. and Jayasuriya, S.K., 1987. Measurement of farm-specific technical
efficiency: a comparison of methods. J. Agric. Econ., 38: 115-122.
Ekayanake, S.A.B., 1987. Location specificity, settler type and productive efficiency: a study
of the Mahaweli project in Sri Lanka. J. Dev. Stud., 23: 509-521.
Farrell, M.J., 1957. The measurement of productive efficiency. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. A, 120:
253-290.
F~Z~rsund, F.R., Lovell, C.A.K. and Schmidt, P., 1980. A survey of frontier production
functions and of their relationship to efficiency measurement. J. Econometrics, 13: 5-25.
Greene, W.H., 1980. Maximum likelihood estimation of econometric frontier functions. J.
Econometrics, 13: 27-56.
Huang, C.J. and Bagi, F.S., 1984. Technical efficiency on individual farms in northwest
India. South. Econ. J., 51: 108-115.
Huang, C. J., Tang, A.M. and Bagi, F.S., 1986. Two views of efficiency in Indian agriculture.
Can. J. Agric. Econ., 34: 209-226.
Jondrow, J., Lovell, C.A.K., Materov, I.S. and Schmidt, P., 1982. On the estimation of
technical inefficiency in the stochastic frontier production function model. J. Econometrics, 19: 233-238.
Just, R.E. and Pope, R.D., 1978. Srochastic specification of production functions and
economic implications. J. Econometrics, 7: 67-86.
Kalirajan, K., 1981. An econometric analysis of yield variability in paddy production. Can. J.
Agric. Econ., 29: 283-294.
Kalirajan, K., 1982. On measuring yield potential of the high yielding varieties technology at
farm level. J. Agric. Econ., 33: 227-236.
Kalirajan, K.P., 1989. On measuring the contribution of human capital to agricultural
production. Indian Econ. Rev., 24: 247-261.
Kalirajan, K.P. and Flinn, J.C., 1983. The measurement of farm-specific technical efficiency.
Pakistan J. Appl. Econ., 2: 167-180.
Kalirajan, K. and Shand, R.T., 1986. Estimating location-specific and firm-specific technical
efficiency: an analysis of Malaysian agriculture. J. Econ. Dev., 11: 147-160.
Kalirajan, K.P. and Shand, R.T., 1989. A generalized measure of technical efficiency. Appl.
Econ., 21: 25-34.
Kontos, A. and Young, T., 1983. An analysis of technical efficiency on a sample of Greek
farms. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ., 10: 271-280.
Kopp, R.J., 1981. The measurement of productive efficiency: a reconsideration. Q. J. Econ.,
97: 477-503.
Kumbhakar, S.C., 1990. Production frontiers, panel data and time-varying technical inefficiency. J. Econometrics, 46: 201-211.
Kumbhakar, S.C., Biswas, B. and Bailey, D.V., 1989. A study of economic efficiency of Utah
dairy farmers: a system approach. Rev. Econ. Stat., 71: 595-604.
Ley, E., 1990. A bibliography on production and efficiency. Mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 32 pp.
Meeusen, W. and Van den Broeck, J., 1977. Efficiency estimation from Cobb-Douglas
production functions with composed error. Int. Econ. Rev., 18: 435-444.
Mood, A.M., Graybill, F.A. and Boes, D.C., 1974. Introduction to the Theory of Statistics
(3rd Edition). McGraw Hill, New York.
Muller, J., 1974. On sources of measured technical efficiency: the impact of information.
Am. J. Agric. Econ., 56: 730-738.
Pitt, M.M. and Lee, L.-F., 1981, Measurement and sources of technical inefficiency in the
Indonesian weaving industry. J. Dev. Econ., 9: 43-64.

208

G.B. BAITESE

Richmond, J., 1974. Estimating the efficiency of production. Int. Econ. Rev., 15: 515-521.
Russell, N.P. and Young, T., 1983. Frontier production functions and the measurement of
technical efficiency. J. Agric. Econ., 34: 139-150.
Schmidt, P., 1976. On the statistical estimation of parametric frontier production functions.
Rev. Econometric Stat., 58: 238-239.
Schmidt, P., 1986. Frontier production functions. Econometric Rev., 4: 289-328.
Stevenson, R.E., 1980. Likelihood functions for generalized stochastic frontier estimation. J.
Econometrics, 13: 57-66.
Taylor, T.G. and Shonkwiler, J.S., 1986. Alternative stochastic specifications of the frontier
production function in the analysis of agricultural credit programs and technical efficiency. J. Dev. Econ., 21: 149-160.
Taylor, T.G., Drummond, H.E. and Gomes, AT., 1986. Agricultural credit programs and
production efficiency: an analysis of traditional farming in southeastern Minas Gerais,
Brazil. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 68: 110-119.
Theil, H.; 1971. Principles of Econometrics. Wiley, New York.
Timmer, C.P., 1971. Using a probabilistic ftontier function to measure technical efficiency.
J. Polit. Econ., 79: 776-794.
Upton, M., 1979 The unproductive production function. J. Agric. Econ., 30: 179-194.
Wan, G.H. and Battese, G.E., 1992. A stochastic frontier production function incorporating
flexible risk properties. Work. Pap. Econometrics Appl. Stat. 66, Department of Econometrics, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W., 13 pp.

