AGRICULTURAL

ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

How to define and study farmers' management capacity:
theory and use in agricultural economics
Carin W. Rougoora,b,*, Ger Tripb, Ruud B.M. Huimeb, Jan A. Renkemab
•Research Station for Cattle, Sheep and Horse Husbandry, Lelystad, Netherlands
bDepartment of Economics and Management, Wageningen Agricultural University, Hollandseweg 1, 6706 KN Wageningen, Netherlands

Accepted 14 November 1997

Abstract
Textbooks and articles on farm management stress the importance of the management capacity of the fanner with respect to
his farm results. However, explicit definitions together with an elaboration of this concept are hard to find. In this article,
aspects of management capacity are grouped into: (1) personal aspects, consisting of fanner's drives and motivations, fanner's
abilities and capabilities and his biographical facts such as age and education; and (2) aspects of the decision-making process,
consisting of practices and procedures with respect to planning, implementation and control of decisions at the farm.
Empirical studies on the role of management capacity in relation to farm results are reviewed. Frontier production functions
are widely used in recent literature to estimate technical and economic efficiency of farms. However, in explaining differences
in efficiency most studies do not go further than adding a biographical variable (e.g., level of education). This study concludes
that a next step would be to include aspects of the decision-making process. Longitudinal on-farm observations, which give
possibilities for studying the dynamic aspects of the decision-making, are suggested to further analyze the concept of
management capacity. © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Review study; Management capacity; Decision-making process; Frontier production function; Efficiency; Fann performance

1. Introduction
It is a well-established fact that economic performance can differ considerably between farms, even if
they are operating under more or less similar production conditions. Differences in economic results are
usually attributed to differences in the management of
the farmer (e.g., Boehlje and Eidman, 1984). Management capacity can be seen as a separate, fourth factor
of production, in addition to the traditional factors

*Corresponding author.
0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Pll S0169-5150(98)00021-8

land, labour and capital (e.g., Case and Johnston,
1953). Then, what constitutes this special production
factor? Despite many books and articles in the field of
farm management and decision theory, the management process itself largely remains a black box, and
management capacity is rarely explicitly defined and
measured. The aim of this article is: (1) to give an
overview of main aspects of management capacity; (2)
to discuss the problems and opportunities with respect
to measuring and collecting data of management
capacity; (3) to review the empirical studies that relate
management capacity to farm results; and (4) to detect
weak spots and give suggestions for improvements.

262

C. W. Rougoor et al.!Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

The outline of this article follows these four
points. All sectors of agriculture are included, so farms
and farmers also refer to greenhouses and growers. For
the sake of readability, we write 'he' instead of 'he or
she' when referring to a farmer or a manager in
general.

ENVIRONMENT

Institutional

I

Social

Personal aspects manager - Drives and motivations

I

f

-Abilities and capabilities

-

Biography

Decision-making process - Planning

I

'

-Implementation
-Control

Teclmical and biological processes

~

2. Aspects of management capacity

Farm results

Concise definitions such as "farm management is
concerned with the decisions that affect the profitability of the farm business" (Castle et al., 1987: p. 3)
or "using what you have to get what you want most"
(Kadlec, 1985: p. 3) make clear that farm management
is concerned with resources, decisions and results.
Kay and Edwards (199): p. 7) list some phrases often
used in definitions of management and show three
common elements: (1) the need to establish goals; (2)
the existence of resources to use in order to meet the
goals; and (3) the possibility to use resources in
alternative ways, varying in degree of effectiveness
and efficiency, to produce several agricultural products. This description is rather broad and resembles
common definitions of economics as a science that
studies the ways in which finite amounts of resources
are allocated to an infinite number of wishes.
A major part of any textbook on farm management
is devoted to economic concepts and quantitative
techniques for calculating optimal levels of inputs
(resources) and outputs (products) under well-defined
restrictions, i.e., managing resources in order to get the
best results. A factor which may be overlooked when
farm management is treated in a formal, more or less
mathematical way is the role of the farm manager in
the decision-making. His management capacity is the
decisive factor when it comes to applying sound
theoretic principles in practice. Johnson et al.
(1961) described a large study where this problem
is paid attention to: the Interstate Managerial Study.
Objectives of this study were, for instance, to describe
the role of information and decision-making. A survey
was conducted among 1075 farm managers. This
study was not the first on this subject, but due to its
comprehensiveness it can be seen as a breakthrough
in research on management in agriculture. Harling
and Quail (1990) developed a simplified general
management model, containing five elements:

Physical

- Technical efficiency
- Price efficiency
- Economic efficiency
Economic

Fig. 1. Management capacltles in relation to environment,
biological processes and farm results.

strategy, environment, resources, managerial preferences and organization, which must be brought in
balance.
Management capacity is defined here as having the
appropriate personal characteristics and skills to deal
with the right problems and opportunities in the right
moment and in the right way. Starting point is the
manager who has certain qualities. By means of his
decision-making he will try to optimize (or at least
influence) the technical and biological processes at the
farm (see Fig. 1). These processes, controllable to
only a certain extent, determine the technical and
economic results of the farm. Stochastic elements,
such as the weather, the incidence of pests and diseases and fluctuations in the market (prices) also play
their part. Farm managers perform their task in an
environment which changes over time in a hardly
predictable way and therefore causes risk and uncertainty in the decision-making. Boehlje and Eidman
(198): p. 670) distinguish four major dimensions: (1)
the institutional environment (e.g., regulations on
water, land and air pollution); (2) the social environment (e.g., the family of the farmer); (3) the physical
environment (including the weather and the state of
the technology); and (4) the economic environment
(which determines prices of inputs and products).
Personal characteristics and skills, which are an
important aspect of managerial capacity can be
divided into: (1) drives and motivations, e.g., farmers'
goals and risk attitude; (2) abilities and capabilities,

C. W Rougoor et al.lAgricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

e.g., cognitive and intellectual skills; and (3) biography, e.g., background and experience (e.g., Muggen,
1969). Such personal characteristics and skills
of the farmer are often assumed to be important in
explaining differences with respect to the success
of the farm.
A farmer who is confronted with favourable external conditions and who also has high personal skillsone might say favourable internal conditions-is
likely to have good results. But still, it can go wrong
when the decision-making process is poor. Following
the steps of a well-defined process helps a decision
maker to make a decision in a logical and organized
manner and will on average lead to better results.
Simon (1977) distinguishes four phases: intelligence,
design, choice and review. Another well-known division of the decision-making process is: planning,
implementation and control. Further subdividing the
process lead Kay and Edwards (199): p. 13) to the
following steps, assuming that goals (step 0) have
already been established: (1) identify and define the
problem; (2) collect data and information; (3) identify
and analyze alternative solutions; (4) make the decision-select the best alternative; (5) implement the
decision; (6) monitor and evaluate the results; and (7)
accept the responsibility for the decision. Following
such a process can help to (easily) explain and justify a
decision, a criterion used for its quality by Slovic et al.
(1977).
An important notion, in connection with the foregoing, is that in assessing the quality of a decision, one
can use not only outcome-oriented criteria (the final
results), but also process-oriented criteria. In other
words, one can judge whether a decision is right before
the outcome is apparent by looking at the process that
led to the decision. Simon (1977) and Simon (198): p.
426) used the term procedural rationality. One hundred percent rationality is usually not realized or even
wanted. Human decision-making can be characterized
by impulsive responses, satisfying rather than optimizing behaviour and by bounded rationality rather
than complete rationality. Summarizing this so-called
model of bounded rationality (Simon, 1982): a decision maker is not likely to change, and make new
decisions, unless a certain level of dissatisfaction
about the current situation is reached. Then, in making
a decision he is bounded by his limited cognitive
skills, e.g., with respect to the amount of information

263

that he can process. However, given these boundaries,
he will try to act rational. He will use his skills and try
to make reasonable-instead of optimal-decisions.
At every step of the decision-making process, part
of the rationality can be lost. In order to be effective it
is a basic condition that priorities are set and time is
divided accordingly. Otherwise, the decision-maker
might get entangled in smaller details of relatively
unimportant decisions and forget to deal with the real
important problems and opportunities (e.g., Covey,
1989). A manager can make an overview of the areas
he should deal with and then choose which factors are
most critical for being successful (Rockart, 1979).
This can be called the meta-decision, deciding which
decisions are most valuable to put an (intellectual)
effort into, i.e., where and how to spend the time as a
manager. Setting priorities and dividing time is an
important aspect of the decision-making process. The
choice of a number of critical processes, out of the
complete picture of tasks, helps a farmer to concentrate on the right problems and to allocate his limited
time in the right way. A complete picture of the farm
could be made using fields of management (e.g.,
finance, production, personnel and marketing), functions of management (e.g., planning, implementation
and control) and/or level of management (e.g., strategic, tactical and operational) as entries; see, e.g.,
Boehlje and Eidman (198): p. 15) who gave a list of
major activities for each function of management. An
example of an overview of the organization of the farm
is the 'Dutch information model', that describes all
functions, processes, information flows and data of the
farm (De Hoop, 1988; Poppe, 1991).

3. Measuring management capacity
3.1. Personal aspects and decision-making processes
Some of the personal aspects (age, education,
experience on the farm) of the farmer can be measured
relatively well. Other personal aspects which lie in the
area of drives and motivations, or abilities and capabilities are much harder to detect and quantify. They
can be diverse, unclear and hidden. Hedges (196): p.
30) listed 19 of the more important traits and characteristics associated with capable management, such
as willingness to learn, decisiveness and self-confi-

264

C. W. Rougoor et al.lAgricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272
GROUP 1

ANALYZING EXISTING FARM DATA

1.

Primary source: written plans, calculations, calenders, records kept, etc.

2.

Secondary source: tax data, accounting data, etc.

GROUP 2

SINGLE ON-FARM INVESTIGATIONS

3.

Interviews

4.

Questionnaires

GROUP 3

LONGITUDINAL ON-FARM OBSERVATIONS

5.

Unstructured observations (participation)

6.

Structured observations

7.

Records kept by farmer on request (panel data)

GROUP 4
8.

OFF-FARM EXPERIMENTS

Tests

9.

Role-playing, gaming, simulation

10.

(Computer) experiments

Fig. 2. Forms of data collection to study management capacity of farmers.

dence. But, he remarks that, "we are not able to
measure such a complex successfully, nor to evaluate
its precise significance". Yet some progress has been
made. A direct way to ask for drives and motivations
was performed by Huime et al. (1997). They asked
farmers to point out the goals they had for their farms.
They used several worksheets, consisting of open
questions and closed questions and they also used
small tasks.
Decision-making processes, as part of the management concept, are difficult to study in practice. Literature from the Business School shows how complex
management can be. For instance, Mintzberg (197):
pp. 10-11) cites two studies (Carlson, 1951; Davis,
1957) on managerial work in order to make clear that a
manager is not working according to the classical
functions of management, such as planning and controlling. A manager does not neatly divide his time in
planning, implementing and controlling. This means
that these concepts need to be translated into explicit,
formalized actions and procedures that can be distinguished and measured. Such actions may be the
frequency of consultants visiting the farm, the time
spent on reading and processing farm results, or the
time spent on meetings with personnel. Rather than
measuring time and frequency of these actions, one
could observe the (physical) results, showing evidence

of a high quality with respect to planning and control.
For instance, does the farmer have written plans-and
if so, to what degree of detail and how far reaching in
time-and how much does he know about facts and
figures on his farm in relation to other farms? By
distinguishing phases of the decision-making process
and by defining explicit actions related to these phases,
an opening is created to measure and quantify part of
the management capacity.
3.2. Data collection

Several data sources can be used to study management capacity. Mintzberg (197): pp. 221-229) gives a
review of methods used to gather data on managers.
To study the management capacity of a farmer,
being the executive of a small company, one can
use either existing data or create new data. Several
options are listed in Fig. 2. These options are grouped
into four main categories: (1) analyzing existing
farm data; (2) single on-farm investigations; (3)
longitudinal on-farm observations; and (4) off-farm
experiments.
Each data source has its advantages and disadvantages. The first group (1) of data sources makes use of
already existing material, either produced by the
farmer himself, as a primary source, or by others as

C. W. Rougoor et al. I Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

a secondary source. Also data can be used from
existing study groups where farmers compare their
results. A substantial advantage of these data sources
are the low costs connected to them. A disadvantage
is that they usually do not cover the research
question completely. The data methods in group (2),
interviews and questionnaires can be made up so
that they entirely cover the research question and
they can be performed at relatively low cost. However,
one may question the reliability and accuracy of
interviews and questionnaires: the respondent may
have forgotten relevant details or deliberately give
'socially desired' answers or answers that avoid
cognitive dissonance. Also, answers may be biased
by the manager's perception of his own job (Mintzberg, 1973: p. 222).
Data sources (3) and (4) give more possibility for
checking and for in-depth research, but are relatively
expensive. Longitudinal on-farm observations (group
3) are based on repetitive data collection throughout a
period of time. These observations are more expensive, but are more likely to generate more reliable and
accurate data. Another advantage is that these methods
are better compatible with decision-making processes,
which are also continuous and dynamic by nature. The
researcher will be visiting the farm on a regular basis
to make observations and to ask questions (e.g., about
his plans) and, in addition, the farmer may be
requested to keep certain records during the intervals
between the visits. A problem with this kind of studies
is articulated by Dillon and Hardaker (199): p. 43)
who wrote, "the mere presence of the observer can
lead the person being studied to modify her or his
behaviour".
Finally, in group (4 ), one can take the farmer away
from his farm, take him to a 'laboratory', which can be
a room equipped with computers, and study his management capacity through (personality) tests or (computer) experiments under controlled conditions. An
example of this kind of research can be found in the
work of Cross et al. (1994) who described workshops
held with groups of farmers in order to investigate,
among other things, the strengths and weaknesses of
their information system.
In Section 4, empirical studies are reviewed with
respect to the parts of management capacity they
consider and the technique(s) they use for data collection and analysis.

265

4. Review of empirical studies
4.1. Methodology

This section focuses on empirical studies that explicitly deal with management capacity of farmers in
relation to technical and/or financial results at the farm
level. Empirical studies have been selected on the
basis of the following criteria: ( 1) one or more aspects
of management capacity of the farmer has been measured; (2) technical and/or financial results have been
measured; (3) a relationship between management
capacity and results has been analyzed; and (4) the
research has been published in scientific agricultural
economics and related English-language journals in
1980 or later. Table 1 gives an overview of studies that
meet these criteria.
The variables analyzed are investigated and compared with the aspects in Fig. 1 (see Section 2).
Besides these variables measuring management capacity, Table 1 contains farm results. Studies are divided
into those using the production frontier approach and
those using other approaches. Battese (1992) reviews
the methods that can be used to estimate the production frontier: deterministic frontiers, stochastic frontiers and panel data models. The current study is
focusing on types of efficiency that can be measured.
The production frontier approach distinguishes technical efficiency (TE), price efficiency (PE) (also called
allocative efficiency), and economic efficiency (EE).
Technical efficiency is the ability to avoid waste by
producing as much output as input usage allows, or by
using as little input as output production allows. Price
efficiency is the ability to combine inputs and outputs
in optimal proportions in light of prevailing prices
(Fried et al., 1993). Economic efficiency is a measure
of overall performance and is equal to technical
efficiency times price efficiency (i.e., EE=TE*PE)
(Bravo-Ureta and Pinheiro, 1993). The studies which
do not use the production frontier approach use
straightforward technical results (T) or financial
results (F). In total, 23 studies will be discussed here,
of which the majority is dealing with dairy farming,
but also crop, greenhouse, swine and mixed farming
are dealt with. First, the methods and techniques used
to measure farm results will be discussed. After that
the methods to study management capacity will be
worked out.

~

Table I
Variables describing management capacity included in empirical studies
Management Capacity"

Production frontier approach
Moock (1981)
Jamison and Moock (1984)
Kalirajan and Shand (1985)
Stefanou and Saxena (1988)
Ali and Flinn (1989)
Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1991)
Kumbhakar and Heshmati (1995)
Parikh et a!. ( 1995)
Adesina and Djato (1996)
Battese et a!. (1996)
Wang eta!. (1996a, b)
Other approaches
Achten et a!. (1983)
Goodger eta!. (1984), Goodger and Kushman (1984-1985), Goodger eta!. (1988)
Bigras-Poulin eta!. (1984-1985a, 1984-1985b)
Sharma and Patel (1988)
Cowen et a!. (1989)
J ofre-Giraudo et a!. ( 1990)
Rosenberg and Cowen (1990)
Tarabla and Dodd (1990)
Jose and Crumly (1993)
Humik eta!. (1994a, b)
Kiernan and Heinrichs (1994)
Dewey et a!. (1995)

Personal aspects

Decision-making

B
B,A
B,A
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B

p
p
P,C
p

p
-

Resultsb

No. of farms included

TE
TE
TE
PE
EE
EE
TE
EE
EE
TE
EE

152
683
91
131
120
511
250/430
436
410
499
786/1889

r'l

~
::tl

"
li:

"""...
"
~

"',.....
~
""~li:

if
~
~

""
::1

B,D
B,D,A
B,D,A
B
B,D
A
B,D
D

P,C
P,C

c
P,C
P,C
P,C

c
-

c
c

F
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T

"B=biography; D=drives and motivations; A=abilities and capabilities; P=planning; !=implementation; and C=control.
~=technical efficiency; PE=price efficiency (=allocative efficiency); EE=economic efficiency; F=financial parameter; T=technical parameter.

71
20/50
110
176
218
50
87
123
120
69
329
76

~

~-

.....
Oo
-;::::

~
""~

tl,
~

C. W. Rougoor et al. I Agricultural Economics 18 ( 1998) 261-272

Management capacity in these empirical studies has
been related to the farm results. What variables are
used as indicator(s) for farm results? In Table 1 it can
be found that nine studies compare management
capacity with financial farm results (indicated by F,
PE or EE in Table 1). Especially in the latest years, the
production frontier approach has been used more and
more to determine farm results. Stefanou and Saxena
(1988) calculated the price, or allocative, efficiency.
Ali and Flinn (1989), Parikh et al. (1995), Bravo-Ureta
and Rieger (1991), Adesina and Djato (1996) and
Wang et al. (1996a, b) calculated the economic efficiency. In other studies plain financial parameters are
used as an indicator for farm results. Achten et al.
(1983) used the money value of the real yield in
horticulture. Jofre-Giraudo et al. (1990) evaluated
the influence of management capacity on economic
benefit, however, in a subjective way. The manager is
asked whether or not the benefits of their management
changes had compensated the costs. Jose and Crumly
(1993) used several debt and income indicators.
Other studies focus on technical aspects only, for
instance milk production (Sharma and Patel, 1988;
Tarabla and Dodd, 1990), or respiratory disease in
swine (Humik et al., 1994a, b). Some studies relate
the management capacity to more than one technical
parameter (Goodger et al., 1984; Goodger and
Kushman, 1984--1985; Goodger et al., 1988; BigrasPoulin et al., 1984--1985b; Cowen et al., 1989;
Rosenberg and Cowen, 1990), ranging from the
number of repeat breeders to somatic cell count (as
an indicator for quality of milk), disease rates and
culling rate. Overall, it can be concluded that all kinds
of different methods are used as an indicator for farm
results. The studies which use the economic efficiency
criteria, are the only ones that (can) combine technical
and economic results.
Although many different methods to measure management capacity are available (see Fig. 2) it turns out
that in practice, single on-farm observations are most
frequently used. Kumbhakar and Heshmati (1995), Ali
and Flinn (1989), Battese et al. (1996) and Wang et al.
(1996a, b) used panel data. However, these data lack
information on the decision-making process: only the
farm results over time are measured. Longitudinal onfarm observations are likely to generate more reliable
and accurate data. However, they are more expensive
and time-consuming.

267

Almost all studies use questionnaires or interviews
except for Goodger et al. (1984, 1988), Goodger and
Kushman (1984--1985). They make observations and
perform measurements on the farm. This method of
research is much more time consuming, as reflected in
the number of farms included in the research: Goodger
and Kushman (1984--1985) used 20 farms. The only
off-farm experiment in which the relation between
management capacity and farm results was measured
is found in Jose and Crumly (1993), who used a
psychological test.
4.2. Personal aspects
Quite some work has been done on the relationship
between education and farm efficiency. From different
studies it can be concluded that education has a
positive influence on farm results, especially in developing countries. Lockheed et al. (1980), Bravo-Ureta
and Pinheiro (1993), and Phillips (1994) reviewed
papers that measure the effect of a farmer's educational level and exposure to extension services on
his productivity. They focused on studies performed
in low-income regions. Overall, they found confirmation for the hypothesis that education, as a part of
the farmers' biography, will have a positive effect
on farmers' efficiency. Other studies (see Table 1)
also indicated that education is positively correlated
with farm results (Moock, 1981; Achten et al., 1983;
Jamison and Moock, 1984; Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b; Stefanou and Saxena, 1988; Ali and Flinn,
1989; Parikh et al., 1995; Battese et al., 1996; Wang
et al., 1996a, b). However, no significant effect of
education on farm results was found by Kalirajan
and Shand (1985), Tarabla and Dodd (1990), Adesina
and Djato (1996).
Another personal aspect quite often looked at, is the
experience and/or the age of the farmer. The influence
on farm results is not straightforward. Some studies
found a positive effect of experience (Kalirajan and
Shand, 1985; Stefanou and Saxena, 1988), while
others did not find any effect at all (Sharma and Patel,
1988; Humik et al., 1994a, b). A negative influence of
age on farm results was found by Parikh et al. (1995),
but no effect by Jamison and Moock (1984), Tarabla
and Dodd (1990). Battese et al. (1996) found effects of
age on technical efficiency. However, the direction
of the effect differs between districts of Pakistan.

268

C.W Rougoor et al.!Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1991) found opposite effects
of age (also called experience) on TE, PE and EE. To
summarize, biographical aspects can affect farm
results, technically as well as financially, but the
results are diffuse; sometimes an effect is found,
sometimes it is not.
Drives and motivations that are investigated vary
from goals of the farmer, attitude towards paperwork,
openness to new ideas, level of ambition, satisfaction
with farming, to most preferred job at the farm.
Milk yield and fat yield are positively correlated with
level of ambition (Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b).
Satisfaction with farming is usually found not to
be of any influence on farm results (Tarabla and
Dodd, 1990; Humik et al., 1994a, b), only BigrasPoulin et al. (1984-1985b) found an influence of
satisfaction with farming on farm results, in terms
of rate of culling and fat and milk yield. Dewey et al.
(1995) found that litter size can be influenced by the
most preferred job of the farmer. Almost all these
studies show that farm results are dependent upon
some aspects of drives and motivations of the farmer,
but these aspects and the resulting effects are
measured in a lot of different ways, which complicates
the making of comparisons.
Table 1 indicates that ability and capability
variables (as part of the personal aspects of the farmer)
are rarely analyzed. Besides that, these variables
are diverse, making it difficult to draw an overall
conclusion on their effect on farm results. Variables
mentioned in the studies vary from knowledge of
cow behaviour, knowledge of technical recommendations and prices, understanding of technology, to
assertiveness and temperament. No influence of
level of assertiveness on farm results was found
(Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b). Goodger et al.
(1984), Goodger and Kushman (1984-1985) calculated an overall management index. They put the
same weight on all kind of aspects, to calculate an
overall score. Knowledge of cow behaviour is one
aspect of this index. They found a positive relation
between the overall management index and farm
results, but the separate effect of knowledge has not
been determined. Understanding of technology, measured by asking the farmer to describe the different
recommendations of new technologies, was found to
have a significant (positive) effect on the yield of rice
(Kalirajan and Shand, 1985). Jamison and Moock

(1984) measured numeracy, literacy and an agricultural knowledge test score. These aspects were taken
as variables in different production function regressions. Sometimes a positive effect is found on production, sometimes no effect could be determined. Jose
and Crumly (1993) compared the temperament factors
with financial measurements. They found that 'thinking people' have higher total assets than 'feeling
people', and 'extrovert people' have higher debts than
'introvert people'. From this small overview on relations between abilities and capabilities of the farmer
and farm results, it can be concluded that the knowledge in this area is still rather limited in agricultural
literature. It can be concluded that the influence of
education is often studied, while other personal
aspects are under-exposed.
4.3. Decision-making processes
With respect to decision-making, a distinction is
made between planning (P), implementation (I) and
control (C). Studies on planning can be divided into
two groups. The first group measures aspects of the
decision-making process itself (e.g., the length of the
planning horizon and the degree of detail), the other
group focuses on aids that are used for the decisionmaking (e.g., use of computer records, extension
services, and other information processing devices).
Studies looking at the decision-making process itself
usually find a positive effect of planning on farm
results. The variables used, however, are very diffuse.
Achten et al. (1983) investigated to what degree of
detail plans are made, concerning production, labour
requirement, etcetera. Planning of short-term decisions and activities proved to be an important factor
which influences the yield level of greenhouse vegetable producers. Decision-making procedures in staff
matters were investigated by Goodger et al. (1984),
Goodger and Kushman ( 1984-1985) as an indicator of
management effectiveness. A judgement on the quality of the decision-making process of the farmer was
made during an open interview on how the farmer
makes his decisions. They found a positive relationship between an overall management score (the decision-making process being a part of it) and milk yield,
days in milk, and days open. Cowen et al. (1989)
investigated the effect of data processing devices:
whether the farmer made use of computer records,

C. W. Rougoor et al./Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

or lists of things to do (e.g., cows to breed). They
found that use of computer records or lists of things to
do results in observation of problems in an earlier
stage. Rosenberg and Cowen (1990) determined the
level of rationality in the decision-making process of
the farmer, by asking the farmer to describe the
process (e.g., how milkers were chosen). They did
not find a relation with farm results.
Studies focusing on aids that are used for decisionmaking are mostly focusing on the use of external
advisors. Jofre-Giraudo et al. (1990) are the only ones
who measured other aspects as well. They investigated
what sources of information for planning purposes are
used (e.g., records from the dairy herd improvement
association (DlllA), own herd records, etc.). However,
the collected data were not sufficient to relate this
to the results of the farm. The findings with respect
to the influence of external advisors is mixed for
the different kinds of efficiency. Adesina and Djato
(1996) did not find a significant influence of extension
on economic efficiency. Moock (1981), Kalirajan and
Shand (1985), found a positive effect of the number
of extension visits, as a source of information, on
technical efficiency. Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1991)
found an effect of extension on efficiency. However,
the effect on technical efficiency is positive, but the
effect on price efficiency and economic efficiency is
negative. This shows that focusing on technical
efficiency alone may have a negative influence on
the overall economic efficiency. The risk of producing
beyond the optimal economic level of production
is present.
None of the studies reported findings on the quality
of the implementation of decisions. However, implementation is closely related to time allocation: how is
a farmer using his time? Time allocation, is included
in five studies and, again, the elaboration of it is rather
heterogeneous. Time allocation variables vary from
the time available for cleaning, time spent at keeping
health records, time spent on heat detection, time spent
on management and hours of continuing education, to
regularity of communication with milkers about job
performance. Time spent at keeping health records
turns out to decrease the incidence of reproductive
disorders (Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b). Regularity of communication with milkers about their job
performance has a positive influence on milk yield
(Rosenberg and Cowen, 1990). Dewey et al. (1995)

269

found a positive effect of the time spent on heat
detection and breeding on the average litter size. They
also asked farmers whether or not they spent enough
time on insemination of sows and heat detection. Here,
no relationship was found with the farm results. JofreGiraudo et al. ( 1990) asked farmers to estimate the
time they spent on management. Farmers with an
information system spent more time on management
than farmers without. However, no clear relation was
found with the financial results of the farm. Although
different studies focused on time allocation of the
farmer, none of the studies measured the complete
distribution of time of the farmer over all kinds of
different activities. This would be interesting and
clarifying, yet difficult to carry out.
Studies focusing on the control part of the decisionmaking process are divided into two groups: studies
focusing on aspects of the decision-making itself (e.g.,
criteria used for evaluation of farm results), and
studies that investigate side-line aspects. The use of
information-as a side-line aspect-seems to have a
positive effect on the results. Cowen et al. (1989),
Kiernan and Heinrichs ( 1994) investigated whether or
not external data are used as a source of information.
Both found a positive influence of using this external
data on farm results. Jofre-Giraudo et al. (1990) also
investigated the use of external data, but did not relate
this to farm results. Tarabla and Dodd (1990) found
that the number of times the milking machine is tested
per year is positively correlated with the quality of
milk. Rosenberg and Cowen (1990) found that use of
written records in the herd decision-making, has a
positive influence on the quality of milk, the average
days open and leads to a smaller number of services
per conception. They also had a look at the decisionmaking process itself: the criteria used in the evaluation of farm results were studied. The hypothesis was
that the objective criteria combined with regular communication with milkers about their job performance
would lead to higher results. But they did not find
support for this hypothesis. Both aspects did not seem
to influence the farm results. So, no study was found
where an effect of the quality of the control itself-as
part of the decision-making process-on the farm
result could be determined.
To summarize the above, two observations can be
made. First, studies which use the production frontier
approach usually look at age/experience and educa-

270

C. W Rougoor et al./ Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

tion of the farmer and to the use of extension services
(as part of the planning), yet ignore other personal
aspects of the farmer and his decision-making process.
Other studies take into account more aspects, but none
includes all aspects of management capacity (B, D, A,
P, I and C; see Table 1). Second, when an aspect is
taken into account, the elaboration of it differs greatly
between studies, leading to a wide range of variables
measured.

5. Discussion and conclusions
This article reviewed empirical studies that relate
farm results to management variables. First, the concept of management capacity was elaborated. Management capacity was defined as having the
appropriate personal characteristics and skills (including drives and motivations, abilities and capabilities
and biography), to deal with the right problems and
opportunities in the right moment and in the right way.
The way problems and opportunities are dealt with by
the farmer/manager is reflected in the decision-making processes (split into planning, implementation and
control), meant to influence the technical and biological processes on the farm, which in tum determines
the farm results. Each of these steps can be controlled
only partly, stochastic elements from the environment
also play their part.
Empirical studies show an influence of management
capacity on farm results. For instance, Jose and
Crumly (1993) who found a relation between personal
characteristics and economic results. Overall, the
proportion of variance in the dependent (result) variables that is explained by the independent (management) variables differs from 7 to 40% between the
studies reviewed. However, these values are hard to
compare, due to differences in the way management
capacity is defined in these studies, differences in
independent variables that are included, and differences in definition of farm results.
Recent studies frequently used the production frontier approach to estimate technical and/or economic
efficiency at farms. Elements of management capacity
can be added to the list independent variables in this
approach. Most often education and experience are
taken into account. The method has met critique on the
applicability of the rules of neoclassical economics to

traditional agriculture (e.g., Torkamani and Hardaker,
1996). Furthermore, for the purpose of relating farm
results to management capacity, the production frontier approach must be compared to other methods. The
path model approach, for instance, gives the opportunity to set up a stepwise analysis, as shown in Fig. 1
(where personal aspects influence the decision-making process, which, in tum, influences the farm
results). So, whether to use the production frontier
approach or an alternative approach, needs attention
on forehand, taking into account the pros and cons of
the different alternative methodologies.
Most empirical studies on management capacity of
farmers, in relation to farm results, use questionnaires
and interviews for data collection. These are usually
executed without repetition, leading to single
measurements. To effectively analyze the role of all
aspects of management capacity, other methods
can be useful. On-farm investigations, with regular
repetition, are more appropriate to study management
capacity of farmers. Such longitudinal observations
are more in line with the dynamic nature of decisionmaking processes. Also, they give opportunities
for verification and are, therefore, likely to give a
more realistic picture. Off-farm experiments with
farmers, e.g., in a computer laboratory, can be used
to simulate decision-making processes, to assess
certain abilities and capabilities of the farmers and
to find out about their drives and motivations and
their attitude toward risk. However, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the external
validity of decision-making research that relies on
laboratory simulations of real-world decision
problems is low (Ungson and Braunstein, 1982:
p. 39). To provide evidence on validity of different
methods, the need for multimethod approaches is
generally acknowledged.
The last objective of this study was to detect weak
spots and to give suggestions for improvements for
studying management capacity in relation to farm
results. It can be concluded that the decision-making
process is under-exposed. This is especially the case
for the studies using the production frontier approach.
The decision-making process can only be measured by
longitudinal data, for instance, structured farm observations/visits in time, to follow the planning, implementation and control on the farm. This kind of studies
can lead to a better understanding of differences in

C. W Rougoor et al.lAgricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

success between farmers and can serve as a basis for
support and improvement of their farm results.

References
Achten, J.M.F.H., Nienhuis, J.K., Alleblas, J.T.W., 1983. A
quantitative model for measuring management level. Acta
Horticulturae 135, 39-61.
Adesina, A.A., Djato, K.K., 1996. Farm size, relative efficiency
and agrarian policy in Cote d'Ivoire: profit function analysis of
rice farms. Agric. Econ. 14, 93-102.
Ali, M., Flinn, J.C., 1989. Profit efficiency among Basmati rice
producers in Pakistan Punjab. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 71, 303-310.
Battese, G.E., 1992. Frontier production functions and technical
efficiency: a survey of empirical applications in agricultural
economics. Agric. Econ. 7, 185-208.
Battese, G.E., Malik, S.J., Gill, M.A., 1996. An investigation of
technical inefficiencies of production of wheat farmers in four
districts of Pakistan. J. Agric. Econ. 47, 37-49.
Bigras-Poulin, M., Meek, A.H., Blackburn, D.J., Martin, S.W.,
1984-1985a. Attitudes, management practices, and herd
performance-a study of Ontario dairy farm managers: I.
Descriptive aspects. Prev. Vet. Med. 3, 227-240.
Bigras-Poulin, M., Meek, A.H., Martin, S.W., 1984-1985b.
Attitudes, management practices, and herd performance-a
study of Ontario dairy farm managers: II. Associations. Prev.
Vet. Med. 3, 241-250.
Boehlje, M.D., Eidman, V.R., 1984. Farm Management. Wiley,
New York, 806 pp.
Bravo-Ureta, B.E., Pinheiro, A.E., 1993. Efficiency analysis of
developing country agriculture: a review of the frontier function
literature. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 22, 88-101.
Bravo-Ureta, B.E., Rieger, L., 1991. Dairy farm efficiency
measurement using stochastic frontiers and neoclassical
duality. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 73, 421-428.
Carlson, S., 1951. Executive Behaviour: A Study of the Work Load
and the Working Methods of Managing Directors. Striimbergs,
Stockholm.
Case, H.C.M., Johnston, P.E., 1953. Principles of Farm Management. J.B. Lippincott, Chicago, 466 pp.
Castle, E.N., Becker, M.H., Nelson, A.G., 1987. Farm Business
Management: The Decision-making Process, 3rd edn. Macmillan, New York.
Covey, S.R., 1989. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People.
Simon & Schuster, London, 280 pp.
Cowen, P., Schwabe, C.W., Rosenberg, H.R., Bondurant, R.H.,
Franti, C.E., Goodger, W.J., 1989. Reproductive management
practices among Tulare, California, dairy herds: I. Census and
descriptive aspects. Prev. Vet. Med. 7, 83-100.
Cross, T.L., King, R.P., Dobbins, C.L., Fuller, E.l., 1994.
Information management for your farm: facilitator's guide.
Station Bulletin 604-1994, Minnesota Agricultural Experiment
Station, University of Minnesota.
Davis, R.T., 1957. Performance and Development of Field Sales
Managers. Harvard Business School, Boston.

271

De Hoop, D.W., 1988. Management processes in dairy and
pig farming and the construction of systems. In: Korver, S.,
van Arendonk, J.A.M. (Eds.), Modelling of Livestock
Production Systems. EC Seminar, 7-9 April 1987, Brussels,
pp. 77-85.
Dewey, C.E., Martin, S.W., Friendship, R.M., Kennedy, B.W.,
Wilson, M.R., 1995. Associations between litter size and
specific herd level management factors in Ontario swine. Prev.
Vet. Med. 22, 89-102.
Dillon, J.L., Hardaker, J.B., 1993. Farm management research for
small farmer development, 2nd edn. FAO Farm Systems
Management Series, Rome, 302 pp.
Fried, H.O., Lovell, C.A.K., Schmidt, S.S. (Eds.), 1993. The
Measurement of Productive Efficiency. Oxford Univ. Press,
New York, 426 pp.
Goodger, W.J., Kushman, J.E., 1984-1985. Measuring the impact
of different veterinary service programs on dairy herd health
and milk production. Prev. Vet. Med. 3, 211-225.
Goodger, W.J., Ruppanner, R., Slenning, B.D., Kushman, J.E.,
1984. An approach to scoring management on large-scale
dairies. J. Dairy Sci. 67, 675-685.
Goodger, W.J., Galland, J.C., Christiansen, V.E., 1988. Survey of
milking management practices on large dairies and their
relationship to udder health and production variables. J. Dairy
Sci. 71, 2535-2542.
Harling, K.F., Quail, Ph., 1990. Exploring a general management
approach to farm management. Agribusiness 6, 425-441.
Hedges, T.R., 1963. Farm Management Decisions. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 628 pp.
Huime, R.B.M., Harsh, S.B., Dijkhuizen, A.A., 1997. Critical
success factors and information needs on dairy farms: the
farmer's opinion. Livestock Prod. Sci. 48, 229-238.
Humik, D., Dohoo,I.R., Donald, A., Robinson, N.P., 1994a. Factor
analysis of swine farm management practices on Prince Edward
Island. Prev. Vet. Med. 20, 135-146.
Humik, D., Dohoo, I.R., Bate, L.A., 1994b. Types of farm
management as risk factor for swine respiratory disease. Prev.
Vet. Dis. 20, 147-157.
Jamison, D.T., Moock, P.R., 1984. Farmer education and farm
efficiency in Nepal: the role of schooling, extension services,
and cognitive skills. World Dev. 12, 67-86.
Jofre-Giraudo, E., Streeter, D.H., Lazarus, W., 1990. The impact of
computer infomation systems on dairy farm management
decisions. Agribusiness 6(5), 463-474.
Johnson, G.L., Halter, A.N., Jensen, H.R., Thomas, D.W. (Eds.),
1961. A Study of Managerial Processes of Midwestern
Farmers. Iowa State Univ. Press, Ames, 221 pp.
Jose, D., Crumly, J.A., 1993. Psychological type of farm/ranch
operators: relationship to financial measures. Rev. Agric. Econ.
15(1), 121-132.
Kadlec, J.E., 1985. Farm Management: Decisions, Operation,
Control. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 429 pp.
Kalirajan, K.P., Shand, R.T., 1985. Types of education and
agricultural productivity: a quantitative analysis of Tamil Nadu
rice farming. J. Dev. Studies 21, 232-243.
Kay, R.D., Edwards, W.M., 1994. Farm Management, 3rd edn.,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 458 pp.

272

C. W. Rougoor et al./Agricultural Economics 18 (1998) 261-272

Kiernan, N.E., Heinrichs, A.J., 1994. Identification of farm
manager types through cluster analysis of calf and heifer
management practices. Prev. Vet. Med. 18, 225-236.
Kumbhakar, S.C., Heshmati, A., 1995. Efficiency measurement in
Swedish dairy farms: an application of rotating panel data,
1976-1988. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77, 660-674.
Lockheed, M.E., Jamison, D.T., Lau, L.J., 1980. Farmer education and
farm efficiency: a survey. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 29, 37-76.
Mintzberg, H., 1973. The Nature of Managerial Work. Harper &
Row, New York, 298 pp.
Moock, P.R., 1981. Education and technical efficiency in smallfarm production. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 29, 723-739.
Muggen, G., 1969. Human factors and farm management: a review of
the literature. World Agric. Econ. Rural Social. Abstr. 11(2), 1-11.
Parikh, A., Ali, F., Shah, M.K., 1995. Measurement of economic
efficiency in Pakistani agriculture. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77,
675-685.
Phillips, J.M., 1994. Farmer education and farmer efficiency: a
meta-analysis. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 43, 149-165.
Poppe, K.J., 1991. Information needs and accounting in agriculture.
Mededeling 444, LEI, The Hague.
Rockart, J.P., 1979. Chief executives define their own data needs.
Harv. Business Rev. 57, 81-93.
Rosenberg, H.R., Cowen, P., 1990. Management differences and
dairy results. Agribusiness 6, 267-279.
Sharma, K.N.S., Patel, R.K., 1988. Quantification of management
input in milk production. Indian J. Anim. Sci. 58(2), 253-259.

Simon, H.A., 1977. The New Science of Management Decision,
revised edn. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 175 pp.
Simon, H.A., 1982. From substantive to procedural rationality.
Models of Bounded Rationality, Vol. 2. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, pp. 424--443. First published in: Latsis, S.J. (Ed.),
1976. Method and Appraisal in Economics. Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, pp. 129-148.
Slavic, P., Fischhoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., 1977. Cognitive
processes and societal taking. In: Jungermann, H., De Zeeuw,
G. (Eds.), Decision-making and Change in Human Affairs.
Dordrecht, Reidel.
Stefanou, S.E., Saxena, S., 1988. Education, experience, and
allocative efficiency: a dual approach. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 70,
338-345.
Tarabla, H.D., Dodd, K., 1990. Associations between farmers'
personal characteristics. Br. Vet. J. 146, 157-164.
Torkamani, J., Hardaker, J.B., 1996. A study of economic
efficiency of Iranian farmers in Ramjerd district: an application
of stochastic programming. Agric. Econ. 14, 73-83.
Ungson, G.R., Braunstein, D.N., 1982. Decision-making: An
Interdisciplinary Inquiry. Kent Publishing, 376 pp.
Wang, J., Cramer, G.L., Wailes, E.J., 1996a. Production efficiency
of Chinese agriculture: evidence from rural household survey
data. Agric. Econ. 15, 17-28.
Wang, J., Wailes, E.J., Cramer, G.L., 1996b. A shadow-price
frontier measurement of profit efficiency in Chinese agriculture. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78, 146-156.

