Agricultural Economics, 2 (1988) 231-245
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands

231

Collateral, Guaranties and Rural Credit in
Developing Countries: Evidence from Asia
Gershon Feder 1 , Tongroj Onchan 2 and Tejaswi Raparla 1
1 World

Bank, J-2075, 1818 H Street, N. W., Washington, DC 20433 (U.S.A.)
2 Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900 (Thailand)

(Accepted 5 February 1988)

Abstract
Feder, G., Onchan, T. and Raparla, T., 1988. Collateral, guaranties and rural credit in developing
countries: evidence from Asia. Agric. Econ., 2: 231-245.
The paper reviews the theory of the impact of loan collateral, and in particular land collateral,
in institutional and non-institutional rural credit markets. Evidence from three Asian developing
countries is presented, showing extensive use of land collateral among institutional lenders in
countries where such collateral is legal. The use of land collateral is more common than other
forms of security, except in places where legal inhibitions on mortgaging agricultural land exist.
Non-institutional lenders are less inclined to use land collateral. However, lenders who do not
have links to borrowers in matters other than finance are more likely to use loan securities. Estimates of instutional credit supply and demand in rural Thailand confirm that the pledging of land
collateral affects the supply of credit more than group guaranty. It is also shown that larger farmers
are more likely to utilize land collateral. The conclusion is that land collateral is preferred by
instutionallenders as it reduces creditworthiness assessment costs. Attempts to ban or limit collateral use by decree are motivated by equity considerations, but they will cause loss of efficiency.
Simplification of ownership verification and other policies reducing the transaction cost of collateral pledging will mitigate the negative equity implications of collateral.

Introduction

Loan transactions typically involve the risk of borrower default, and lenders
therefore pursue various procedures to reduce default risk and to minimize the
losses which may be incurred in the case of default. Screening potential borrowers according to creditworthiness criteria and credit rationing are two common policies adopted by lenders facing default risk (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981).
The utilization of collateral and guaranties is another universal procedure deThe views expressed in this paper are those of the authors. They do not necessarily reflect the
views of the institutions with which they are affiliated.

0169-5150/88/$03.50

© 1988 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.

232

signed to increase the lender's expected profitability from a loan transaction.
Several works developed rigorous models demonstrating that collateral increases (ceteris paribus) the amount of credit offered to a given borrower, or
reduce the rate of interest charged (Barro, 1976; Benjamin, 1978; Plaut, 1985).
The prevalence of collateral arrangements or guaranties in many economies
throughout history would seem to indicate that they perform a useful role for
lenders, otherwise such arrangements would not persist.
In the context of rural financial markets in developing countries, however,
doubts have been raised whether collateral and guaranties are useful and
effective:
"Even when collateral is taken, it may be extremely dificult- for political, social, legal and
institutional reasons - for lenders to foreclose on agricultural land or on other assets, such as
cattle and machinery." (Von Pischke, 1986, p. 95)

If collaterals are not practically enforceable in rural economies of LDCs, one
would expect the practice to vanish, or, if collaterals are used because of bureacratic inertia, they would actually not affect lending decisions. The purpose
of the present paper is to present evidence from several less developed countries on the use of collateral and guaranty procedures in rural financial markets, and on their impact on lending.
The structure of the paper is as follows: the next section provides a conceptual framework on the role of collaterals and other guaranties, followed by
evidence on the use of such procedures. The subsequent section estimates a
supply-demand model using Thai data on credit transactions, to identify the
impact of collateral on credit supply. The last section discusses equity issues
and policy implications.

1 . Role of loan securities

For the purposes of our discussion, it is useful to distinguish two broad sources
of farm credit, namely, institutional (formal) and non-institutional (informal) lenders. Institutional lenders include banks, cooperatives and specialized
government agencies. Non-institutional lenders include friends, relatives, moneylenders, traders and rich farmers. The literature on rural credit markets
suggests several important distinctions between these two sources of finance.
In particular, the role of collateral may differ for these two types of lenders.
The lending decision involves determination of loan amount, the direct and
indirect price, loan duration, and collateral (or other security) requirements.
Some of these decisions may be simultaneous and others may be recursive (e.g.,
the duration or the amount of the loan may depend on the type of collateral
provided). Lenders face the risk of borrower default and thus they require
information which is borrower-specific. The acquisition of information is costly,
and this aspect defines one of the main distinctions between institutional and
non -institutional lenders. The latter are frequently part of the farmers' en vi-

233

ronment. They have established a close acquaintance with the farmer and his
social group and may, in fact, be part of it. They thus have detailed and reliable
information about the farmer (Timberg and Aiyar, 1984; Miracle, 1983). Institutional lenders, on the other hand, do not usually have detailed personal
familiarity with farmers. With less information, a borrower is more risky from
an institutional lender's point of view, as compared to a non-institutionallender.
Another aspect differentiating between the two types of lenders is related to
the borrower's incentive to default and the lender's ability to enforce repayment. Given that the non-institutional creditor is a member of the farmer's
social environment, there are social norms and pressures that militate against
default. An informal lender can also apply violent enforcement procedures or
threats. These aspects are absent in the case of institutional lenders (Bottomley, 1983, p. 284; Von Pischke et al., 1983, p. 228). As a result they will be more
inclined to utilize risk-reducing measures such as loan secirity. The term loan
security usually refers to the pledging of collateral or the provision of collateral
substitute.
The role of collateral in lending is discussed extensively by Barro ( 1976),
Benjamin (1978), Binswanger et al. ( 1985), Plaut ( 1985) andBinswanger and
Rosenzweig ( 1986). A collateral increases the expected return of the lender
and creates an incentive for borrowers to avoid intentional default. It is expected therefore that the amount of loan will increase with the value of the
collateral, ceteris paribus. A collateral is not a risk free asset: it can be damaged
or moved before the creditor seizes it. It is expected that land will be the most
common collateral in rural areas (Binswanger and Rosenzweig, 1986). Typically, in order for land to be used as collateral, evidence of legal ownership is
required (e.g. title).
The utility of land collateral in rural areas depends on the extent to which
the legal system as well as the socio-political environment enable actual foreclosure of agricultural land. Fore-closure usually entails a considerable transaction cost (legal fees, auctioner fees; etc.), but these may in fact reinforce
repayment discipline and enhance the utility of collaterals if the cost is borne
by the borrower. The risk of incurring a high transaction cost in the case of an
unintended default may imply that farmers will forgo the use of collateral even
though this limits their access to credit. An additional risk-reducing element,
implicit in a collateral, is the fact that it restricts the borrower's ability to incur
additional institutional debt (Von Pischke, 1986).
Farmers operating in areas where suitable collaterals are not available (e.g.
squatters) resort to alternative arrangements which are referred to as collateral substitutes, such as third party guaranty (Binswanger et al., 1985). A
common collateral substitute in some LDCs is a 'group guaranty'. Farmers
form groups such that while they borrow individually, the group as a whole is
responsible for each of its members' loans. It is expected that social pressures
will minimize defaults. However, repayment discipline on loans obtained

234

through group guaranty may be hampered if actual enforcement of collective
responsibility is difficult. In many cases the repayment performance of such
loans was poor (Adams and Ladman, 1979; Onchan and Techavatananan, 1982;
Desai, 1983).
For obvious reasons, borrowers who own substantial assets are perferable to
those who have few assets even if no formal collateral is pledged. Similarly,
borrowers with a record of good repayment performance, are preferred to those
who do not have such a record.
Institutional lenders are usually heavily regulated, and in most cases have
to abide by usury laws which dictate a relatively low rate of interest. Noninstitutional lenders are not regulated, and in cases where regulation is attempted it is difficult to enforce. As a result, interest rates charged by such
lenders are typically higher. The ability of non-institutional lenders to charge
higher interest rates to compensate for risk reduces their need to utilize
collateral.
2. Evidence on utilization of loan security

The discussion in the preceding section suggested that institutional lenders
will be more inclined to use collateral or guaranties as compared to non-institutionallenders. It is also expected that land will be a major type of collateral
as it is the most suitable collateral asset. However, ifland cannot be foreclosed
for social or political reasons, the merits of land collaterals are much diminished and their utilization will be less common. These propositions are tested
below using Data from three less developed countries: Thailand (1985/86).
India (1979/80) and Korea (1968).
The data from Thailand pertain to samples of borrowing farmers from eight
provinces. The farmers are separated into two groups, namely farmers who
have titles to their land, and untitled farmers, who are essentially squatters
encroaching on state land. Squatters, who are not legal owners, cannot provide
land as a collateral. The data from Thailand show that titled farmers provide
land as collateral in 63% of the institutional loans sampled (Table 1). Group
guaranty, which is officially sanctioned by the government bank, is used in
only 29% of the institutional loans of titled farmers. A very small proportion
of the institutional loans to titled farmers is not backed by any security. The
situation is different in the case of untitled farmers. As they cannot offer a land
collateral, a vast majority of their loans (71%) is covered by a group guaranty,
and the remaining loans are either backed by a guarantor or are granted with
no security at all. Non-institutionalloans are mostly granted with no collateral
or other security. However, for the few non-institutional loans which involve
any security, the most common security is land collateral.

235
TABLE 1
Borrowing transactions in rural Thailand ( 1985/86)
Type of security

Lender/Borrower type
Institutional

No collateral
Land collateral
Group guaranty
Third party
Other
Sample size

Non-institutional

Titled
farmers

Untitled
farmers

Titled
farmers

Untitled
farmers

(%)

(%)

(%)

(%)

8
63
29
0
0

24
n/a
71
4
1

79
19
0
1
1

95
n/a
0
0
5

316

178

179

153

Sources: Surveys sponsored by World Bank (1985) and Kasetsart University (1986 ).
TABLE2
Collateral types in rural India ( 1979/80)
Collateral type

Land collateral
Third-party guaranty
Other
No collateral

Institutional lenders
(N=226)

Non-institutionallenders
(N=258)

(%)

(%)

65
30
0
5

3
1
13
83

Source: Binswanger eta!. (1985, appendix 4).

The evidence from India is similar (Table 2) 1 . The institutional loans are
backed by a land collateral in almost two thirds of the cases. The remainder of
the institutional loans are granted with a third-party guaranty2 . Non-institutional loans were mostly without a security, as in Thailand. Land was rarely
used as a collateral by informal lenders in India.
The study of Korea took place at a time when the government banned the
use of land as a loan collateral, presumably in an attempt to protect farmers
against land loss and pauperization. Institutional lenders had to abide by this
regulation, and resorted mainly to requiring a third party guaranty. Informal
lenders, however, could arrange an effective land collateral through disguished
conditional sale contracts. (Kim, 1971, p. 179). It is thus observed in Table 3
1 The data on credit transactions in the Indian sample do not distinguish between landowners and
renters or between titled and untitled farmers.
2 Group guaranty was apparently not feasible in India at the time of the study.

236
TABLE3
Distribution of loans by lender and collateral type, Korea 1968"
Collateral type

Land collateral
Movable property
Third party guaranty
No collateral

Institutional
lenders

4.4
9.9
66.9
18.8

Non-institutionallenders
Moneylenders

Traders

Manufacturers

Other
farmers

Informal
credit
association

Relatives
and
friends

25.8
29.6
36.2
8.4

12.0
20.4
28.9
38.7

10.1
19.7
28.1
42.1

7.4
12.7
11.8
68.1

2.0
15.3
26.5
56.2

3.8
12.0
7.6
76.9

"Numbers in the table are percentages of total volume of loans given by each source of credit.
Source: Kim (1971).

that most types of non-institutional lenders had a higher frequency of land
collateral than institutional lenders, ranging from 26% among moneylenders
to 7% among farmers-lenders. It is notable that those informal lenders who
have some social bond with the borrowers (friends, relatives, informal credit
associations, other farmers) are more inclined to forgo a collateral (about 60%
of their loans were not backed by any security). Lenders who have some business transactions with the borrowers (e.g. traders, manufacturers) require
somewhat more frequently a loan security (only 40% of their loans were granted
without security). Moneylenders, whose only dealings with farmers are in the
context of credit transactions, required some form of loan security for more
than 90% of the loans extended. This pattern is compatible with the discussion
of the preceding section. Lenders who are socially related to the borrower have
a better enforcement capability through social pressure. Lenders with other
business dealings with borrowers can use the threat of disrupting other business to increase their enforcement capacity. Moneylenders, who deal with
farmers only in credit transactions, require more security.
If the pledging of a land collateral increases the supply of credit to farmers,
utilization of collateral in rural lending can have adverse implications for equity. Suppose, for simplicity, that a certain amount of credit per hectare ofland
owned is available to farmers when they offer no security, and a larger amount
per hectare is avialable if a land collateral is pledged. The same opportunities
are thus available theoretically to larger and smaller farmers, provided that
they own land. Tenants and renters, who do not own land, do not have the
option of obtaining the larger amount of credit per hectare and herein lies one
inequity implication of land collaterals. This problem, however, is often resolved by the landlords obtaining credit from institutional lenders and relending funds to their tenants.
The actual provision of a land collateral frequently requires certain fixed
transaction costs on the part of farmers, such as ownership certification, legal

237

fees and the farmer's time. Fixed costs imply a higher effective borrowing cost
per hectare to smaller farmers. In addition, the risk of loosing land if the harvest fails is likely to be a stronger deterrent to less wealthy farmers. Smaller
farmers may therefore refrain from pledging collateral either due to cost considerations or due to risk aversion (Aku, 1986, p. 27). This proposition is tested
using data from four provinces in Thailand. A logit equation was estimated,
relating the probability that a titled farmer pledges his land as collateral to the
size of his holding (adjusted for quality differences). The equation is of the
form:
(1)

where Pis the probability of collateral use, Sis farm size, and a, bare parameters.
The results are reported in Table 4, and indicate that the parameter of farm
size is significantly greater than zero at a 99% confidence level. This confirms
that the incidence of land collateral use among borrowing farmers increases
with farm size. Thus, even when all land owners face theoretically similar credit
supply schedules per hectare irrespective of size, the actual borrowing per hectare is larger for wealthier farmers.
A distinction can be drawn between commercial banks and other institutional lenders. While commercial banks are profit-oriented, other institutional
lenders such as government-owned banks and cooperatives may have broader
objectives, and in particular they may be inclined to pursue a wider dispersion
of funds among all classes of farmers. This may translate into different positions with respect to use of collateral. As argued above, a requirement for collateral, and in particular land collateral, may exclude or discourage less wealthy
farmers. For this reason, more socially-oriented lenders adopt more lenient
collateral policies. This hypothesis is compatible with the data from Thailand
and India: of the loans granted by commercial banks, 85% and 89%, respecTABLE4
Logit analysis of the effect of farm size on the probability of using collateral
Variable
Constant
Farm size (adjusted for quality)
Likelihood ratio statistic
No. of observationsb

Parameter
-0.4010
(1.519)"
0.0160
(2.903)
9.955
201

"Numbers in parentheses are t-values.
bThe data pertain to 201 titled borrowers from four Thai provinces surveyed in 1985/1986 under
World Bank and Kasetsart University sponsorship.

238

tively, were backed by land collateraP. This is a significantly higher frequency
than that observed in the overall sample of the loans from institutional lenders
(about 66%). Recent evidence from Nigeria, while not providing detailed data,
indicates that commercial banks frequently require land collateral in their
transactions with farmers (Aku, 1986, p. 27). Similarly, Collier ( 1983, p. 163)
points out the significance of land collateral in the operations of commercial
banks in rural Kenya. Since commercial banks are profit-oriented, and assuming that their information and lending costs are similar to those of other institutionallenders, this observed pattern of their lending is compatible with the
hypothesis that the utilization of collateral (and specifically land collateral)
increases the profitability of their lending.
3. Econometric analysis of supply and demand for institutional
credit

The evidence in the preceding section is generally consistent with the propositions formulated in Section 1. However, if collateral is used only for bureaucratic purposes, the data do not necessarily imply that the utilization of collateral increases the availability of credit. In order to clarify this issue, an analysis of credit supply is required. The standard appraoch in analyzing marketobserved quantities and prices is to assume equilibrium and estimate supply
and demand equations where price (or quantity) is the dependent variable.
However, the credit market may not be in equilibrium due to the prevalence of
rationing (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). This phenomenon is particularly likely
in the case of institutional credit, where information asymmetry increases the
need for supply rationing and where a ceiling on the rate of interest may prevail. The econometric approach suitable for dealing with data generated by
market disequilibrium is popularly known as 'switching regression', and it utilizes a maximum likelihood procedure to obtain simultaneous estimate of supply and demand equations' coefficients which are efficient, consistent, and
asymptotically normal. The data utilized in the analysis were obtained in a
farmers' survey conducted in Lop-Buri province of Thailand in March 1985.
The estimated system is defined formally as:
L 1 =a' X+ (; 1

(supply of institutional credit)

( 2)

(demand for institutional credit)

(3)

L =min (L1 , L 2 ) (observed borrowing from institutional lenders)

(4)

where L 1 is the amount of institutional credit lenders are willing to provide, X
is a vector of farmer characteristics which influence lender perceptions, a a
corresponding vector of parameters, L 2 the amount of credit the farmer would
3

The data from Korea do not distinguish between different types of institutional lenders.

239

like to have, Z a vector of factors determining the farmer's credit requirements,
E1 and E2 are random error terms
which are assumed to be normally distributed wich mean zero. Farmers are
expected to attempt to satisfy their overall credit needs from (cheap) institutional sources first, and only if there is some unsatisfied demand will they
approach non-institutionallenders. This implies that information on farmers'
transactions in the non-institutional credit market does not affect the estimates of the parameter vectors a and fJ of equations (2) and ( 3).
Rigorous models of credit supply and demand have already been developed
in the literature (e.g., Barro, 1976; Bell and Srinivasan, 1985). We, therefore,
provide only a discursive outline of the theory underlying the variables utilized
in the empirical analysis and their expected effects. In general, variables that
were incorporated in the supply equation are indicators which are relatively
easy to observe for an instituionallender. Demand variables, on the other hand,
reflect variables known to the borrower, but not necessarily to the lender. The
determinants of institutional credit supply are:
( 1) Land collateral dummy. The provision of land as a formal collateral
greatly reduces the risk to the lender and thus is hypothesized to increase the
amount of credit offered, relative to a case where no collateral is provided.
(2) Group collateral dummy. The practice of group guaranty theoretically
reduces default risk. It is hypothesized, however, that the amount of credit
offered with a group collateral will be less than that which is offered with a
land collateral. Moreover, in areas where repayment performance on groupresponsibility loans is poor, the amount of credit which is offered with such a
collateral is not expected to be higher than that which is offered in the absence
of any collateral.
( 3) Land value. Land is usually the most valuable asset owned by the farmer,
and as such it can serve to generate cash by sale if cultivation revenues are not
sufficient. In addition, land is a productive factor which generates cash income.
Land value summarizes information pertaining to the land's productive potential ( Chalamwong and Feder, 1987). It is thus expected that farmers who have
higher land value will be offered more institutional credit.
(4) Capital. Farm capital is both an indicator of the farm's productive capacity and an asset with cash value which can serve as an implicit collateral.
Farmers with more capital (measured in current value) are expected to be
offered more credit.
( 5) Debt to institutional lenders. Farmers' outstanding debt to institutional
lenders is a drain on their cash resources and is therefore expected to negatively affect the amount of credit they are offered. Debt to informal lenders is
not included because it is not observable to formal lenders.
(6) Past default dummy. If the farmer has defaulted in the past on payments
to institutional lenders, his creditworthiness is expected to be negatively affected, and hence also the supply of institutional credit available to him.

fJ a corresponding set of parameters, and

240

(7) Formal liquidity. Farmers with more liquid assets are less likely to default
since they can use their liquid resources in order to generate the cash required
to repay a loan, rather than incur the costs of default. The present study defines
outstanding deposits in financial institutions as indicators of liquidity observable to institutional lenders, and these are expected to increase the supply of
credit.
(8) Experience/age. The number of years a farmer has acted as farm manager is expected to increase his productivity and thus to exert positive influence
on a lender's assessment. However, this variable is highly correlated with age.
If younger farmers are perceived as being more productive and innovative, the
effect on credit supply will be negative.
Demand variables

(1) Number of adults. The number of working age adults (ages 14-65) in
the household represents a fixed endowment (in the short run), which redudes
the need for cash for hired labor. However, this variable is also an important
determinant of consumption requirements, and could thus affect positively the
demand for credit. The final effect on demand is thus undetermined.
(2) Education. The number of years of formal schooling is an indicator of
human capital, which affects positively efficiency. For this reason, education
would also be an indicator of creditworthiness, and would affect the supply of
institutional credit. However, sample farmers have had only a few years of
elementary schooling, and it is difficult for the lender to verify that the reported number of school years is indeed accurate. It should also be pointed out
that there is very little variation in the sample with respect to reported formal
schooling. Higher human capital increases the marginal productivity of variable inputs, and thus increases the demand for inputs and the derived demand
for cash.
(3) Experience. The number of years of practice as farm decision maker is
an indicator of human capital, and would thus be expected to have an effect
quantitatively similar to that of education. However, given the high correlation
between this indicator and age, and the possibility that higher age is related to
lesser innovativeness, the ultimate effect on credit demand may be positive or
negative.
(4) Title dummy. Possession of a legal title increases ownership security,
and thereby it increases the incentive to invest (Feder and Onchan, 1987).
The higher demand for investment translates into higher demand for credit,
and it is thus expected that the possession of title will positively affect credit
demand.
(5) Capital. The effect of the farmer's stock of capital on credit demand is
complex, and there are several counterveiling aspects. A higher stock of capital
increases the marginal productivities of variable inputs (when production

241

complementarity exists), and would thus induce a higher derived demand for
credit. But the availability of more family-owned machinery and animals reduces the need to hire machine and animal services, and thus reduces cash
need. The net effect on credit demand is thus ambiguous.
(6) Owned land, adjusted for quality. Land is a major determinant of the
farmer's productive potential and of his scale of operation. With larger amounts
of land owned, the farmer's total demand for variable inputs will be higher,
and hence the demand for credit. The amount of land owned is adjusted for
quality differences using a land quality index derived from a hedonic price
analysis of land values ( Chalamwong and Feder, 1987).
( 7) Net liquidity. The farmer's liquidity, including certain liquid assets not
easily observable to formal lenders, such as a output not yet sold, will have a
negative effect on the farmer's demand for cash.
Variables pertaining to cropping decisions (i.e., area cultivated, types of crops
grown) are not included in the analysis since they are being determined simultaneously with the demand for credit, or even after the farmer knows what
amount of liquidity he can obtain. The interest rate on institutional credit is
practically identical for all farmers within the area studied because of a legal
interest rate ceiling. It is therefore excluded from the analysis.
If the institutional credit market were in equilibrium (i.e., demand and supply are equal at the prevailing interest rate), then a single-equation reduced
form could be estimated, involving all the variables in vectors X and Z. The
two models (equilibrium and disequilibrium) cannot be tested formally for
superiority as they are not nested. However, the main interest is in the impact
of the collateral variables, which can be identified even in the reduced form
equilibrium model (they appear in the supply equation only). Therefore, both
specifications can be compared with respect to the conclusions they generate
for the collateral variables. The estimation results are reported in Table 5
The results for both models are quite similar. The estimates indicate that
the coefficient of the land collateral dummy variable in the supply equation is
significantly greater than zero at the 95% confidence level. This confirms that
the pledging of land collateral significantly increases the amount of credit offered by institutional lenders as compared to the case of no collateral. The
coefficient of the group collateral dummy variable is small in magnitude, and
it is not significantly different from zero (it is negative in the disequilibrium
model). The difference between the coefficient of the land collateral and the
group guaranty is statistically significant at a 95% confidence level for both
models. The results imply that farmers providing land collateral obtain more
institutional credit than farmers providing group guaranty or no security at
all. In the area studied, group guaranty apparently does not imporve access to
credit.
The parameters of land value and capital in the supply equation of the disequilibrium model are significantly greater than zero, as expected. It is note-

242
TABLE5
Econometric analysis of institutional credit supply and demand (Lop-Buri Province, Thailand,
1985)
Disequilibrium model
Supply equation
Constant
Land collateral
Group guaranty
Land value
Capital
Liquidity
(in institutions)
Experience
(age)
Debt to
institutions
Past default
(dummy)

Equilibrium model
Demand Equation

8.8431
(17.524)"
0.3643
(2.091)
-0.0666
(0.421)
0.1694
(2.547)
0.0508
(2.368)
0.0004
(0.028)
0.2193
( 1.884)
0.0404
(2.491)
-0.0205
(0.182)

Constant
No. of adults
Education
Land (adjusted
for quality)
Capital
Liquidity
(total)
Experience
(age)
Title (dummy)

Reduced Form
11.1641
(2.292)
2.2356
(1.402)
-0.4084
( 1.211)
0.3958
(0.384)
0.1063
(0.777)
-0.0626
(0.260)
-0.9145
(0.955)
8.0803
(0.407)

Constant
land collateral
Group guaranty
Land valueh
Capital
Liquidity in
(institutions)
Experience (age)
Debt to
institutions
Past default
(dummy)
No. of adults
Education
Liquidity
(total)
Title (dummy)

Rz

n.a.
Likelihood ratio statistic
No. of observations

n.a.
55.5
116

8.7213
(15.356)
0.4386
(2.126)
0.0738
(0.414)
0.1854
(2.760)
0.0541
(2.395)
0.0123
(0.827)
-0.2916
(2.222)
-0.0355
(1.909)
0.0280
(0.223)
0.1277
(0.844)
-0.0015
(0.030)
-0.0249
(0.975)
0.0970
(0.617)
0.34
n.a.
116

•Numbers in parentheses are asymptotic t-values in the disequilibrium model, and t-values in the
equilibrium model.
hBecause land value and area adjusted for quality are highly correlated, only land value was used
in the reduced form.

worthy that the coefficient of land is significantly larger than that of capital,
implying that land is perceived as a better implicit collateral. In the disequilibrium model, liabilities to institutions have a significant negative effect on
supply as expected. Experience, or rather, age, seems to have a negative effect

243

on institutional credit supply. The default dummy variable and the liquidity
variable are not statistically significant although they have the expected sign.
In the demand equation of the disequilibrium model most of the parameters
are not statistically significant. The number of adults increases significantly
(at a 95% one-tailed confidence level) the demand for credit. The inconclusiveness of the demand estimates is apparently due to the fact that the disequilibrium model almost all borrowers (97%) had a high probability (of 50%
or more) of being credit supply-constrained.
The numerical results imply that in the area studied, the pledging of land
collateral increases the amount of institutional credit offered by 43% ( disequilibrium model) or 55% (equilibrium model), as compared to a loan without
a security (calculated using the logarithmic coefficient in Table 5). This is
compatible with a situation where lenders perceive a significant improvement
in loan profitability when land collateral is pledged. The Thai legal system does
indeed allow land foreclosure (Feeny, 1982, pp. 96, 189-190). While foreclosures are not frequent, the threat of land loss is apparently perceived as viable
by farmers, and land collateral is therefore useful for lenders.

4. Policy implications
The possible negative equity implications of collateral requirements underly
the frequent attempts by development officials and policy makers to reduce or
eliminate the need for land collaterals. Alternative arrangements such as group
guaranties and partial government guaranties are typically proposed. In several countries, the utilization of land collateral is banned or is made ineffective
by political interventions rescinding foreclosures.
The evidence shows that institutional lenders prefer land collaterals to other
loan securities, where land collaterals are legal. Moreover, group guaranties
are frequently ineffective, as is apparent from a review of experience in several
LDCs (Desai, 1983). Government guaranties for farmers' loans can lead to
moral hazard problems: lenders will be inclined to adopt a lax creditworthiness
assessment procedure, and borrowers will have less incentive to repay. Moral
hazard problems thus lead to welfare losses. Efficiency loss is also likely to
result from a ban on land collateral as this forces lenders to spend more resources (at the margin) on creditworthiness assessment, and less lending to
farmers may take place as lenders shift funds to other borrowers who are less
risky (but have lower return) at the margin. As demonstrated in the case of
Korea, the prohibition on land collateral, while adhered to by institutional
lenders, did not prevent informal lenders from utilizing collateral in a disguised
form, and thus did not prevent land loss.
The costs of creditworthiness assessments are a consideration overlooked
by many development officers and scholars who call for abandonment of 'old
fashioned' lending procedures based on collateral in favor of procedures based

244

on projections of farm budgets and detailed assessments of farmers' capabilities. Such assessments put a heavier demand on lending institutions' staff time,
and thus the more equitable distribution of credit is obtained at a real cost.
One policy which is typically pursued for other purposes, but which has a
direct bearing on the transaction cost of pledging land collaterals (and hence
on the equity issue) is land titling and registration. When land registers are
kept up to date and ownership documents are provided on a large scale with
simple procedures, it is easy (and cheap) for farmers to confirm ownership and
to pledge collateral. Simplification of legal procedures for land transactions is
also a policy with a similar effect, namely, it reduces the inequity in access to
credit without incurring an efficiency loss.
Another policy addressing smaller farmers' aversion to the pledging of collateral is the implementation of procedures whereby rescheduling of loans is
possible (with a small interest penalty to cover processing costs) if the inability to repay on schedule is a result of natural calamities or a temporary weak
market. This procedure alleviates somewhat the farmer's fear of land loss in
the case of adverse developments beyond their control, but maintains a lien on
the land, thus providing an incentive to repay.
The relaxation of interest rate ceilings, or elimination of subsidies on agricultural credit, aside from a direct efficiency gain, will reduce (at the margin)
the role of land collaterals and other securities. However, the evidence in the
paper demonstrates that even in the unregulated informal credit markets, collaterals are being used, albeit at a lesser frequency. Since information asymmetries are bound to persist in most lending transactions by institutional
lenders, it is unlikely that the usefulness of collaterals will be eliminated once
interest rate restrictions are removed.

References
Adams, D. and Ladman, J., 1979. Lending to rural poor through informal groups: a promising
financial market innovation? Paper presented at the 17th International Conference of Agricultural Economists, August 1979, Banff, Alta., Canada.
Aku, P.S., 1986. Lending to farmers through the commercial banks in a developing economy: the
Nigerian experience. Agric. Syst., 22: 23-32.
Barro, R., 1976. The loan market, collateral and rates of interest. J. Money Credit Banking, 8:
439-456.
Bell, C. and Srinivasan, T.N., 1985. Agricultural credit markets in Punjab: segmentation, rationing and spillover. RP0-671-89 Work. Pap. 7, World Bank, Washington, DC, 53 pp.
Benjamin, D.K., 1978. The use of collateral to enforce debt contracts. Econ. Inq., 16: 333-359.
Binswanger, H.P. and Rosenzweig, M.R., 1986. Behavioral and material determinants of production relations in agriculture. J. Dev. Stud., 22: 503-539.
Binswanger, H., Balaramania, V., Rao, B., Bhende, M. and Kashirsagar, K., 1985. Credit markets
in rural India: theoretical issues and empirical analysis. Disc. Pap. ARU-45, Agricultural Research Unit, World Bank, Washington, DC, 84 pp.

245
Bottomley, A., 1983. Interest rate determination. In: J.D. Von Pischke, D. Adams and G. Donald
(Editors), Rural Financial Markets in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD, pp. 243-250.
Chalamwong, Y. and Feder, G., 1987. Ownership security and land values: theory and evidence
from Thailand. Department of Agricultural and Rural Development, World Bank, Washington,
DC, 28pp.
Collier, P ., 1983. Malfunctioning of African rural factor markets: theory and a Kenyan example.
Oxford Bull. Econ. Stat., 45: 141-173.
Desai, B., 1983. Group lending in rural areas. In: J. Von Pischke, D. Adams and G. Donald (Editors), Rural Financial Markets in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD, pp. 284-288.
Feder, G. and Onchan, T., 1987. Ownership security and farm investment. Am. J. Agric. Econ.,
69: 311-320.
Feeny, D., 1982. The Political Economy of Productivity: Thai Agricultural Development 18801975. University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver, B.C., 238 pp.
Hazell, P., Pomareda, C. and Valdes, A. (Editors), 1986. Crop Insurance for Agricultural Development. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 322 pp.
Kim Sung Hoon, 1971. The structure and functioning of rural credit in Korea: an empirical analysis. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, 321 pp.
Miracle, M., 1983. Economic incentives for loan agents. J. Von Pischke, D. Adams and G. Donald
(Editors), Rural Financial Markets in Developing Contries. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD, pp. 213-217.
Onchan, T. and Techavatananan, V., 1982. Economics of group lending in Thailand: a case study
in Suphanburi Province. Center for Applied Economic Research, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 32 pp.
Plaut, S.E., 1985. The theory of collateral. J. Banking Finane., 9: 349-475.
Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A., 198I: Credit rationing and markets with imperfect information. Am.
Econ. Rev., 71: 393-410.
Timberg, T. and Aiyar, C.V., 1984. Informal credit markets in India. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change, 33:
43-59.
Von Pischke, J.D., 1986. Can crop credit insurance address risks in agricultural lending? In: P.
Hazell, C. Pomareda and A. Valdes (Editors), Crop Insurance for Agricultural Development.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, pp. 87-100.
Von Pischke, J.D., Adams, D. and Donald, G. (Editors), 1983. Rural Financial Markets in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 441 pp.

