Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

The impact of seed industry concentration on innovation:
a study of US biotech market leaders
David E. Schimmelpfennig a,∗ , Carl E. Pray b , Margaret F. Brennan c
a

Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Resource Economics Division,
1800 M Street, NW, Room 4195, Washington, DC 20036-5831, USA
b Department of Agricultural, food and Resource Economics, Rutgers University, USA
c Cook College Office of Research, Rutgers University, USA

Received 18 April 2001; received in revised form 1 June 2002; accepted 6 November 2002

Abstract
Agricultural research drives increases in agricultural productivity, and the number of private agricultural input firms has been
declining. The empirical relationship between the number of firms doing applied biotechnology crop research and the amount
of research output they produce is investigated in a research profit function model. Increases in seed industry concentration
have reduced biotech research intensity in the United States in the 1990s. Concentration and research are simultaneously
determined and are influenced by the appropriability of research results and the state of technological opportunity.
© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: L1; Q16; C3
Keywords: Industrial organisation; Biotechnology R&D

1. Introduction
Productivity growth has an important influence on
the competitiveness and profitability of international
agriculture. To remain in business agricultural producers have often had to adopt new technologies. Some
of these innovations have been embodied in mechanical inputs that have replaced labour. Other new inputs,
like high-yielding seed varieties and chemical herbicides and pesticides, have increased land productivity.
These new technologies have led to post-war total factor productivity growth in agriculture that is almost
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-202-694-5507;
fax: +1-202-694-5774.
E-mail address: des@ers.usda.gov (D.E. Schimmelpfennig).

four times the growth rate in the non-farm economy
in the US (Jorgenson and Gollop, 1992).
Huffman and Evenson (1992) showed that both public and private research were major contributors to productivity growth in the post-war period. The relative
importance of the public and private sectors has been
changing around the world, but particularly in the US.
Private sector spending on agricultural research and
development (R&D) more than doubled in the US between 1970 and 1996, from 2 to 4.2 billion US dollars
(bUS$). Public Federal and State research have been
stagnant at a little over 1.5 and 1 bUS$, respectively,
since 1978 (Fuglie, 2000).
In the 1990s, the private sector made major investments in agricultural biotechnology research. Just and
Hueth (1993) link the direction of biotechnology in-

0169-5150/$ – see front matter © 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2002.11.001

158

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

novation to market structure. They argued that chemical companies would develop biological innovations
that increase dependence on the chemicals that they
sell. Ollinger and Pope (1995) empirically tested Just
and Hueth’s theoretical findings using the numbers of
permits for pre-market field tests of genetically modified crops from the US Department of Agriculture’s
(USDA) Animal Plant Health and Inspection Service
(APHIS). They did not find empirical support for the
Just and Hueth hypothesis.
The large number of mergers and acquisitions in
agricultural inputs industries around the world raises
the question whether more concentrated markets increase or decrease the level of biotechnology research,
and future increases in agricultural productivity. Other
than the studies mentioned in the previous paragraph,
there have been no empirical studies of the links between the structure of the agricultural input industries
and the amount of R&D. Furthermore, for all industries there are few indicators to help the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) or Department of Justice in the
US, or their counterparts around the world, identify
whether the level of concentration in the innovation
market is in some sense sub-optimal. We develop a simultaneous theoretical model of concentration in the
innovation market and private R&D intensity in an attempt to answer this question.
Of course, industry structure is not the only factor that can influence the amount of private research.
Public R&D and stronger intellectual property rights
(IPRs) could also induce more private R&D. Thus our
model also includes variables for public research and
IPRs. We test the model with private R&D measured
by data on biotech field trials of corn, cotton and soybeans divided by total (biotech and non-biotech) US
market seed sales to control for potential market size.

The answers to these questions will be of interest to
policymakers and officials in antitrust regulation who
are concerned with levels of seed and biotech industry
concentration. We provide some of the first estimates
of the effects of concentration in these industries. The
results should also be of interest to administrators in
public research institutions and people in charge of
IPRs. The next section reviews the recent stylised facts
about US corn, cotton and soybean production and the
influence of biotechnology on these crops. The following sections introduce the theoretical model and test
it using aggregate US data. The last section examines
some of the policy implications of our results.

2. Corn, cotton and soybean production, industry
consolidation, and the spread of genetically
modified varieties
This study focuses on corn, cotton and soybeans
because genetically modified (GM) varieties of these
three crops cover most of the total area of GM crops
in the US. Table 1 presents some of the characteristics
of the US markets for and research efforts on these
crops. Total area planted to transgenic varieties remained quite large in 2000. Round-up ReadyTM soybeans cover the most area followed by insect resistant
(Bt) corn, Bt cotton and cotton with stacked Bt and
Round-up Ready (RR) genes. The spread of GM varieties in these crops is partially the result of large investments in plant breeding and biotech research that
have focused on these crops. Corn has attracted far
more plant breeding and biotech research resources
than any other crop (see last column in Table 1), and
has had the largest number of transgenic varieties approved for commercial use (see next to last column of

Table 1
Characteristics of US biotech markets and research on corn, cotton and soybeans

Corn
Cottona
Soybeans

Area planted in
US, 2000
(millions of acres)

Area of transgenic
varieties, 2000
(millions of acres)

Number of private
plant breeders,
1994 (Frey, 1996)

Number of
biotech patents
(1990–1999)

Number of
transgenic varieties
approved for
commercial use

Number of field
trials (and rank)

79.6
15.4
74.5

19.9
9.4
40.2

510
103
101

299
382
141

14
5
5

2591 (1)
395 (5)
509 (3)

Sources: area planted and area of transgenics from NASS (2000). Transgenic varieties approved and number of field trials from APHIS
(1999). Patents see Table 2.
a Upland varieties (excludes Pima cotton).

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

Dow, but only a few (including Liberty LinkTM and
non-transgenic imidazolinone (IMI) herbicide tolerant
varieties) have been adopted in the US so far.
There is less concentration in the innovation markets than in the sales of genes or varieties. Measuring
concentration in the innovation market is possible because all new GM varieties ready to be tested in open
fields have to be registered with USDA and data on
each application is publicly available. This data can be
used to measure concentration in several ways. First,
we can simply look at the number of firms that are
doing research on genetically engineered crops. Fig. 1
shows that the number of firms increased rapidly to
the mid-1990s and slowly started to decline thereafter.
Second, we can calculate a four-firm concentration ratio of the field trials of these crops. In 1989–1990 and
1998, over 80% of all field trials were done by the top
four firms. Third, one firm, Monsanto, has conducted
over a third of all field trials in some years.
Another reason to look at these crops is that US policy makers are intervening in the supply of research
and technology in many ways—antitrust activity,
public research, and strengthened patents. Concentration in these industries has already attracted antitrust
actions. When Monsanto acquired Holden’s Foundation Seed Company in 1997, the government required
Monsanto to continue to make corn germplasm available to other companies for a number of years. To get
approval for its acquisition of DeKalb, Monsanto had
to remove restrictions on the use of other companies’
genes in connection with Monsanto’s genes and give
up some of its plant transformation technology to the

Table 1). Soybeans and cotton were ranked third and
fifth in biotech research respectively. We concentrate
exclusively on the US because of the strong possible
impact that consumer acceptance may have had on the
development and adoption of transgenic varieties in
Europe in the late 1990s.
There has been growing concentration in the seed
markets of these crops in the US. Mergers and acquisitions have led to a corn seed market in 1997 in which
Pioneer/DuPont had over 40% of total sales, Monsanto
had 20% and a large number of companies competed
for the other 40% or less. “In addition, Monsanto’s
purchase of Holden’s [Foundation Seed Company]
gives them significant influence over germplasm sold
to other companies; Holdens’ germplasm is estimated
to be part of an additional 30–40% of branded seed
sales” (Hayenga, 1998). These two companies are also
leaders in soybean seed sales. Each company’s share
of purchased seed is around 20%. Finally, in cotton,
one company, Delta and Pineland, which was almost
purchased by Monsanto, controls more than 70% of
the seed market. The next largest company has about
16% (Hayenga).
Sales of the biotech-gene component of these seeds
are even more concentrated although levels of concentration are declining as more genes owned by more
companies come on the market. Monsanto provides
the Bt and RR genes for corn, soybeans and cotton not
only to their own subsidiaries, but also to Pioneer and
other competitors (Rausser et al., 1999). Competing
varieties of Bt and herbicide tolerance genes are available from American Cyanamid, Aventis, Syngenta and

%

100

45

90

40

80
70

35

60
50

No. of
25 Firms
20

30

40
30

15
10

20
10

5

0

0
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

159

1995

1996

1997

1998

Source: APHIS, 1999
Fig. 1. Concentration of research and number of firms.

Monsanto
4 Firm
Total No.
of Firms

160

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

University of California. In addition, it appears that
the FTC held up Monsanto’s purchase of Delta and
Pineland until Monsanto sold off their cotton seed
subsidiary Stoneville.
The Federal government is also intervening in these
markets by investing a considerable amount of public
money in corn, cotton and soybean research including strategic research like the corn genome project.
In soybeans, public varieties still account for about
10% of soybean sales. Finally, the government intervenes through the patent system. The US system allows patenting of plant varieties, genes and biotech
tools unlike most other countries in the world where
plant varieties and genes can not be patented. The results obtained for the US can help inform biotech policymaking in other countries and particularly in the
European Community (EU) where the US companies
are quite active.

3. The economic model
Arrow (1962) argued that the payoff to a successful
firm in an R&D race would depend on the structure
of the market for its innovation. Phillips (1971) extended this theoretical argument by pointing out that
the nature and structure of R&D might feed back and
influence the structure of the market for the resulting
innovations. Schumpeter was among the first to notice
that in more competitive industries the rate of innovation seemed to be higher, but in his later writings
he points out that market concentration can lead to
more R&D. In this paper, we empirically test a Schumpeterian model in which market structure and R&D
are jointly and endogenously determined (Levin and
Reiss, 1984; Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1980a). We also
explicitly model and test the influence of appropriability and public R&D on private research spending, and
thus possibly industry structure.
Besides the link between industry structure and innovation, Schumpeter is also associated with the related idea that the rate of innovation might depend on
firm size. Kohn and Scott (1982) examine the theoretical relationships between firm-specific R&D scale
economies and firm size in a static model. They find
that relationships between firm size, R&D and various
Schumpeterian hypotheses could be influenced by differences in sizes of potential market shares, opportu-

nities for risk spreading, costs of capital, and access to
efficient marketing channels. The message from this
literature is that the relationship between a firm’s size
and its rate of innovation is probably dynamic in annual data. Cohen and Levin (1989) find that most of the
empirical literature testing Schumpeterian hypotheses
is inconclusive because of failures to focus on factors
explaining interindustry differences in rates of innovation and firm heterogeneity.1 They point the way
forward by indicating the need to measure interindustry differences in the availability of technological opportunity and the appropriability of the returns from
innovation.
We develop a framework that explicitly considers
these factors, and we appeal to Cohen et al.’s (1987)
finding that firm size has a small, insignificant interindustry effect on R&D intensity when technological opportunity and appropriability are held constant.
It seems quite likely that the same will be true when
three comparatively similar agricultural biotech crops
comprise the ‘industries’. Levin et al. (1985) find
this to be true across 13 (two-digit SIC) industries.
The remaining question then is whether the data on
these three crops will allow us to identify significant
cross-crop effects of concentration on R&D intensity
in aggregate US data.
We employ a static model with identical firms and
assume firms maximise profit by choosing only their
levels of output and expenditures on R&D. Firm i’s
R&D (xi ) shifts its own cost function down, independently of the level of output chosen, and contributes
to the industry level of R&D (Σxi = X). The unit cost
of firm i is,
ci = c(xi , X)

(1)

where c1 , c2 < 0, and c11 , c22 > 0,2 with positive,
convex returns to own and industry R&D.3 X is an
argument in the firm’s cost function because the firm
may benefit from innovation spill-overs within its industry. Spill-overs are an external scale economy that
1 Several industries are necessary in most empirical studies to
allow for the collection of sufficient data to test for significant
relationships.
2 Numerical subscripts denote first or second derivatives with
respect to first (1) or second (2) arguments.
3 Moschini and Lapan (1997) argue that for agricultural input
innovations, product and process innovations can both be modeled
as downward shifts in the cost function of the innovating firm.

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

firms may attempt to control, so we solve the model
in a way that allows us to monitor the appropriability
of own R&D (xi ). The problem of firm i is then to,
= [p(Q) − c(xi , X)]qi − xi

Max
qi ,xi

(2)

i

where Q = Σqi is industry output, and p(X) is the
inverse industry demand curve for biotech seed varieties.
There is some evidence that agricultural input markets are oligopolistic with free-entry (Barton, 1998;
Harl, 2000). We therefore assume that firms make
Cournot conjectures regarding the output levels chosen
by all other firms. For firm i this implies dQ/dqi = 1.
Conjectural variations concerning the response of input industry R&D to a change in one firm’s R&D level
could be more complicated. To leave open a full range
of conjectures concerning inter-firm strategic R&D behaviour we assume dX/dxi = θi , so θ is a function
of xi conditional on X (xi /X). Later we explore how
changes in θ influence the empirical results, but we do
not estimate θ directly.4 Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980b)
show that the profit of each firm in an industry, in a
similar model, is zero in the long-run with symmetric
free entry and exit.
Following Levin and Reiss, the first-order conditions for maximisation of the profit of the ith firm are
si
p 1−
= c,
(3)
ε
and
−(c1 + c2 θi )qi = 1

(4)

where ε = p/Qp1 , is the price elasticity of demand,
and si = qi /Q, is the ith firm’s market share. With
Cournot conjectures in output, equilibria exist under a
wide range of parameter values. Using the symmetric
industry zero-profit condition,
[p(Q) − c(xi , X)]Q = nx
4

(5)

It is also possible to think of the output and R&D levels chosen by the firms as the outcome of a symmetric Nash (one-shot)
noncooperative game. Introducing dynamic games like Stackelberg
leaders and followers would be quite appealing because of the
possibility that there is a first-mover advantage in agbiotech research, but this is beyond the scope of our paper. Instead we make
the convenient assumption that technological opportunity and appropriability control for firm heterogeneity in strategic behaviour,
the same assumption that we made for firm size.

161

so that markets clear, and after dividing both sides of
(5) by total revenue, we have two structural equations:
1
(qi ) = ε(qi )R,
n
and
R
(xi /X)
= α(xi /X) + γ(X/xi )θ
1−R
n

(6)

(7)

where n is the number of firms in each input market as
a function of the output of firm i, so 1/n is the Herfindahl index of concentration (H) for equally sized firms.
R is the ratio of industry R&D to sales.In Eq. (7),
(1 − R) is the share of sales revenue that does not go
to R&D in the industry, and α is firm elasticity of unit
cost with respect to own R&D (xi ) holding industry
R&D constant. Since R&D is assumed to be focused
on cost-reducing innovations, α represents the productivity of research or technological opportunity. Also in
(7), γ is the elasticity of unit cost with respect to input
industry R&D (X) holding own R&D constant. This
elasticity is a measure of the extent to which research
results are appropriable by the innovator or spill-over
to lower the costs of other firms. As long as the conjectural variation, θ, is positive, higher levels of γ will
be associated with increased appropriability.5 Concentration and R&D intensity are jointly endogenous (and
are functions of the choice variable, output) and the
theoretical model is identified by α (that is a function
of the other choice variable, R&D).
The input market elasticities, α, ε, and γ are time
variant in the theoretical model, so to empirically estimate the model with time series data, additional structure must be imposed on (6) and (7). By assuming that
both the underlying cost and inverse demand functions
have constant elasticities, and after taking natural logs
of Eq. (6), the empirical model becomes:
Log H = constant1 + β1 log (R) + e1

(8)

R
= constant2 + β2 α + β3 (θγH) + e2
1−R

(9)

where R is industry R&D intensity, β1,...,3 are estimated coefficients, and the e1,2 are residual errors.
5 If the behavioural parameter θ were negative, it would mean
that firms are free-riders to the extent that a 1$ increase by firm
i produces cutbacks of more that 1$ in the R&D expenditures of
the other firms.

162

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

Eq. (9) is not in logarithms so the model can be estimated jointly as a linear simultaneous system. The
theoretical model indicates appropriability should be
interacted with concentration (1/n) (when θ is held
constant) in (9), so the estimated models provide information on the substitutability and complementarity
of appropriability and concentration. If β3 is positive
(negative), appropriability and concentration are complements (substitutes).
The model is estimated as an independent linear
simultaneous system for each of the three crops (corn,
cotton and soybeans), and as a panel, assuming that
coefficients are homogeneous across the crops, accounting for any correlation between the errors in
the equations for different crops. There are several
approaches available for instrumental variable estimation of panel data. Baltagi (1981) shows that one-way
error components three-stage least squares reduces
to one-way error components two-stage least squares
(EC2SLS) when the errors in Eqs. (8) and (9) are uncorrelated with each other. This appears to be the case
as we show in the results section. The model is identified empirically by the use of first stage instruments
that are correlated with the variables and uncorrelated
with the error terms. The first stage instruments that
we use are total US sales figures for rapeseed, rice
and sugarbeets.

4. Data
To test the impact of concentration on research intensity, our principle goal, we have identified variables
that measure concentration and research, and other important variables that influence research intensity. The
variable names and data sources are listed in Table 2.
Concentration is measured as the Herfindahl index for
the industry, which for equally sized firms is equal to
the reciprocal of the number of firms.6 Biotechnology
research intensity is measured as counts of biotech
crop field trials divided by total GM and non-GM seed
sales to capture GM market potential.7 Field trials are
6 The theoretical model that we test assumes equally size firms,
so we maintain this assumption in the creation of variables to
test the model. The 4-firm concentration ratio displays insufficient
inter-annual variability.
7 Our intensity variable measures applied research, and we are
unable to determine how market structure might influence the

a good proxy for proprietary data on applied R&D expenditures by crop. Every time a company wishes to
test a plant variety that it has transformed with a foreign gene it must apply to the USDA for permission to
test this variety in experimental fields. Field trials are
not the perfect expenditure variable because of other
random and administrative factors in the GM-crop approval process that can influence the number of field
trials, but they do measure research activity and not
just research success. For corn, for example, only 14
GM varieties have been approved for commercial use
while there have been 2591 field trials of GM corn
varieties (Table 1). Our theoretical model focuses on
the current relationship between these variables, abstracts from dynamic considerations, and indicates that
research intensity may be influenced by at least two
groups of factors in addition to concentration.
The first set of these other factors are those that shift
α or technological opportunity. Some of these factors
are crop specific public research and plant breeding,
crop specific transformation possibilities, and the exploitation of spillovers from public goods. We measure
this as the number of scientists (scientist years, SYs)
at the USDA and the land grant universities working
on crop specific public research as recorded in the
USDA’s Current Research Inventory System (CRIS).
Research expenditures from the same source did not
provide useful results, probably because of the substantial administrative and overhead costs included in
these expenditures. The more scientists are working
on a crop, the more likely they are to find new research methods, new genes, new germplasm or new
knowledge about the crop that will reduce a private
firm’s costs of developing a new variety. We applied
a simple lag to the data and in the name of parsimony
avoided more elaborate distributed lag structures.
Firms’ expectations about technological opportunity are likely to be based on the cost of research and
the probability of developing and commercialising a
new product. This expectation will in turn depend on
the cost of research inputs, and the time and effort
needed to develop a commercial product. We tried,
unsuccessfully, to create a variable for past research
success. Technological opportunity to improve each
willingness of firms to engage in basic research, such as genomics,
which could be influenced by quite a different set of factors
because of the long-term nature of basic research.

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

163

Table 2
Corn, cotton and soybeans biotechnology data, 1989–1998
Variable name

Variable

How to measure

Source

Research intensity

Private applied biotech R&D
per unit of seed sales
Public research expenditure

Annual field trials by crop per 1 US$ of seed
sales of that crop
Scientist years (SYs) by commodity

APHIS and ERS USDA
CRIS USDA

Biotech patents

Patents of private firms by crop

Derwent world patent index

R&D concentration
Multinational

1/number of firms conducting field trials on a crop
Percentage of trials by multinational companiesa

Calculated from APHIS data
Calculated from APHIS data

Technological
opportunity
Appropriability
Concentration

Sources: APHIS (1999). Seed sales are calculated using the value of seed purchased per acre when available from Gill (1996) and filling
in more recent years using the value of seed purchased per acre in 1996 multiplied by the sown area of the crop. Scientist years are
unpublished data from the Current Research Information System (CRIS) of USDA in various years. The number of issued biotech patents
by private firms is supplied by Derwent Information’s Derwent World Patent Index.
a These include firms owned by multinational chemical or pharmaceutical companies, i.e. Monsanto, DuPont, Novartis, Agrevo,
Astra/Zeneca and Dow.

specific crop will be influenced primarily by public
sector research on that crop. Public scientists and labs
also carry out contract research for the private sector
that is included in the CRIS data.
Second, we control for factors affecting γ or appropriability. We measure this by the number of biotech
patents on each crop. Firms’ expectations of their ability to appropriate a share of the total cost savings due
to research will depend on the legal structure of IPRs,
the physical ease of copying the invention, and the
firms’ abilities to stay ahead of competitors. In addition, monopoly power arising from factors other than
IPRs can also increase the ability of firms to capture a
share of the market, and we include market size in the
research intensity variable. Since corn is a hybrid crop,
it is difficult for farmers to replant the seed. However,
companies still feel it is important to protect their hybrid varieties, breeding techniques, inbred lines and
genes from copying by other companies. They do this
using utility patents whenever possible.
Cotton and soybean seeds are not F1 hybrids. Companies producing these crops can only protect them by
means of plant breeder’s rights and utility patents—not
the technical protection provided by hybrids. Companies will only go to the expense of patenting if they
think that there is a market for their new technology,
and that the patents will actually reduce spill-overs.
Therefore the number of biotech patents on each crop
reflects in part, companies’ assessments of whether
IPRs really provide appropriability for their technologies or not. Instrumental variables were introduced

to handle the simultaneity in the theoretical model in
Section 3, but are also necessary because patents are
probably systematically related to R&D through some
form of research production function.

5. Results
From previous research and other information that
we have collected on the agricultural input industry,
it is not clear whether increased concentration will
increase or decrease research intensity, defined as
research output per unit of total GM and non-GM
industry sales. Concentration could increase appropriability, which could increase R&D intensity.
Economies of scale and scope in conducting research,
and obtaining and defending IPRs on research results,
could increase the productivity of a unit of research
and could increase research intensity. However, concentration might also reduce the competitive pressure
to carry out research. Economies of scale in research
obtained within a firm could be offset by diseconomies
of centralised bureaucratic management. In addition,
risk aversion may increase with increased concentration, as small, high-risk entrepreneurial firms are
eliminated.
Conversely, research intensity may or may not lead
to increased concentration. An incentive for expansion and concentration may be to spread-out the sunk
cost of research, especially the large investments that
are required to carry out research in basic biotech-

164

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

Table 3
Two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of structural equations for individual crops
Regressors
Corn (n = 9)
R&D intensity
Patentsa concentration
Public R&D (5 year lag)
Constant
Durbin–Watson statistic
Akaike information criterion
Cotton (n = 10)
R&D intensity
Patentsa concentration
Public R&D (15 year lag)
Constant
Durbin–Watson statistic
Akaike information criterion
Soybeans (n = 10)
R&D intensity
Patentsa concentration
Public R&D (20 year lag)
Constant
Durbin–Watson statistic
Akaike information criterion
a
b

Industry concentration equation

R&D equation

Coefficient

t-statistic

Coefficient

t-statistic

−0.48

−9.69b
0.04
0.0002

2.33a
1.76a

−3.99

−22.14b

1.99
0.48
−0.56

0.89
−2.72
−4.45b
0.07
0.0004

−2.56

−10.95b

1.12
0.46

1.41
−0.51

−0.81

−8.99b

−4.44

−13.88b

2.14
0.56

2.07a
1.79a

−0.007
0.0005
−0.04

−3.61a
4.65b
−1.43a

1.62
−5.17

Significant at 90% confidence level.
Significant at 99% confidence level.

nology. The growth of multinational agricultural firms
may have resulted from a desire to spread the cost of
biotechnology research over as large a share of the
seed industry as possible and, to span as many industries and the largest geographic areas possible. We
tested a multinational firm concentration variable, but
it was not significant.
To resolve these questions empirically we estimate
Eqs. (8) and (9) individually for each crop. Table 3
shows the results. Both the industry concentration
equation and the R&D equations are correctly specified, as indicated by the diagnostic statistics. The
empirical evidence is that industry concentration and
R&D intensity are simultaneously determined as in
the theoretical model. In addition, the estimated R&D
coefficients in the concentration equations are all
negative. This indicates an inverse relationship between concentration and research intensity for corn,
cotton and soybeans in the US. These coefficients are
elasticities, so a one-unit decrease in R&D intensity
arising from one less field trial or a one-unit increase

in sales (in thousands US$), is associated a less than
one unit increase in concentration or a proportional
decrease in the number of firms. Hence, fewer firms
do less research, or increased concentration reduces
R&D intensity.
The results for the three crops are similar, even
though the crops themselves are quite different. Cotton and soybeans are dicotyledons that could be genetically modified earlier and are still more easily and
cheaply transformed and might therefore be expected
to display a higher research intensity than corn, which
is a monocotyledon.8 In reality, great research efforts
were made to improve corn because of its large market
potential. The first field trials on GM cotton and soybeans were in 1989, but GM corn was not far behind
and appeared in the field in 1990.
8 Monocots have primarily been transformed using the biolistic
gun, which was and still is much less efficient and reliable than
the agrobacterium process, which has only recently been modified
to be useful for monocots.

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

165

Table 4
Error components panel data two-stage least squares (EC2SLS) estimates of structural equations (corn, cotton and soybeans combined)
Regressors (n = 29)

R&D intensity
Patentsa concentration
Public R&D (4-year lag)
Constant
F-statistic (14,14)
Log Amemiya problem criterion
Akaike information criterion
a
b

ragedright Industry concentration equation without group dummy variables

ragedright R&D equation
with period effects

Coefficient

t-statistic

Coefficient

t-statistic

−0.0006

−2.14a

−1.40

−4.54b

−0.0005
0.003
−0.44

−2.15a
2.65b
−1.08

0.172
3.009

8.9b
−4.96
−2.23

Significant at 95% confidence level.
Significant at 99% confidence level.

In the R&D equation, patents and industry concentration are complements for corn and cotton and
substitutes for soybeans. The more concentration in
the soybean industry, the fewer the patents and lower
the appropriability of private soybean biotech R&D.
This result will be shown to hold up in the panel
model of the three crops combined (below). The reported coefficients for this appropriability variable assume Cournot–Nash conjectures (θ = 1) which implies firms are not able to steal private research results
directly from their competitors. Assuming that firms
are subject to research free-riding (θ < 1) increases
the size of the reported coefficient on the interaction
term proportionately.9
Public R&D has a small positive and significant
effect on all three crops. The lag on public research for
soybeans is four times longer than the lag on public
corn R&D. This result indicates the relatively quick
impact that public R&D has had on private corn R&D
intensity. Disregarding the lags, a public scientist-year
of research on cotton or soybeans has twice the impact
of a similar allocation of research on corn, but the
effect takes three to four times longer.
There are some important differences between the
results for the individual crops, with different (and
large) R&D elasticities and patents and concentration
that can be substitutes or complements. To investigate
the cross-crop effects of intensity and concentration,
the results from estimating the model as panel data
9 We are unable to estimate free-riding endogenously in a linear
model.

are presented in Table 4. These overall results provide plausible estimates. A 100-unit decrease in R&D
intensity arising from one-hundred fewer field trials
or a 100-unit increase in sales (in thousands US$), is
associated with a 6% increase in concentration, or
a proportional decrease in the number of firms. The
concentration equation is estimated without group
dummy variables and with an overall constant, as
indicated by the theoretical model.10 The negative
signs on the R&D elasticities are confirmed, but by a
smaller but nevertheless significant coefficient in the
panel estimation.
In the panel data form of the R&D equation in
Table 4, the interaction term is also smaller than in the
individual equations. Overall, patents and concentration are substitutes. More concentration is associated
with fewer patents. One interpretation of this result is
that as firms develop market power, they have fewer
competitors to protect their intellectual property from.
This result could also be related to the earlier finding
that concentration and R&D intensity are inversely related. More concentration could mean fewer patents
because there are fewer research results to protect.
Public R&D still has a small positive sign in the
panel model and the cross-crop lag is only four years
in the overall model. Constants are included in the
models because of the indication of an overall constant
in the theoretical model (9), and individual and period
10 We investigated the properties of the price elasticities of demand for corn, cotton and soybeans that make up the constant
in Eq. (8) and found them to be time invariant and quite similar
across crops.

166

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

fixed effects are indicated by diagnostic statistics for
the estimation of the panel version of (9). The overall constant is not significant in the R&D equation,
but is maintained for consistency with the theoretical
model. The average simple correlation between the
residuals of the concentration and R&D equations is
only −0.06 indicating the appropriateness of EC2SLS
for panel data over more complicated full information
alternatives.

6. Conclusions
The empirical results from the estimation of a simultaneous research profit function indicate an inverse
relationship between firm concentration in corn, cotton and soybean seed markets, and R&D intensity in
these US markets. One interpretation of this result is
that increased competition in R&D, as indicated by
low levels of market concentration and the participation of more competing firms in the GM crop approval
process, is positively related to R&D intensity. As the
number of firms declined through mergers and acquisitions, the intensity of R&D fell, holding appropriability and technical opportunity constant.
Schumpeter’s early idea that concentration reduces
the incentives to do research may have been the correct one for the seed market leaders in the US. We do
not find support for his later assertion that the opposite
may be true. The levels of concentration in the seed
industry in the US raise concerns about maintaining or
increasing levels of research activity and a steady supply of productive new agricultural input innovations.
The multinationals may have already begun a cycle of
divestiture and spinning-off of agricultural divisions
that could lead to increases in research intensity in the
future if the restructuring results in more firms doing
agricultural research.
Additional work is needed on dynamic aspects
of these Schumpeterian relationships. These aspects
include the influence of intertemporal strategic behaviour, and how changing firm size and associated
access to financial and human resources might affect
the rate of innovation, as mergers and acquisitions
cause both the number of firms in an industry and
their sizes to change.
We attempt to control for these factors in our static
model with measures of technological opportunity

and research appropriability. Public research representing the level of technological opportunity has
a small positive and significant effect in all of the
model specifications, indicating that public research
stimulates private biotech R&D. The stagnation of
funding for public R&D since 1978 may be a significant problem for several reasons. The level of public
research might be less than optimal given the high
rates of return to public research, but the low level
may also limit the amount of private research.
Whether appropriability, measured by numbers of
patents, stimulates or reduces research intensity depends on the crop. Concentration by itself is inversely
related to research intensity, and concentration has
been increasing in recent years in these commodities.
Patenting is a complement to concentration for corn
and cotton, which implies that patenting works with
concentration to reduce the amount of research. For
soybeans and when the three crops are pooled together,
patenting and concentration are substitutes which implies that patents are working to increase research
while concentration is pulling it down. The differences
in the way the individual crops react to patenting may
be due to the fact that corn varieties are protected
from copying by being hybrids. For cotton it is relatively easy to enforce plant breeders rights because
all seeds have to go through a few seed plants. Thus,
patents are a substitute for concentration in soybeans
because they are a relatively more important means
of gaining appropriability than in the two other crops.
These results suggest several policy implications.
First, it appears to be important to ensure competition
in biotech innovation markets since reduced competition is associated with reduced R&D. Second, public
research can stimulate private research, which provides a reason for government investments in public
research in addition to high social rates of return.
Third, patents may be an important way to stimulate R&D in commodities where technical means of
protecting intellectual property are weak.

Acknowledgements
Financial Support for this research was provided
under Cooperative Agreement No. 43-3AEL-9-80050
between the USDA and Rutgers. We wish to thank
Sanjib Bhuyan, John King, Mike Ollinger, Robbin

D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 157–167

Shoemaker, and two referees for very useful comments. We also express appreciation to participants in
seminars in the Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA; the
Department of Agricultural Economics and Marketing, Rutgers University, NJ; the USDA Economists
Group workshop, Economics of Agricultural Research, Issues 2000 Seminar Series, Beltsville, MD;
and the USDA conference The American Consumer
in the Changing Food System, Rosslyn, VA. The
views expressed are not necessarily those of the US
Department of Agriculture.

References
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), 1999.
Data retrieved December 1999 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.nbiap.vt.edu/.
Arrow, K.J., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of
resources for invention. In: Nelson, R.R. (Ed.), The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors.
Princeton University Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Princeton, NJ, pp. 609–625.
Baltagi, B.H., 1981. Simultaneous equations with error
components. J. Economet. 17, 189–200.
Barton, J., 1998. The impact of contemporary patent law on
plant biotechnology research. In: Eberhardt, S.A., Shands, H.L.,
Collins, W., Lower, R.L. (Eds.), Intellectual Property Rights III,
Global Genetic Resources: Access and Property Rights. Crop
Science Society of America, Madison, WI.
Cohen, W.M., Levin, R.C., 1989. Empirical studies of innovation
and market structure. In: Schmalensee, R., Willig, R.D.
(Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. II. Elsevier,
pp. 1059–1107.
Cohen, W.M., Levin, R.C., Mowery, D.C., 1987. Firm size and
R&D intensity: a re-examination. J. Indus. Econ. 35, 543–
564.
Dasgupta, P., Stiglitz, J., 1980a. Uncertainty, industrial structure,
and the speed of R&D. RAND J. Econ. 11, 1–28.
Dasgupta, P., Stiglitz, J., 1980b. Industrial structure and the nature
of innovative activity. Econ. J. 90, 266–293.
Frey, K.J., 1996. National plant breeding study I. Special Report
98. Iowa Agriculture and Home Economics Experiment Station.
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 51 pp.
Fuglie, K.O., 2000. Trends in agricultural research expenditures
in the United States. In: Fuglie, K.O., Schimmelpfennig, D.E.
(Eds.), Public-Private Collabouration in Agricultural Research:

167

New Institutional Arrangements and Economic Implications.
Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA, pp. 9–23.
Gill, M., 1996. Seed use, costs, and trade. AREI Updates,
No. 10, Economic Research Service, US Department of
Agriculture, Washington, DC, 4 pp. Retrieved 6 November
2002 from the World Wide Web: http://www.ers.usda.gov/
publications/arei/96upd/upd96-10.pdf.
Harl, N.E., 2000. The age of contract agriculture: consequences
of concentration in input supply. J. Agribusiness 18, 115–127.
Hayenga, M., 1998. Structural change in the biotech seed
and chemical industrial complex. AgBioForum. 1, 43–55.
Retrieved 8 January 2001 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.agbioforum.missouri.edu/.
Huffman, W.E., Evenson, R.E., 1992. Contributions of public and
private science and technology to US agricultural productivity.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 74, 751–756.
Jorgenson, D.W., Gollop, F.M., 1992. Productivity growth in US
agriculture: a postwar perspective. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 74,
746–750.
Just, R.E., Hueth, D.L., 1993. Multimarket exploitation: the case
of biotechnology and chemicals. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 75, 936–
945.
Kohn, M., Scott, J.T., 1982. Scale economies in research and
development: the Schupeterian hypothesis. J. Indus. Econ. 30,
239–249.
Levin, R.C., Cohen, W.M., Mowery, D.C., 1985. R&D
appropriability, opportunity, and market structure: new evidence
on some Schumpeterian hypotheses. Am. Econ. Rev. 75, 20–24.
Levin, R.C., Reiss, P.C., 1984. Tests of a Schumpeterian model
of R&D and market structure. In: Griliches, Z. (Ed.), R&D,
Patents, and Productivity. The University of Chicago Press
for the National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago,
pp. 175–208.
Moschini, G., Lapan, H., 1997. Intellectual property rights and the
welfare effects of agricultural R&D. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 79,
1229–1242.
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), 2000. Acreage.
Agricultural Statistics Board, US Department of Agriculture,
Washington, DC, 30 June.
Ollinger, M., Pope, L., 1995. Plant biotechnology: out of the
labouratory and into the field. Agric. Econ. Rept. No. 697,
Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture,
Washington, DC, April, 13 pp.
Phillips, A., 1971. Technology and market structure: a study of the
aircraft industry. Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, 235 pp.
Rausser, G., Scotchmer, S., Simon, L., 1999. Intellectual
property and market structure in agriculture. In: Proceedings
of the Paper Presentation to the Conference, The shape
of the Coming Agricultural Biotechnology Transformation:
Strategic Investment and Policy Approaches from an Economic
Perspective. Rome, Italy, 17–19 June 1999, 29 pp.

