AGRICULTURAL

ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Controlling agricultural nonpoint water pollution:
costs of implementing the Maryland Water Quality
Improvement Act of 1998*
Doug Parker*
Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

Abstract
The Maryland Water Quality Improvement Act of 1998 (WQIA) seeks to create environmental and other benefits to the
Chesapeake Bay through reductions in nonpoint source nutrient pollution. This paper analyzes the economic impacts of the
WQIA on agricultural users of nutrients (commercial fertilizers or animal manures) and on poultry growers in the state of
Maryland. The net economic impacts to each of these groups are estimated along with some discussion of the distribution of
the impacts. Recognition of the distribution of the impacts allows for the assessment of potential policies to address negative
impacts. Additional sections of the WQIA are discussed in terms of their ability to shift the distribution of the impacts or
to provide partial compensation to those most affected. The WQIA is the most restrictive agricultural nonpoint pollution
control law in the US. While the WQIA only regulates nutrient use in the state of Maryland, other states, as well as the federal
government, are watching how this law is implemented. Many states are considering similar laws. At the national level, the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Environmental Protection Agency have issued draft guidelines
that will control nutrients from animal operations in much the same way as the WQIA. Therefore, analyses of the economic
impacts of the WQIA may be important in shaping policies in other states and at the national level. © 2000 Elsevier Science
B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: Q20
Keywords: Non point source pollution; Water quality; Nutrient management; Animal waste management

1. Introduction

Runoff and leaching from agricultural fields are a
major source of nonpoint source pollution (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1996). Contaminated
groundwater can have a negative impact when con-

i:c This project was partially supported by a cooperative agreement with the United States Department of Agticulture, Economic
Research Service, #43-3AEL-8-80071.
*Tel.: +1-301-405-8042; fax: +1-301-314-9091.
E-mail {n/dress: dparker@arec.umd.edu (D. Parker).

sumed, or it can contribute to surface water degradation by moving laterally into streams, lakes or bays.
Direct runoff from fields also contributes to surface
water degradation. Excess nutrients (nitrogen and
phosphorus) in surface waters cause algal blooms
and eutrophication, which can lead to problems with
odors, fish kills, and other environmental concerns.
Control of nitrogen as an agricultural input has
been addressed for both commercial fertilizer and animal sources (Trachtenberg and Ogg, 1994). Methods
of control that have been addressed include input reduction, improved irrigation management, and cover

0169-5150/00/$- see front matter© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PI!: SO 169-5150(00)00 112-2

24

D. Parker/ Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31

cropping in winter months (Helfand and House, 1995;
Wu and Segerson, 1995; Suppalla eta!., 1995; Lichtenberg et a!., 1994). Since most phosphorus from
agricultural lands is transported with sediment, sediment control has been the major focus for phosphorus
control. Furthermore, because phosphorus binds to
the soil, phosphorus has not been a groundwater concern. Thus, the majority of research on phosphorus
management has focused on the control of sediments.
Sediment control measures that have been assessed
include cover crops, buffer strips, no or low till, and
the use of polymers (Wu and Babcock, 1998; Hanson
eta!., 1993; Yiridoe and Weersink, 1998; Parker and
Caswell, 1999).
Increased densities in the geographic distribution
of animal production have led to excess quantities of
nutrients in animal producing regions (Letson et a!.,
1998). Since most animal waste is applied to the land
as a source of nutrients, the intensification of the animal industry has created a situation of gross excesses
of certain nutrients being land applied. Recent soil
science research has shown that very high phosphorus
levels can lead to soluble phosphorus runoff (Sims,
1998). Thus, phosphorus control in animal intense
regions must go beyond sediment retention. Recent
research on phosphorus management has focused on
current and alternative uses of animal wastes (Jacobs and Casler, 1979; Govindasamy and Cochran,
1995; Bosch and Napit, 1992; Parker, 1998). This
paper considers nitrogen and phosphorus as part of a
regional nutrient management strategy.

2. Concerns for the Chesapeake Bay
In August of 1997, the Chesapeake Bay experienced
several toxic outbreaks of the microbe Pfiesteria piscicida. The microbe was responsible for several fish
kills (each killing thousands of fish) in rivers on the
Lower Shore of the Bay. Local fishermen and residents
complained of dizziness and memory loss after exposure to those waters. The State of Maryland responded
by closing several rivers and issuing health warnings
to local residents. Pjiesteria had been present in the
Neuse River in North Carolina for several years and,
thus, there was the beginning of a scientific understanding of the microbe. Maryland's rapid response
to the microbe furthered scientific inquiry into the life

cycle of the microbe and the conditions under which it
becomes a toxic hazard to the waters in which it exists.
A scientific panel of experts was convened to assess the state of knowledge concerning the microbe
(Cambridge Consensus, 1997). This panel concluded
that high levels of nutrients in the Bay's waters, especially phosphorus, had combined with warm waters,
high salinity levels, and high fish densities to create
an environment conducive to the Pfiesteria outbreak.
Attention immediately focused on the large poultry
industry in the region as the most probable source of
phosphorus pollution in the waters.
The Chesapeake Bay Program is a federal, state,
and local effort to coordinate clean up the Chesapeake Bay. This program has been working to improve
water quality throughout the bay region. One focus of
the program has been on agricultural nutrient management. In 1989, the Maryland Cooperative Extension
began a voluntary program to get growers to adopt nutrient management plans for their land. Adoption of
nutrient management guidelines ensures that growers
will credit all nutrient sources (commercial and animal waste), when making application decisions. Combining source information with information from soil
tests, growers only apply that level of nutrients necessary to reach their yield goals. If followed, this management strategy would lessen agricultural nonpoint
source pollution from excess nutrient applications.
At the time the nutrient management program was
being implemented, concerns over excess nitrogen
applications were paramount. Common soil science
wisdom was that phosphorus runoff could be controlled by controlling sediments. Thus, nutrient management plans were written to limit the amount of
nitrogen applied (often resulting in over application of
phosphorus from animal waste by as much as 100%).
In the early 1990s, research began to suggest that in
very high phosphorus situations sediment control was
insufficient to contain phosphorus. When the phosphorus level in the soil reaches high levels, dissolved
phosphorus could runoff fields, even when sediments
were controlled. For certain soils, nutrient management plans needed to address both nitrogen and phosphorus loads. To the poultry industry, this meant that
application of poultry litter as a nutrient source could
be greatly curtailed. This could lead to excess quantities of poultry litter on some farms. Furthermore,
many farms currently using poultry litter would have

D. Parker/Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-3/

25

to switch to commercial fertilizers to achieve the necessary nutrient balance. This would entail switching
from an essentially free source of nutrients, to having
to purchase commercial nitrogen. There was a great
deal of opposition by many growers to voluntarily
implementing phosphorus based nutrient management
plans. The Maryland Water Quality Improvement Act
of 1998 (WQIA) will require all growers to implement nutrient management plans that consider both
nitrogen and phosphorus in their recommendations.

already have nutrient management plans (Maryland
Cooperative Extension Service, 1997). Thus, the
WQIA will require that an additional 1.2 million
acres implement plans. These plans can be written by
private consultants, Maryland Cooperative Extension,
or growers that have been certified. The expected cost
to write these additional plans is approximately $6.62
million. The plans will need to be updated every
few years. For some growers these additional costs
may be offset by additional profits from improved
management.

3. Agricultural impacts of water quality
regulation

3.2. Poultry growers and users of poultry litter

The WQIA seeks to create environmental and
other benefits to the Chesapeake Bay through reductions in nonpoint source nutrient pollution. This
paper analyzes the economic impacts of the WQIA
on agricultural users of nutrients (commercial fertilizers or animal manures) for land application, and
on Maryland's poultry growers. The WQIA requires
all growers to obtain and follow a nutrient management plan. The plans will regulate the quantities of
nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) that may be applied to cropland. Maryland's large poultry industry
is concentrated in a small region on the Eastern Shore
of the Chesapeake Bay. The high densities of the industry will force it to find alternatives to local land
application for some share of the poultry litter. This
paper considers three alternatives to local land application of poultry litter: compost for wholesale and
retail markets, energy conversion, and transport to
alternative agricultural lands out of the area. The net
economic impacts for each of these alternatives are
estimated along with some discussion of the distribution of the impacts. Recognition of the distribution of
the impacts allows us to assess the potential for different policies to lessen the negative impacts. Additional
sections of the WQIA are discussed in terms of their
ability to shift the distribution of the impacts or to
provide partial compensation to those most affected.
3.1. All crop growers
Virtually all crop growers in Maryland will be
required to have and implement nutrient management
plans. Nearly 1 million acres of Maryland cropland

High concentration in the poultry industry has lead
to county level excesses of the quantities of available
nutrients from animal waste. As a base case, assume
that all poultry litter is currently applied as a crop nutrient source within the county of origin. Implementation of the WQIA will limit the amount of poultry litter
that can be used in any given county and, thus, require
that some poultry litter be put to alternative uses. The
alternative uses to in-county land application that will
be considered are: compost, energy production, and
transportation for land application outside the county
of origin.
The change in value of poultry litter resulting from
the WQIA can thus be broken into two parts; the
changes in value for in-county land applications, and
the additional changes in value under each of the three
alternative use scenarios. The changes in value for
in-county land application will remain constant across
the three alternative use scenarios.
3.2.1. Estimating quantities of excess poultry litter
Information on the total number of acres currently
receiving poultry litter is combined with estimates of
acreage restrictions under the WQIA to determine the
amount of excess poultry litter (that amount which can
no longer be used for in-county land application). Soil
test data from the University of Maryland's Soil Testing Lab are used to estimate the number of acres of
cropland with excessive levels of phosphorus. There
is concern that the University of Maryland's Laboratory tests represent a proportionately high number
of soils receiving animal manures and, therefore, this
data may overestimate the percentage of acres in
each county with high levels of phosphorus. Thus,

26

D. Parker/Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31

this analysis may overestimate the impacts of the
WQIA.
Since final regulations are not yet available and
sufficient information on the impacts of the proposed
regulations are not available, some simplifying assumptions concerning soil phosphorus test levels and
nutrient management recommendations are made.
For this analysis, assume that nitrogen based nutrient management plans will be required for all land
with soil phosphorus test values below some pre-set
maximum. For land above this level, the addition
of phosphorus will not be allowed. 1 The economic
impacts at five regulated soil phosphorus levels are
estimated: 50 (low), 100 (medium), 150 (optimal),
200 (high), 300 (excessive).
The first step in estimating the expected quantities
of excess poultry litter is to estimate how many acres
of in-county cropland will be eligible to receive poultry litter. This is combined with information on the
amount of poultry litter produced in each county to
estimate the amount of litter that could be used for
in-county land application. This number is adjusted
to account for the fact that not every crop grower
will choose to use poultry litter over commercial
fertilizers. For the Lower Shore (the major poultry
production region), it is assumed that 20% of the
eligible crop acreage will not use poultry litter. This
number is increased to 40% for all other Maryland
counties. Fig. 1 shows the quantities of poultry litter
that will be used as an in-county crop nutrient source
under each regulated soil phosphorus level. As the
phosphorus restriction is relaxed (moving towards
300), the quantity of in-county litter use increases.
Land with excessive soil phosphorus levels will
not be permitted to add any additional phosphorus.
Thus, in the long run (15-30 years) land with excessive soil phosphorus levels will see phosphorus levels
drop. Eventually all cropland will again be available
for poultry litter application. The long run, in-county
It is expected that the final regulations will require the application of a phosphorus index on lands above the pre-set soil phosphorus test level. Application of the phosphorus index is expected
to allow some unknown amount of land above this level to apply phosphorus. Thus, the assumptions used in this analysis lead
to overestimates of the amount of land for which no phosphorus,
and thus no poultry Jitter, will be allowed. Therefore, this analysis
overestimates the economic impacts at any given soil phosphorus
test level.
1

350000
"'300000
~ 250000
ill 200000
/
"" 150000
/
~
~/
--Long Run
'§ 100000
0
-..a.-·
Short Run
il.
50000
0 +------,------,------,------,
0
100
200
300
400
Soil Phosphorus Regulation

Fig. l. In-county land application of poultry litter.

application of poultry litter under a phosphorus based
nutrient management plan is also shown in Fig. I.e
Notice that, in the long run, the regulated soil phos-'
phorus level does not affect the outcome. The regulated soil phosphorus level does determine the amount
of time it will take to reach this long-run equilibrium.
The amount of poultry litter that must find an alternative use is equal to the amount produced, less the
amount that is land applied in-county. Fig. 2 shows
that the amount of excess poultry litter decreases from
a high of 270 000 t at a very restrictive level to just
over 100 000 t as the regulated soil phosphorus level
is relaxed. For the long-run equilibrium, there are still
some counties with excess poultry litter and thus about
45 000 t would need to find an alternative use.
3.3. Changes in value of poultry litter
For each of the three alternative poultry litter
use scenarios, the same estimate of net changes in
poultry litter value for in-county land application is
incorporated.
300000
250000
0
!::. 200000
j 150000
....J
£' 100000
::;
~ 50000

--A-

~

''

' ' A--- ....

Short Run

--Long Run

-- .... ----- ...

0+----.------,,..-----,------,

0

100

200

300

Soil Phosphorus Regulation

Fig. 2. Excess poultry litter.

400

27

D. Parker/Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31

1.0

3.4. Estimating the changes in value for in-county
land application
The changes in value of poultry litter depend upon
the current costs for land application of poultry litter. The cunent costs depend upon whether poultry
growers use their own poultry litter or whether the
Joultry litter is transported to another crop grower for
in-county land application. Currently, 36% of poultry
growers use their own poultry litter on their own or
on rented land, while 64% sell, give away, or pay to
dispose of poultry litter (Michel et al., 1996).
Under the WQIA, the use of some amount of poultry litter for in-county land application will still be
tllowed. The change in value of the poultry litter that
' · · >tays within the county of origin will be the gains in
fertilizer savings from using the poultry litter as a nutrient source on the in-county farms (calculated at the
rate recommended by a nutrient management plan),
less the losses in fertilizer savings from no longer
using poultry litter as a nutrient source (calculated
at the current average rate of litter application in the
base case), less the costs of marketing the poultry
litter, less, for the share of poultry litter currently
used on-farm, the costs of loading and transporting
the poultry litter to another in-county farm

~

~n1c

=

[FN- Fo- M- 0.36(L + TJc)]QMof3 (1)

where ~n1c is the change in value for poultry litter
to be land applied in-county, FN the fertilizer savings
under new law, Fo the fertilizer savings before new
law, M the marketing costs, L the loading costs, T1c
the transportation costs (in-county average), QMo the
quantity of poultry litter produced in Maryland, and
;3 the share of poultry litter used in-county after new
law (;3 = l before law).
Note that for poultry litter that is not currently used
on the farm of origin there is no change in loading
and transportation costs. This is because the poultry
litter is already being loaded and transported otf-farm
and we are assuming an even spatial distribution of
poultry litter use within each county. The share of
poultry litter that must find an alternative use can be
represented as (I - ;3). As the restriction represented
by the regulations gets tighter, (I - ;3) increases.
The changes in value for the in-county land application are combined with the estimated net changes in

(1.0)
<17

(3.0)

<f)

c

~

~

(5.0)
(7.0)

----Out-of-County Land Application
__.._Compost

(9.0)

--e-- Energy Conversion

(11.0)
0

100

200

300

400

Soil Phosphorus Regulation

Fig. 3. Annual change in value of poultry litter from implementing
the Maryland WQIA.

value from each of the three alternative use scenarios
to get a series of net changes in value. The three alternatives are compost, energy production, and transport
for land application out-of-county. The net changes in
value for each scenario plus the net changes in value
for the long-run equilibrium of land application in and
out-of-county are all shown in Fig. 3. Each will be
discussed separately below.

3.5. Compost
This scenario assumes a central compost facility is
set up in each county and compost is sold in bulk form.
The information for the analysis comes from variety
of sources (Barker et al., 1990; Brodie et al., 1996;
Composting News, 1998; Fritsch and Collins, 1993)
and is adapted to Maryland conditions. The change in
value for the compost option is the revenues generated
from compost sales, less the costs to produce compost,
less the losses in fertilizer savings associated with the
litter that is no longer used as a crop nutrient source
(calculated at the average rate of application), less,
for the share of poultry litter currently used on-farm,
the costs to load and transport the poultry litter to the
compost facility
!':,nc

= [Rc

- Cc - Fo - 0.36(L +Tic)]

x QMo(l - ;3)ac

(2)

where !':,nc is the change in value for poultry litter
to be composted, Rc the revenue from compost sales,
Cc the costs to produce compost, and ac the share of
excess poultry litter going to composting.

D. Parker! Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31

28

The variable ac represents the share of the excess
poultry litter that is composted. If all excess poultry
litter were composted, ac = 1. The net change in
value for the industry if all excess poultry litter is
compos ted is ~nrc + ~nc (Fig. 3). As the strictness
of the restriction on soil phosphorus is increased (f3
decreases), the net costs of this option (ac = 1)
rises from about $3 million to nearly $11 million. As
the restriction is increased, more poultry litter must
be composted, more compost is produced, and local
markets are saturated. This market saturation causes
a decrease in the price of compost. Thus, the decrease
in value of poultry litter results from the increase in
quantities of poultry litter to be composted and from
a decrease in the sale price of compost.
3.6. Energy conversion
This scenario assumes one central energy production facility is located in the center of the poultry
producing region, Salisbury, MD. The facility burns
poultry litter for electricity production and sells the
phosphorus rich ash as an input to commercial fertilizer production. The information is taken from a
study of poultry litter energy conversion in the United
Kingdom (Dagnall, 1993), and adapted to US conditions with information from the Maryland Environmental Services study of energy conversion options
at the Eastern Shore Correctional Facility (Maryland
Environmental Service, 1998).
The change in value for the energy conversion
option is the revenues generated from the sales of
electricity and nutrient rich ash, less the costs to produce the electricity, less the losses in fertilizer savings
associated with the litter that is no longer used as a
crop nutrient source (calculated at the average rate of
application), less, for the share of poultry litter currently used on-farm, the costs to load and transport
the poultry litter to a centralized facility, less, for the
poultry litter currently used off-farm, the difference
in the transportation costs between in-county use and
transportation to a centralized energy facility
~nE

= [RE - CE - Fo - 0.36(£

+ TE)

-0.64(TE- Trc)]QMo0- f3)aE

(3)

where ~nE is the change in value for poultry litter
from energy conversion, RE the revenue from energy
and ash sales, CE the cost to produce energy, TE the

transportation costs to energy facility, and aE the share
of excess poultry litter going to energy.
The variable aE represents the share of the excess
poultry litter that is used for energy production. If all
excess poultry litter were used for energy production,
aE = 1. The net change in value for the industry if all
excess poultry litter is used for energy conversion is
~nrc + ~nE (Fig. 3). As the strictness of the restriction on soil phosphorus is increased ({3 decreases), the
net costs of this option (aE = 1), rise from about $3.5
million to over $9 million. Because the price of electricity does not change (it only represents a very small
part of the US electricity market), the energy conversion option is favorable to the compost option in the
very restrictive cases.
If we were allow the share of poultry litter that
goes to each option to vary (aE :::: 1, ac :::: 1), we
would expect that poultry litter would be used for the
production of compost until it drove down the price of
compost such that the value of another unit of poultry
litter composted is just equal to the value of poultry
litter as an energy source.
3. 7. Transport for out-of-county land application
This scenario uses a least cost travel model to distribute poultry litter to available lands in neighboring
counties. It only looks at counties in Maryland. Thus,
for the restrictive cases, poultry litter is shipped to
Southern Maryland, Central Maryland, and, eventually, Western Maryland, and it is not considered possible to ship poultry litter to Delaware or Virginia. 2
As with the in-county land application, it is assumed
that 40% of the available land not on the Lower Shore
will choose not to use poultry litter.
The change in value for out-of-county land application is the gains in fertilizer savings from
out-of-county land application (calculated at the nutrient management application rate), less the losses in
fertilizer savings from the litter that is no longer used
in-county (calculated at the average rate of application), less the costs to market the litter, less, for the
share of poultry litter currently used on-farm, the costs
to load and transport the litter for land application
2 Both Delaware and Virginia have high concentrations of poultry
production in the region. Thus, shipment of any significant amount
of poultry litter across state lines is unlikely.

D. Parker/Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31

out of the county, less, for the share of poultry litter
currently used off-farm, the difference in the costs to
transport the litter in-county versus out-of-county
~7TL

= [FN-

Fo- ML- 0.36(L

+h)

29

cost of transporting another unit of poultry litter a
very long distance may become so high that the compost option may be optimal for some share of the
excess poultry litter. This does not seem likely under
the set of regulations under consideration.

-0.64(h- Tic)]QMoCl- (3)
x (1 - ac - aE)

(4)

where ~7TL is the change in value for poultry litter
land applied out-of-county, ML the costs to market out-of-county, TL the transportation costs to
out-of-county sites.
If all excess poultry litter were used for land application out of the county of origin, ac = 0 and eYE = 0.
The net change in value for the industry if all excess
poultry litter is used for out-of-county land application is ~n 1 c + ~7TL (Fig. 3). For very low restrictions
((3 close to 1), the net change in value from this option
(ac = 0 and eYE = 0), produces a net gain of approximately $300 000. This gain results from two forces.
First, at a low regulatory level very little poultry litter
is transported further than is currently the case. Second, the law requires growers to adhere to nutrient
management plans. Current rates of application are so
high as to essentially waste nutrients in the litter. Under nutrient management plans, less poultry litter is
applied per acre and more acres benefit. As the strictness of the restriction on soil phosphorus is increased
. ({3 decreases), the net costs of this option (ac = 0 and
eYE = 0) rises to over $3 million ..
The 'long-run equilibrium of poultry transport for
out-of-county land application also produces a small
net gain (Fig. 3). Again, this is because long-run
application under phosphorus based nutrient management more efficiently utilizes the nutrients available
in poultry litter.
The in-county use equation can be combined with
the three alternative uses to create one decision model
for the industry
(5)

where ~n IN is the change in value of poultry litter for
the poultry industry.
Given the dominance of the out-of-county land application option over the other two options (compost
and energy conversion), we would expect a corner
solution such that, ac = 0 and eYE = 0. If land application restrictions became very tight, the marginal

4. Distribution of impacts
The distribution of costs between groups of growers may vary significantly across the alternative use
scenarios. In the cases of compost and energy production, the majority of the costs are almost certain
to be borne by the poultry growers. A small number
of growers may still be able to use poultry litter on
their own fields and these growers may see little or
no impact. Furthermore, some litter will be used on
other fields within the county. This litter will produce
fertilizer savings. It is unclear who will benefit from
those fertilizer savings. If a strong market for poultry
litter were to arise, the poultry growers could capture
the fertilizer savings from the in-county use. If a weak
market exists, the benefits from the fertilizer savings
may go to the crop grower.
For the transport of litter for land application outside the county option, it is less clear who will bear the
costs and who will receive the benefits (of fertilizer
savings). If a strong market arises, then poultry growers will capture much of the fertilizer savings. Under
these market conditions, poultry growers would bear
the net costs shown in Fig. 3 (i.e. $50 000 for a phosphorus soil test restriction at 150), and crop growers
will essentially break-even. If there is a weak market
for poultry litter, poultry growers could bear significantly higher costs, while crop growers could make
significant profits. With a weak market for poultry litter, at the phosphorus soil test restriction of 150 scenario, poultry growers could face costs of up to $4.7
million while crop growers would receive benefits of
$3.8 million. This uncertainty suggests a need to provide poultry growers either monetary aide or assistance in developing a competitive market for poultry
litter as a fertilizer source outside its county of origin.

5. Actions to mitigate WQIA impacts
The WQIA has several sections that partially
mitigate the economic impacts of requiring nutrient

30

D. Parker/Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31

management. To offset the costs of having nutrient
management plans written, growers can apply for a
cost share of 50%, up to $3 per acre. Furthermore,
there are funds to increase the number of Maryland
Cooperative Extension personnel who assist in writing
plans.
The major expense to poultry growers will be purchasing additional commercial fertilizer for producing
their crops (almost 75% of the net costs shown earlier). The WQIA provides for a 50% tax credit, up
to $4500 per grower per year for up to 3 years, to
help offset the costs of switching from poultry litter
to commercial fertilizer.
The WQIA also does three things that attempt to assist in the creation of a strong market for poultry litter.
(1) To facilitate the flow of information in the market
(help willing buyers find willing sellers), an animal
manure matching service will be set up at the Maryland Department of Agriculture. This service will
allow buyers and sellers to call a toll free telephone
number and be matched with others in their area who
are looking to sell or buy poultry litter. (2) To help offset the costs of converting from commercial fertilizer
to poultry litter, the WQIA provides a 100% tax deduction for the costs of manure spreading equipment
in their year of purchase. This should help reduce
the high entry cost barrier to use of animal manures.
(3) The WQIA provides funds to match a voluntary
industry contribution to promote poultry litter movement. The Poultry Litter Transport Pilot Project will
use these funds to cost share, up to $20 c 1 , the costs
of transporting poultry litter from poultry growing
sites to alternative uses. These funds should provide
an extra measure of profit to the poultry litter market
that may help to compensate crop growers for some of
the uncertainty involved in changing fertilizer sources.

6. Conclusions
Overall, the WQIA does a good job of balancing
the need for improvements in environmental quality
with the need for Maryland to maintain a healthy
agricultural economy. While the Act attempts to mitigate some of its impacts on poultry growers with
cost share programs and market stimulation, there is
still the potential for some relatively large economic
impacts on some growers. Some impacts not yet con-

sidered include; the possibility of changes in cropping
patterns that may arise as a result of a shift in the
relative costs of different nutrients, the impacts on
other animal operations (specifically dairy) in other
parts of the state, the impacts on organic producers,
and the impacts on the horticultural industry.

References
Barker, J.C., Carter, T.A., Safley, C.D., Safley Jr., L.M., Warren,
S.L., Westerman, P.W., Zublena, Z.P., 1990. Composting poultry
litter - economics and marketing potential of a renewable
resource. North Carolina Agricultural Research Service No.
8556122. North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.
Bosch, D.J., Napit, K.B., 1992. Economics of transporting poultry
litter to achieve more effective use as fertilizer. J. Soil Water
Conserv. 47 (4), 342-346.
Brodie, H.L., Carr, L.E., Steinhilber, P.M., Teffeau, K.M.,
1996. Poultry litter compost production, processing, evaluation
and marketing for use as nursery growing media: a
means of distributing excess nutrients. Final Report, CBIG
contract # 14-96-11 OCBGO 13. Mary land Department of Natural
Resource, Annapolis, MD.
Cambridge Consensus, 1997. Land-based pollution and toxic Dinoflagellates in Chesapeake Bay. Forum. University of Maryland,
Center for Environmental Science, Cambridge, MD.
Composting News, 1998. National Compost Prices, Vol. 7, No. 5.
McEntee Media Corp., Cleveland, OH, p. 4.
Dagnall, S.P., 1993. Poultry litter as a fuel. World's Poultry Sci.
J. 49 (2), 175-177.
Fritsch, D.A., Collins, A.R., 1993. The economic feasibility of
poultry litter composting facilities in Eastern West Virginia... ,
Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev.. ?2 (2). 199-209.
Govindasamy, R., Cochran, M.J., 1995. The feasibility qf poultry
litter transportation from environmentally sensitive areas to delta .
row crop production. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 24 (1), 101110.
Hanson, J.C., Lichtenberg, E., Decker, A.M., Clark, A.J., 1993.
Profitability of no-tillage corn following a hairy vetch cover
crop. J. Prod. Agric. 6 (3), 432-437.
Helfand, G.E., House, B.W., 1995. Regulating nonpoint source
pollution under heterogeneous conditions. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
77 (4), 1024-1032.
Jacobs, J.J., Casler, G.L., 1979. Internalizing externalities of phosphorus discharges from crop production to surface water:
effluent taxes versus uniform reductions. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
61 (2), 309-312.
Letson, D., Gollehon, N., Breneman, V., Kascak, C., Mose, C.,
1998. Confined animal production and groundwater protection.
Rev. Agric. Econ. 20 (2), 348-364.
Lichtenberg, E., Hanson, J.C., Decker, A.M., Clark, A.J., 1994.
Profitability of legume cover crops in the mid Atlantic region.
J. Soil Water Conserv. 49 (6), 582-585.
Maryland Cooperative Extension Service, 1997. Maryland
Cooperative Extension Service, Maryland Department of

D. Parker/Agricultural Economics 24 (2000) 23-31
Agriculture, Maryland Nutrient Management Program, 1997.
Annual Report. College of Agriculture and Natural Resource,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
Maryland Environmental Service, 1998. Estomin, S., Walters, G.,
Prasad, A., Ross, J. (Eds.), The Engineering and Economic
Feasibility of Using Poultry Litter as a Fuel to Generate Electric
Power. Maryland's Eastern Correctional Institute, Annapolis,
MD.
Michel, K., Bacon, J.R., Gempesaw II, C.M., Martin Jr., J.H., 1996.
Nutrient management by Delmarva poultry growers: a survey
of attitudes and practices. FREC RR96-0 I. Department of Food
and Resource Economics, College of Agricultural Sciences,
University of Delaware, Newark, DE.
Parker, D., 1998. Alternative uses for poultry litter. Economic
Viewpoints 3. Department of Agricultural and Resource
Economics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
Parker, D.D., Caswell, M.F., 1999. Technological innovation
to remove water pollutants. In: Casey, F., Schmitz, A.,
Swinton, S., Zilberman, D. (Eds.), Flexible Incentives for
the Adoption of Environmental Technologies in Agriculture.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, pp. 249262.

31

Sims, T., 1998. Soil testing for phosphorus: environmental uses
and implications. Bulletin No. 389, SERA-lEG 17. University
of Delaware, Newark, DE.
Suppalla, R.J., Selley, R.A., Bredeweg, S., Watts, D., 1995.
Adoption of nitrogen and water management practices to
improve water quality. J. Soil Water Conserv. 50 (I), 77-82.
Trachtenberg, E., Ogg, C., 1994. Potential for reducing nitrogen
pollution through improved agronomic practices. Water Resom·.
Bull. 30 (6), 1109-1118.
US Environmental Protection Agency, 1996. Environmental
indicators of water quality in the United States. EPA
841-R-96-002. Office of Water, Washington, DC.
Wu, J., Babcock, B.A., 1998. The choice of tillage, rotation, and
soil testing practices: economic and environmental implications.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 80 (3), 494-5 1!.
Wu, J., Segerson, K., 1995. The impact of policies and land
characteristics on potential groundwater pollution in Wisconsin.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77 (4), 1033-1047.
Yiridoe, E.K., Weersink, A., 1998. Marginal abatement costs of
reducing groundwater-N pollution with intensive and extensive
farm management choices. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 27 (2),
169-185.

