Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

Agent-based spatial models applied to agriculture:
a simulation tool for technology diffusion,
resource use changes and policy analysis
Thomas Berger∗
Center for Development Research, University of Bonn, ZEF-Bonn, Walter-Flex-Street 3, D-53113 Bonn, Germany

Abstract
This paper presents a spatial multi-agent programming model, which has been developed for assessing policy options in the
diffusion of innovations and resource use changes. Unlike conventional simulation tools used in agricultural economics, the
model class described here applies a multi-agent/cellular automata (CA) approach by using heterogeneous farm-household
models and capturing their social and spatial interactions explicitly. The individual choice of the farm-household among available production, consumption, investment and marketing alternatives is represented in recursive linear programming models.
Adoption constraints are introduced in form of network-threshold values that reflect the cumulative effects of experience and
observation of peers’ experiences. The model’s economic and hydrologic components are tightly connected into a spatial
framework. The integration of economic and hydrologic processes facilitates the consideration of feedback effects in the use
of water for irrigation. The simulation runs of the model are carried out with an empirical data set, which has been derived from
various data sources on an agricultural region in Chile. Simulation results show that agent-based spatial modelling constitutes
a powerful approach to better understanding processes of innovation and resource use change. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V.
All rights reserved.
JEL classification: Q120; O330; Q150; C690
Keywords: Diffusion of innovations; Inter-household linkages; Policy analysis; Multi-agent systems; Cellular automata

1. Introduction
Simulation models are gaining importance as tools
for managing tomorrow’s agriculture, since they allow the study of a wide range of price and trade
policy options. In agricultural economics, simulation models that predict the behaviour of individual
decision-makers are typically based on mathematical
programming methods. In these models, individual
decision-making is usually aggregated at the regional
∗ Tel.: +49-228-73-4964; fax: +49-228-73-1869.
E-mail address: t.berger@uni-bonn.de (T. Berger).

or sector level in order to evaluate policy options. The
advantage of such models is that they are robust and
less demanding concerning the availability of aggregate data than econometric models. This makes them
attractive, especially for policy analysis in transition
and developing countries.
However, apart from the well-known problem of
aggregation error and the tendency to overspecialisation, conventional simulation models based on mathematical programming suffer from two weaknesses.
First, they do not explicitly capture the interaction
between actors (i.e. the individual farm-households),
which is equivalent to the assumption that there are no

0169-5150/01/$ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 0 8 2 - 2

246

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

transaction and information costs. Second, these models do not fully take into account the spatial dimension
of agricultural activities and, thus, neglect the role of
internal transport costs and the physical immobility
of land. Consequently, the explanatory power of these
models is rather moderate for research questions that
involve the diffusion of innovations or locally adapted
resource use where interaction and space usually play
a decisive role.
Against this background, the study presented here
(Berger, 2000) attempted to develop a new mathematical programming approach for the prediction of
diffusion processes, natural resource use changes and
policy responses. The model’s applicability is tested
on an empirical policy-related research question in
Chile. The research was funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and carried out in
co-operation with the University of Talca and the
Center for Technology Evaluation in Linares (Berger,
1997). The project draws on Balmann (1997), who
pioneered the use of farm-based linear programming
within a cellular automata (CA) framework.

2. Problem and objectives
Demand for a new type of model arose from the
quest for adequate policies to improve the competitiveness of Chilean agriculture in the context of the
Mercosur free-trade agreement.
In 1996, tariffs were cut by 30% on the average. It
was also agreed to specify exceptions for some rather
sensitive agricultural products such as wheat, flour
and sugar. Tariffs on these products remained at the
level of 1996, until the end of the agreed adjustment
period, which will be around 2014. Accompanying
the ratification of the treaty in 1996, several studies
were commissioned that were aimed at reducing the
fears of the rather traditional Chilean farmers. The
overall result of these studies was that farmers will
in fact suffer income losses, but only if they continue
to produce import commodities. However, Chilean
farmers do have a considerable comparative advantage over other Mercosur countries if they produce
export commodities. Hence, the challenge for Chilean
farmers is to invest in new technologies in order to
take advantage of increasing prices for export goods.
Given that irrigation is required for most export farm-

ing activities, resource use changes and water-saving
innovations are a hot issue in agricultural extension.
Political bargaining started on how to support the
adjustment and modernisation process of Chilean
agriculture. Despite the importance of innovation,
there exist only a few and rather informal studies
about the likely outcomes of market-driven technical
and structural changes in Chilean agriculture.
The objective of this research was to develop a new
multi-agent modelling approach which (1) reduces the
weaknesses of mathematical programming mentioned
above, and (2) provides insights into the diffusion of
innovations and water resource use.
The simulation tool should help to clarify the following questions:
• What will be the likely patterns of diffusion for
specific innovations?
• Can we expect substantial changes in the use of
water as a result of water-saving irrigation methods?
• Will these innovations create sufficient incomes and
also reach traditional farmers?
• What will be the structural effects of a ‘treadmill’
innovation process, to use Cochrane’s (1979) terminology?

3. Underlying model philosophy
In Section 3.2, I outline some methodological
thoughts on model building, which favour the application of a spatial farm-based programming approach to
the adoption of innovations and resource use changes.
Since the concepts of multi-agent systems (MAS) and
CA are borrowed from the computer sciences, a short
explanation may be helpful. For an overview on these
and other artificial life techniques applied to social
science simulations, refer to Gilbert and Troitzsch
(1999).
MAS are computer systems composed of autonomous entities or agents which have only limited
knowledge and information processing capacities.
While agents can be as simple as subroutines of a
computer program, typically they are larger entities
with some sort of persistent control. Good examples
are personal electronic assistants that search for information on the internet, arrange their owners’ time
schedules and assist car drivers. Accordingly, on a

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

more abstract level, their purpose is to solve larger and
complex problems that one centralised unit cannot
tackle, because too much information and computation power would be required. In MAS, agents interact and exchange information in a decentralised and
somewhat ‘social’ manner instead, which explains
why the term ‘Distributed Artificial Intelligence’ was
coined. Particularly, this last aspect makes MAS an
interesting tool for social sciences. The idea is to use
computer simulations with human like agents in order to study how an aggregation of individuals leads
to complex macro behaviour. These in silicio experiments will help to test the hypotheses on the fundamental social mechanisms in human societies. CA
can be used to model the agents’ interactions in the
physical or social space. Typically, the agents occupy
positions on a two-dimensional grid of cells and the
distances between them influence their interactions.
An extensive literature has emerged both on the
methodology and the use of mathematical programming models in predicting supply response in agriculture. Hanf (1989) provides an assessment of the
two extreme prototypes of agricultural sector models,
which may be very briefly summarised as follows.
The ‘simultaneous equilibrium approach’ generally
assumes a perfect co-ordination mechanism and maximises a common sectoral utility function. In contrast,
the ‘representative independent farm approach’ consists of a number of farm models which are independently calculated and then added up to a sector result.
The second approach seems to be a preferred model
choice, if sector development is characterised by (1)
imperfect markets, (2) different behaviour than pure
profit maximisation and (3) adjustment processes. The
same arguments apply in principle to the multi-agent
programming approach. As will be shown in the remainder of this section, the multi-agent concept additionally facilitates the consideration of inter-household
linkages and of space.

2.

3.

4.

5.
3.1. Arguments for using a multi-agent
programming approach
1. A farm-based programming approach allows for a
pragmatic treatment of data availability in transition and developing countries where consistent aggregate data hardly exist. Information from various
sources such as agronomic results from experimen-

247

tal stations, official and unpublished farm records
and sample surveys, experts’ opinions and direct
observations on field trips can be incorporated.
Policy makers and institutions pursuing technology
transfer have a great interest in predicting the diffusion of specific innovations and in assessing the
policy implications for ‘typical’ farm-households.
Both technical and financial constraints on the farm
level can easily be introduced into a farm-based
programming approach.
The set of activities which are technically and
financially feasible for a farmer is influenced by
behavioural constraints that reflect the cumulative effects of experience and observations of his
neighbours’ experiences. Therefore, one should
consider some form of heterogeneity of behaviour
in order to capture time lags in farmers’ choices
among alternative technologies. For the programming approach, this implies that several single
farm models with different behavioural constraints
have to be solved simultaneously, which is possible
in a MAS.
A multi-agent model is able to capture the most
important interactions between farm-households.
One type of interaction is the exchange of information about new technologies that is essential
for the individual innovation decision. As findings
from the innovation diffusion literature show, a
‘critical mass’ of convinced users must be reached
before an innovation will spread. The finest approach to modelling this phenomenon might be
to internalise the communication process between
the individual programming models, because otherwise one would have to establish the time of
adoption more or less ‘ad hoc’ for each model and
each policy scenario. Herein, lies the real merit of
MAS, since it facilitates the solving of autonomous
programming problems while exchanging variables
between them.
Similar considerations as in step 4 apply to another
type of interaction: the exchange of locally available resources such as water and land. These factors
of production are usually subsumed under the notion of ‘non-tradable’ goods. Because of their importance for agriculture, the incorporation of land
and water markets in MAS with an endogenous
price formation represents a notable improvement
over conventional models.

248

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

6. Different kinds of analysis can be undertaken
in a dynamic model setting. The main research
interest of the project presented here is to analyse the path of agricultural development without
imposing the final outcome, as it is done in the
comparative-static models used in many studies. The idea behind this approach is to define
constituent parts of an agricultural region and to
establish some rules concerning their dynamics.
Having set up a starting situation, the model is run
and a kind of self-organising process can be observed at the aggregate regional level. By variation
of particular model variables, e.g. prices or interest
rates, one can explore the structural evolution that
might unfold in response to changing policy conditions. Thus, the approach can be best described
as conducting experiments in an artificial world in
order to obtain insights for policy development and
evaluation.
3.2. Arguments for using a spatial cellular
automata model
The next question to be raised in this context is why
the spatial dimension of agricultural activities should
be considered in farm models.
1. From the farm management theory, it is well-known
that internal transport costs limit farm growth.
Farms mainly compete with their neighbours for
land and, therefore, depend on the local supply of
and demand for land. In rural areas, where many
farms with a high marginal productivity attempt
to expand their acreage, this can lead to excessive
land prices that may even prevent the realisation
of economies of scale. Ignoring these spatial dynamics by assuming perfect land allocation among
farms is not always an adequate representation of
reality.
2. The particular role of spatial relations in the use of
water for irrigation also requires a spatial model.
Technologies with low irrigation efficiencies used
by upstream farmers generate high return flows
that can be reused by downstream farmers. Accordingly, the spatial distribution of freshwater
utilisation and reuse is essential for farm models
in developing countries where irrigation efficiency
is typically low.

3. Soils of different cultivation qualities and water
supply determine the spatial variation of particular
land use systems to a certain extent. Newly available technologies and policy interventions may
alter this distribution, especially in the case of irrigated farmland. The same applies to organisational
innovations such as jointly used infrastructure or
cultivation practices with a high degree of spatial
co-ordination, e.g. as integrated pest management.
Spatial models are required to capture these issues.

4. Model implementation
The newly designed MAS–CA model consists of
two main components: an economic sub-model and a
hydrologic sub-model, which are tightly connected to
a consistent spatial framework (Fig. 1). This section
provides a short model description with emphasis on
the technology adoption process. For a listing of model
parameters and equations consult Berger (2000).
4.1. Farm-based mathematical programming
As far as the economic sub-model is concerned, a recursive linear programming approach is implemented
but with a decisive novelty. Each farm-household in
the study area is captured in the model and solves its
decision problems over time autonomously. Several
types of interactions between farms are considered:
contagion of information, exchange of land and water
resources and return-flows of irrigation water. Correspondingly, one might call this a highly disaggregated
farm programming approach with inter-household
linkages. The farm-households are assumed to seek
to maximise expected family incomes without exhausting their land and water assets. Adoption of
innovations is conceptualised as a farm investment
problem under uncertainty. The agents’ complex
decision-making processes are decomposed into sequences of smaller linear programming problems that
are solved separately for each agent (Fig. 2). Following Day and Signo (1978), there is “sub-optimising
with feedback”, i.e. the agents attempt to maximise
their expected income in a sequential, local optimisation procedure that takes into account the agents’
previous experiences. In the case where the returns to
family-owned resources fall below certain thresholds,

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

Fig. 1. Model components.

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the simulation model.

249

250

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

the models’ farm-agents are willing to give up agricultural production and leave the farm business.
4.2. Technical change
The innovation economics literature, as cited in
Dosi et al. (1988), regards modern farm production
as a typical example of a supplier-dominated sector.
Technical improvements are largely incorporated in
process innovations such tractors, fertilisers and pesticides, which are generated in the input supplying industry. The focus of this model approach is therefore,
placed on the adoption of agricultural innovations by
farms. Specific supply factors of technical change are
neglected. This simplification can also be justified
by the commonly accepted hypothesis that demand
factors are largely responsible for the speed of diffusion in agriculture (Griliches, 1957). Technologies
that appear to be promising in the near future become
available to the farm-households in the simulation
runs and diffuse through the farm sector. Obviously,
two extreme scenarios define the ‘possibility space’
for future technology diffusion in the farm sector.
On one hand, farmers might adjust ‘smoothly’ to
exogenous technical changes as predicted in the standard economic approaches. On the other hand, one
might assume conservative farmers who are reluctant to innovate and refuse any technology adoption.
Reality will probably lie somewhere between these
two boundaries. The model presented here helps to
explore the economic potential of new technologies
along alternative development paths.
4.3. Heterogeneity of behaviour
In decision-theoretic terms, two variables affect
the behavioural heterogeneity of farmers during the
diffusion process of a specific innovation. First, the
net benefits from adoption which traditional farm investment analysis can ‘objectively’ measure. Second,
all other costs that relate to the farmer’s managerial capacity and are usually referred to as adoption
costs. These include information and planning costs,
socio-psychological adjustment costs, temporary production losses as well as ‘subjective’ risk premiums
and option values. Metcalfe (1988, p. 564) provides a
good illustration of how the diffusion process in the
farm sector emerges from the frequency distribution

of these two variables. Following his concept, one
can classify the farm-households into three groups
with regard to their timing of technology adoption:
“non-adopters” whose net benefits from adoption of
a specific innovation are negative (presumably due
to indivisibility or insufficient farm sizes), “potential adopters” who at present face prohibitively high
adoption costs and “actual adopters” with positive net
benefits after adoptions costs. Diffusion of the innovation occurs when relative price changes or technical
improvements modify the distribution of net benefits
and/or adoption costs and hence, more ‘potential’
adopters become ‘actual’. As Metcalfe (1988) notes,
the recognition of ‘information contagion’ or ‘bandwagon effects’ distinguishes the following two diffusion models. Equilibrium approaches assume that
information sets are given and exogenous, while disequilibrium approaches acknowledge an endogenous
chain-reaction type of ‘contagion process’. A prominent example of the second approach is Cochrane’s
(1979) treadmill model in agriculture, which is based
on different adoption costs. Farmers with a high management capacity and low individual adoption costs
tend to adopt a new technology first; imitators follow
when their initially higher adoption costs decrease due
to information spillover. Much empirical evidence, as
cited by Rogers (1995), supports this concept. At the
most critical stages in their adoption decision process, farmers apparently rely on information brought
to them by the peers.
4.4. Thresholds to adoption
If all farmers eventually adopt an innovation, the
outcome of the contagion process over time usually
approaches an S-shaped diffusion path. Typically the
normal bell-shaped and the cumulative curve are partitioned into five adopter categories using the average
time of adoption and the standard deviation (Table 1).
Along the time path, the farmers behave as if they
had thresholds to adoption. For example, the first
farmers of the ‘early adopter’ segment adopt after
the ‘innovators’ segment, which counts for 2.5% of
the farm population has. The ‘early majority’ follows
after the innovation has reached 2.5 + 13.5% of the
farmers, and so forth. Accordingly, one can interpret
these cumulative percentages as ‘adoption thresholds’
for the farmers of the subsequent adopter category. If

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

251

Table 1
Adopter categories and thresholdsa

Frequency (%)
Cumulative frequency (%)
a

Innovators

Early adopters

Early majority

Late majority

Laggards

2.5
0.0

13.5
2.5

34.0
16.0

34.0
50.0

16.0
84.0

Source based on Rogers (1995, p. 262)

one additionally assumes that relative prices remain
constant and no post-innovative technological improvements occur, the following decision rule at the
farm level leads to the same time path.
• Step 1: Monitor the present adoption level and compare it with the individual threshold.
• Step 2: If the threshold is reached, calculate the
farm’s net benefits from the adoption.
• Step 3: If the net benefits are positive, adopt the
technology.
Introducing a few more assumptions to this
frequency-dependent diffusion model make it possible
to predict the time path of the adoption of several production technologies simultaneously. The most important of the assumptions listed in Berger (2000) are: no
change of thresholds over time; innovations do not differ in their ‘primary’ attributes (cf. Downs and Mohr,
1976); the existence of a ‘natural’ time intervals such
as (Table 1) planting seasons when adoption decisions
can only be made. As further extensions to this approach, one can (1) consider separate communication
networks without information spillover by monitoring
only the farmers belonging to the same network and
(2) attribute higher weights to external information
sources by lowering the above mentioned thresholds.
4.5. Empirical estimation of diffusion parameters
Net benefits of different production technologies
can be derived from experimental data and easily introduced into the whole farm programming models.
In contrast, the estimation of adoption costs and their
changes over time usually poses problems due to
poor data availability. Fortunately, network-thresholds
have in principal the advantage of a better empirical
measurability. As Valente (1995) demonstrates, individual network-thresholds can be straightforwardly
computed from the network survey data. Since adoption thresholds contain the same information about

the underlying contagion process as adoption costs,
the threshold approach is chosen for the research
presented here. However, a complete network survey
was not yet available for the Chilean study region
and the network-thresholds had to be derived from
the data provided by the extension service, an own
project survey and in-depth interviews. Based on the
intensive empirical work of Stallmeister (1995) and
Sauer (1995), two distinct communication networks
without information spillover were considered. On
one hand, the campesino farms network consists of
small-scale family holdings between 2.5 and 12.0 ha.
On the other hand, the so-called ‘commercial’ farms
network with farm sizes of more than 12.0 ha. Certainly, this network analysis is rather subjective and
a follow-up study will have to conducted to provide
more objective empirical network-thresholds.
4.6. Other empirical data
The simulations are carried out with an empirical data set that has been derived from various data
sources on an agricultural region in Chile. The empirical investigation captured both the main agronomic
and socio-economic features of the relevant region.
The spatially disaggregated data set includes land of
different cultivation qualities and water as an additional factor of production. A special module was
designed to process and store the regional and individual farm data in a spatial database. In order to
consider price changes due to the Mercosur agreement, price indices were computed based on Muchnik
et al. (1996). In the alternative scenarios without the
association to the Mercosur, input and output prices
are fixed to their 1996 levels. Table 2 gives a summary
of all the model variables and parameters.
4.7. Spatial dimension
As in most geographic information systems (GIS),
the data are spatially organised in a grid of landscape

252

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

Table 2
Summary of model variables and parameters
Exogenously determined variables

Endogenous variables

Parameters

Market prices for ‘tradables’
Interest rates
Wages
Taxes and contributions
Minimum consumption level
Supply of land
Supply of freshwater
Supply of innovations
Initial location of farms

Prices for ‘non-tradables’
Acreages of crops
Yields
Investment levels
Working capital expenditures
Borrowing and saving levels
Labour utilisation
Return-flows in irrigation
Allocation of land and water

Input–output coefficients
Depreciation rates
Sunk costs for fixed assets
Unit transport cost
Network thresholds
Expectation coefficients

units. Each cell or pixel has several biophysical and
economic attributes associated with it: soil quality,
water supply, land cover/land use, ownership, internal transport costs, marginal productivity or return to
land. While the first attribute, ‘soil quality’ here is assumed to be constant, all the other attributes are influenced by the autonomous decisions made over the
time by the model agents, i.e. the farm-households
and non-farm owners. For example, water supply depends on the amount of individual water user rights
traded on markets. Land cover/land use is derived from
the farm’s linear programming problem, taking into
account the price expectations and technical and financial constraints. As far as ownership or tenureship
is concerned, the model captures their changes when
farmland is sold or rented. As a result, internal transport costs may also vary because of a cell’s location
and respective distance to the new farmstead.
4.8. Markets for land and water rights
As empirical findings show, land and water are
hardly ever sold in Chile, but rental markets may play
an important role in the local exchange of both the
resources. To capture these features, rental markets
for land and water are considered endogenously in
the model. An auction module was designed to model
bilateral trade between the agents. Farm-agents attempt to rent out land and water when their shadow
prices for a particular parcel are below sector average. Since the internal transport costs between parcel
and farmsteads are considered, it is mainly the neighbouring farm-agents that compete for the offered
land. The temporary land use right is then transferred

to the neighbour with the highest shadow price for
the specific parcel. For the purpose of simplicity,
strategic behaviour is not taken into account and the
individual level of rent is fixed at the average of the
corresponding offer and request.
4.9. Return-flows of irrigation
The water resources sub-model is subdivided into
sections in order to capture the locally available
freshwater supplies and return-flows. Equations and
parameters are derived from a water engineering
study for the Chilean Department of Public Works.
The sub-model establishes a monthly water balance
for each section, starting with the upstream sections. The farms receive their individual freshwater
and return-flows quota according to their water user
rights. They irrigate their farmlands, thereby producing return-flows to users downstream. The farms
apply certain decision rules as far as the temporary
or permanent abandonment of crops is concerned.
The threshold linear relationships are assumed with
respect to the crop–water production function.
4.10. Simulation experiments
The research region covers an area of roughly
667 km2 and is represented in the model with a resolution of about 158m × 158 m. Hence, the size of
grid cell is 2.5 ha. Since each grid cell corresponds to
a farm parcel, farm sizes are measured to the nearest 2.5 ha. The spatial model is sub-divided in 20
sections in order to consider the return-flows from
upstream to downstream farmers. Each of the 5400

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

farm-households (90% campesino) regarded in the
model solves its investment, annual production and
tenure decisions problems by the use of mixed-integer
programming (dimension of the LP matrix: 120×240,
around 1.4 million problems solved per simulation
run). Based on the exhaustive field trials by the Center
for Technology Evaluation, 32 innovative crops and
water-saving techniques were chosen to be included
in the model and diffused during the simulation runs.
The farm-agents select among these innovations and
adopt according to their relative profitability. In the
bandwagon scenarios, however, farm-agents only
have access to those innovations which have reached
their network-threshold. The technological possibilities of the campesino and commercial holding types
differ for some farming activities due to indivisibilities. Heavy machinery, certain export fruit plantations and irrigation methods are only available to the
large-scale commercial farms. Apart from the pure
market-driven scenarios with and without Mercosur,
policies on credit and subsidies to farm production are
analysed.
4.11. Software
This newly designed MAS–CA model has
MS-Windows 32 bit and UNIX portability. Input and output files are in ASCII-text format and
can be processed with common spreadsheet and
graphics programs. The source code is written in
C++ object-oriented programming language and
permits modular extensions to include, e.g. ecological constraints or to create interfaces with GISapplications.

5. Model calibration and robustness
The calibration of a MAS–CA model is rather challenging since the model has to approximate real-world
observations on the micro level (farm-households) as
well as on the macro level (research region). In this
study, a two-step approach is followed: first, validation experiments on the micro level, where typical
model agents are compared to real-world farm data;
and second, macro level experiments in order to test
the model’s aggregate representation. The calibration
procedure is repeated until a sufficient model fit at both

253

levels is achieved. Unfortunately, only the real-world
observations on land use distribution in 1996 were
available for the micro level. Therefore, the model’s
ability to replicate reality can only be checked for the
initial simulation period. Land use results from the
model were regressed on their observed values to generate a simple goodness-of-fit — perfect association
would be indicated by an intercept of 0 and a slope
of 1. On the micro level, the regression yields a slope
of 0.977 (S.E. = 0.01, R 2 = 0.991) and on the macro
level of 0.704 (S.E. = 0.107, R 2 = 0.657). The model
probably overestimates the cultivation of maize and
some legumes, and underestimates wheat cultivation.
Given that gross margins for these crops are fairly
comparable and their regional values are only rough
estimates, the model fit seems sufficient for this study.
Needless to say, the standard errors are only informal
criteria since the model results are not strictly independent. Change or tracking experiments as suggested
by McCarl and Apland (1986) remain to be done in
a follow-up study, which will collect more field data.
However, local experts considered the model’s predictive capacity to be plausible.
In addition, robustness tests are of extreme importance for simulation models that contain many
degrees of freedom and with highly recursive dynamics. Especially in this study, where empirical data
were combined with rather informal observations and
random-generated synthetic data, the model should
produce non-erratic results within a broader range
of parameter variations. Therefore, the model’s robustness was tested by using two variables, average
income and on-farm labour allocation in different
adopter categories, which directly reflect changes in
the farm organisation. With identical starting conditions, these indicators show very little variation
in repeated simulation runs (<1%, except for the
innovators’ group income where about 6% variation
was found due to the small size of this group). In the
case of changing starting conditions, variation was
obviously higher when the initial endowment with
fruit plantations was altered by more than 100%.
Fruit production requires considerable labour input
and generates high incomes. Though absolute values
of both indicators differ in these special scenarios,
the relative trends are uniform. As a consequence,
the model seems robust enough to compare different scenarios under identical starting conditions.

254

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

More details on the robustness experiments and
supportive statistical tests can be found in Berger
(2000).
6. Technological and policy scenarios
The MAS–CA model provides the opportunity to
carry out a wide range of technological and policy
scenarios by variation of the following parameters:
• Input and product prices. Different exogenous price
regimes make it possible to simulate scenarios with
and without the association to Mercosur.
• Credit market conditions. Chilean extension clients
enjoyed preferential access to credit in the form of
subsidised loan rates and lower minimum shares of
equity capital. The model facilitates implementation of such client-specific policies as well as special government investment programs for large- or
small-scale farm enterprises.
• Cash expenditures. By variation of farm and
non-farm cash expenditures, either coupled or uncoupled to land, government interventions such as
direct income transfers, personal taxes and land
taxes can be taken into account.
• Labour opportunity costs. Consideration of specific labour opportunity costs provides insights into
rural–urban migration and generation cycles. It can
be assumed that households quit the farm business
when they reach certain thresholds for off-farm
wages. Also younger farmers often have better
off-farm job opportunities and, as a result, farms
may close down when the older generation retires.
• Water supply. Variations of fresh water supplies and
distribution losses make it possible to analyse very
dry years as well as investments in improved irrigation infrastructure.
• Land and water markets. Dynamics on rental markets can be driven by activity coefficients for special scenarios. Differences in shadow prices for a
specific plot may not attain certain thresholds, thus,
preventing the transaction between potential tenants
and landowners.
• Price and water supply expectations. It is possible to
consider different forms of expectations, e.g. static,
adaptive and perfect foresight, in order to analyse
the role of behavioural heterogeneity in the process
of innovation and farm adjustment.

• Adoption costs and network-thresholds. These parameters are used to predict the diffusion of specific
innovations under different assumptions concerning communications between farm-households.
Scenarios with complete a priori information
(zero adoption costs — ideal technical change),
frequency-dependent contagion processes (bandwagon effect) or excess inertia (prohibitively high
adoption costs — without technical change) can be
simulated.
Policy options, which have direct effects on model
variables such as prices or credit schemes, can be
readily tested for their repercussions on the supply response and farm incomes. It is by far more challenging
to assess the impacts of indirect effects such as agricultural extension programs. One possibility is to run
the model with ad hoc assumptions about the effectiveness of extension on adoption thresholds and then
examine the model’s sensitivity.

7. Selected simulation results
In this section, some simulation results will be discussed to demonstrate the model’s applicability to
policy-related research questions. As indicated above,
resistance of the farm sector and especially the Chilean
farmers association to Mercosur is rather fierce. With
a view to this disagreement, several policy options are
being discussed in Chile and attempts are being made
to modernise national agriculture by promoting the
diffusion of innovations. The agent-based simulation
model attempts to answer the questions listed in Section 2 and helps to identify winners and losers among
the farm holdings.
First, the simulation runs reveal several typical diffusion patterns as shown in Fig. 3. Certain innovations
such as ‘contract farming’ diffuse rapidly and reach
very high saturation levels among the commercial
farm holdings. Behavioural heterogeneity and communication effects do not play a key role as compared
to the example ‘horticulture’ in the case of campesino
farms. Here, we find remarkable differences in diffusion speed and saturation level if less ideal technological conditions are assumed. Such patterns might
justify some form of government intervention in order to ‘speed up’ the diffusion bandwagon. A third

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

Fig. 3. Selected diffusion patterns in Mercosur scenarios (share of adopters in %).

255

256

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

pattern illustrates the potentially path-dependent nature of diffusion processes as described by Cowan and
Gunby (1996). If a low degree of behavioural heterogeneity is assumed, the innovation ‘pear plantation’
diffuses quickly and reaches almost 40% of the commercial farms. Once the bandwagon is moving, more
farmers are persuaded to adopt than would be the
case with complete a priori information. Under ideal
technological conditions, other innovations appear
more profitable and no significant diffusion of ‘pear
plantation’ occurs. The fourth pattern for ‘greenhouses with Chilean cinta-irrigation’ underlines the
relevance of the multi-technological competition and
selection process proposed by Metcalfe (1988). Ideal
technical change would imply an initially high level
of adoption, whereas, under behavioural heterogeneity diffusion is delayed for several years. Then the
bandwagon speeds up and leads to an even higher
level of saturation. Apparently, the relative advantage of this innovation changes among campesino
farms when fewer competing innovations, as compared to the ideal technological scenario, are available for the less innovative farmers. Consequently,
the usual dichotomy found in diffusion studies, old
versus new technology, might capture only a small
fragment of the complete picture and suggest misleading recommendations for technology transfer
programs.

A similar argument applies to the public efforts
to promote the adoption of modern water-saving irrigation techniques as indicated by Fig. 4. The potential for water-saving technologies in both holding
types is high — ideal technical change would allocate
about half of the total irrigated area to water-saving
techniques within only 10 years. However, this seems
rather optimistic, at least if we trust the model results for the two bandwagon scenarios in which only
one-fifth of the total irrigated area is used for modern
techniques such as drip, sprinkler or improved furrow
irrigation.
It is often stated that change agencies and policy
makers are best advised to increase their focus on
how the farmers perceive technological alternatives
and which income these innovations are able to generate. As Fig. 5 confirms, association with Mercosur
offers a notable income potential for Chilean agriculture, at least in the research region with its relatively
favourable agro-ecological conditions. However, this
income potential will only be exploited under the
assumption of a very optimistic ideal innovation process. If behavioural heterogeneity and bandwagon
effects are introduced, the model income results appear almost as modest as under the fully pessimistic
scenario without technical change. Massive government support, which was demanded by the Chilean
farmers association in 1996, may help to increase the

Fig. 4. Diffusion of water-saving irrigation methods in both the networks together in Mercosur scenarios (percentage of total area dedicated
to different methods).

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

257

Fig. 5. Aggregate regional income of farm-households in Mercosur scenarios (billion Chilean $).

agricultural incomes. Then, of course, the question is
whether the social net benefit is positive. More details on the income and policy analysis can be found
in Berger (2000). For instance, average household
incomes in the early and late adopter groups will
apparently grow apart and then stabilise.
Cochrane (1979) argued that technical change in
agriculture is a cannibalistic process in which the early
bird farmers absorb the land resources of laggard farmers who have been driven out of business. The simulation runs also display a kind of ‘treadmill’ effect,
though in this case the less innovative households
voluntarily close down their farm enterprises. Fig. 6
shows the annual rate of change in the number of commercial and campesino farms over a 20 year horizon.
While under ‘ideal’ technical conditions, the average
annual rate is about 0.1%, the assumption of a bandwagon communication process leads to a considerable
structural change. Especially in the case of commercial farms, almost 6% of the ‘laggard’ adopter segment disappears each year. Insolvency is not the main
cause of closing down. Instead, increasing opportunity
costs for land motivate households to give up agricultural production. However, since empirical data were
not available on how farm-households respond to the

rising opportunity costs, model parameters are still
based on ad hoc assumptions. A follow-up study will
aim at clarifying these simulation results.
Other results, provided by the simulation experiments, relate to the so-called ‘Schumpeter hypotheses’
of industrial dynamics. According to these hypotheses,
large-scale enterprises are more innovative and, therefore, grow faster than their small-scale competitors.
Empirical counterexamples are often cited in the literature and the simulation runs suggest a less clear-cut
relationship between farm size and farm growth as
well. Fig. 7 depicts the change of farm size classes
under ‘ideal’ and ‘bandwagon’ conditions. The initial
number of farms in each class is normalised to 100
and compared with values in the years 10 and 19. Apparently, the underlying structural change in the bandwagon scenario leads to a decline in number of the
small-scale farms and rather dynamic increases in the
middle farm size classes. Large-scale farms show less
tendency to growth when acreage is used as a measure
of farm size.
As far as the evolution of land and water rental
prices is concerned, the model seems to replicate the
real-world prices and quantities of 1996 quite well.
For the subsequent years, the model predicts a slight

258

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

Fig. 6. Average farm exits in Mercosur scenarios (% per year).

Fig. 7. Relative change in farm size classes in Mercosur scenarios (year 1 = 100).

upward tendency for land and water shadow prices.
However, differences between agro-ecologically
favoured and marginal locations are apparent. The
rising number of parcels offered for rent in the bandwagon scenarios mitigates increases in the level of

rent. Berger (2000) presents more results on the land
and water market issue. Informal annual rental contracts do not offer an incentive to invest in perennial
crops and water-saving irrigation techniques. As a
consequence, the potential of the market to efficiently

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

reallocate resources among farm holdings is not exploited under the present conditions by far. In special
scenarios, with a high share of land and water purchases, diffusion speeds up significantly and income
increases. Much more research seems necessary to
improve our understanding of how efficient land and
water markets emerge, as Vogelgesang (1996) points
out.

8. Conclusions and outlook
After several decades of government regulations,
most agricultural and development economists now
share the conviction that decentralisation, innovation and market solutions can help to overcome the
problems of the “critical triangle of development”
(Vosti and Reardon, 1997). As a consequence, dynamic modelling concepts are required which allow
the extension of economic analysis to market-driven
innovation, resource use changes and structural
evolution.
The study presented here has shown that a spatial
multi-agent approach offers an exciting opportunity
to model heterogeneous economic behaviour and
policy responses from the farm-households’ viewpoint. The inclusion of inter-household linkages
makes it possible to model economic phenomena in
which macrobehaviour emerges from micromotives,
as Thomas C. Schelling (Schelling, 1978) has put it
in his 1976 renowned book. Such phenomena are,
for instance, the diffusion of multiple innovations,
transactions on imperfect land markets, the use of
water for irrigation and structural change in the farm
sector.
A spatial multi-agent model is applied to an empirical question in Chile in order to test its applicability.
The simulation scenarios help to explore the possibility space for regional agricultural development in the
context of the Mercosur agreement. The traditional
farm sector strongly opposes the trade agreement as
it expects severe income losses. The model results
indicate that Mercosur offers, in principal, higher
farm incomes through innovation and would additionally increase on-farm labour intensity. However, if
frequency-dependent diffusion processes are considered, modern farming practices (except perhaps, supplier contracts with the agro-industry) will probably

259

not reach traditional farmers in a reasonable lapse of
time. On the contrary, the model suggests that structural change will occur as traditional farmers will
experience persuasive ‘pull effects’ to leave the farm
business. On the other hand, their income situation
probably would not have improved significantly if
the trade agreement had not been signed. Therefore,
one might regard traditional farmers as relative but
not absolute losers of Mercosur. A follow-up study
based on an improved empirical data set will aim at
verifying these results.
The model consists of an economic and a hydrologic component bound into a spatial framework. The
integration of economic and hydrologic processes
facilitates the consideration of feedback effects in
the use of water resources. Although not presented
specifically in this paper, land use changes can easily be predicted. The model’s source code is written
in the C++ object-oriented programming language
and permits modular extensions to include ecological constraints or to create interfaces with GIS-applications.
Fully integrated economic and ecological models
for policy development and evaluation remain an
ambitious undertaking. In my opinion, the predictive
capacity of such models will be mainly restricted
by their inherent assumptions with regard to human
decision-making rather than by ecological parameters.
Spatial multi-agent models acknowledge the fact that
regional land use emerges from decentralised human
decisions. Thus, they can capture essential features of
human–nature interaction. They are built on concepts
of microeconomic theory that are typically lacking in
the current land-use models. In particular, they make it
possible to consider the introduction of improved land
use practices as a farm investment decision to cope
with natural resource degradation. As argued by various authors, viewing land-improvement as exogenous
technological change may lead to misleading policy
recommendations and certainly to an under-emphasis
on farmland investment as a policy issue. Further
testing of this model class and the incorporation of
integrated ecological and economic modelling approaches is called for. The initial results suggest that
once the practical problems of combining different
types of models are solved, GIS-based integrated
multi-agent models will become a powerful tool for
policy analysis and natural resource management.

260

T. Berger / Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 245–260

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Stefanie Kirchhoff and especially
Regina Birner for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
The paper’s structure and readability has also benefited
from the suggestions made by David Colman.
References
Balmann, A., 1997. Farm-based modelling of regional structural
change: a cellular automata approach. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ.
24, 85–108.
Berger, T., 1997. Modelo de simulación para medir los procesos
de innovación en el sector agr´ıcola. El ejemplo de Chile y su
asociación al Mercosur. Econom´ıa Agraria 1, 15–19.
Berger, T., 2000. Agentenbasierte räumliche simulationsmodelle
in der landwirtschaft. anwendungsmöglichkeiten zur bewertung
von diffusionsprozessen, ressourcennutzung und politikoptionen. Agrarwirtschaft Sonderheft 168.
Cochrane, W.W., 1979. The Development of American Agriculture.
University of Michigan.
Cowan, R., Gunby, P., 1996. Sprayed to Death: path dependence,
lock-in and pest control strategies. Econ. J. 106, 521–
542.
Day, R.H., Signo, A., 1978. Modelling Economic Change:
The Recursive Programming Approach. Overview, Elsevier,
Amsterdam (Chapter 1).
Dosi, G., Freeman, C., Nelson, R., Silverberg, G., Soete, L. (Eds.),
1988. Technical Change and Economic Theory, Wiely, London,
New York.
Downs, G.W., Mohr, L.B., 1976. Conceptual issues in the study
of innovation. Admin. Sci. Quart. 21, 700–713.

Gilbert, G.N., Troitzsch, K.G., 1999. Simulation for the Social
Scientist. Open University Press, Buckingham.
Griliches, Z., 1957. Hybrid corn: an exploration in the economics
of technical change. Econometrica 25, 501–522.
Hanf, C.H., 1989. Agricultural Sector Analysis by Linear
Programming Models. Wiss. Verlag Vauk, Kiel.
McCarl, B.A., Apland, J., 1986. Validation of linear programming
models. South. J. Agric. Econ. 12, 1986, 155–164.
Metcalfe, J.S., 1988. The diffusion of innovations: an interpretative
survey. In: Dosi, G., et al. (Eds.), Technical Change and
Economic Theory, pp. 560–589.
Muchnik, E., Errazuriz, F., Dominguez, I., 1996. Impacto de
la asociación de Chile al Mercorsur en el sector agr´ıcola y
agroindustrial. Documento de Trabajo No. 253. Universidad
Católica de Chile.
Rogers, E., 1995. Diffusion of Innovations, 4th Edition. The Free
Press, New York.
Sauer, U., 1995. Sozialökonomische untersuchungen landwirtschaftlicher familienbetriebe im chilenischen zentraltal. PhD
Dissertation, Institut für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften
der TU München. Freising Weihenstephan.
Schelling, T.C., 1978. Micromotives and Macrobehavior. Wiely,
New York, London.
Stallmeister, P., 1995. Analyse des staatlichen beratungsdienstes
für landwirtschaftliche familienbetriebe in Chile. Ph.D.
Dissertation, Institut für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften
der TU München. Freising Weihenstephan.
Valente, T.W., 1995. Network Models of the Diffusion of
Innovations. Hampton Press, Cresskill, NJ.
Vogelgesang, F., 1996. Property rights and the rural land market
in Latin America. CEPAL Rev. 58, 95–113.
Vosti, S.A., Reardon, T. (Eds.), 1997. Sustainability, Growth and
Poverty Alleviation: A policy And Agroecological Perspective.
Baltimore, London, pp. 1–15.

