239

THE ‘NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS’
IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT:
INSIGHTS AND CHALLENGES
Michael Hubbard*

The insights of the ‘new institutional economics’ (NIE) and the
challenges it faces are discussed, using examples from agricultural
development. NIE has emerged from the theories of the firm,markets,
history and politics. It is characterised by two propositions: (i) the
nature of business contracts is determined by uncertainties and
assurances arising from market conditions and from prevailing
institutions (property rights, conventions, authority structures); (ii)
prevailing institutions are altered by social action responding ultimately
to trend changes in relative prices. Empirical progress in NIE has
resulted from studies of contracting behaviour and has been greatest in
measurement of intraindustry transaction costs and relating them to
vertical integration among firms, But NIE is at an early stage in the
more complex empirical task of analysing relations between markets
and prevailing institutions.

The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, to provide a simple overview of ‘new
institutional economics’ (ME) in the context of agricultural development. This is
justified on the one hand by the breadth and complexity of NIE and the increasing
interest in it, and on the other by the substantial part which the study of agricultural
institutions is playing in the development of NIE. Second, to emphasise the
importance of understanding contracting behaviour to empirical progress in ME.
Section 1 outlines the emergence of N E from the theories of the fm, markets,
history and politics. Section 2 discusses two key propositions in NIE and the
centrality of contracting. Section 3 concludes.

1. The Institutional Economics Approach
Having set up as its market ideal an environment of perfect information and
communication, microeconomics then long neglected the actual costs of getting
business done - the delays, uncertainties, bargaining, obstructions and chicanery.
* Michael Hubbard is in the School of Public Policy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT,
UK. Thanks to Bruce Trail1 and two anonymous referees for comments. This paper is an edited
version of a paper presented to the Agricultural Economics Society Annual Conference in
Cambridge, April 1995.

Journal of Agricultural Economics

48 (2)(1997) 239-249

240

M.HUBBARD

Many textbooks still show typical business decisions as determined by production
and distribution costs, prices and market structure alone, ignoring the costs
involved in making transactions. Agricultural economics has been no less guilty of
this omission than other branches of microeconomics, despite having long
incorporated risk and uncertainty of yield and price.
The costs of doing business and the social rights and obligations (institutions)*
which people contrive to reduce them, are the focus of the ‘new institutional
economics’ (NIE), which has attracted much attention recently, including that of the
Nobel committee. It contrasts with the earlier institutional economics traditiont of
Veblen and Commons in its attempt ‘to extend and generalise the theory of price
and apply it to economic and political institutions’ (Eggertsson, 1990, p.3) or, in
other words, to endogenise institutions within the theory of markets. TOthis extent
NIE is a neoclassical project, whereas the earlier institutional tradition tended to be
anti-neoclassical in its attacks upon the simplified ‘rational’ person assumed in
market theory (Veblen, 1919, p.73).
At the heart of institutional economics is the making, monitoring and enforcing of
contracts. The ease or difficulty of contracting, and the types of contract made, are
determined by the level and nature of transaction costs, underlying which is the
extent of imperfect information involved in making a transaction. The contracts,
laws and conventions of a society (its institutions) either evolve to reduce transaction
costs or fail to do so. Institutions may benefit one group more thadat the expense of
another, they may outlive their usefulness, and - through being hard to alter - lock a
society onto an historical path which may or may not favour economic development.
From this angle, economic development is determined by the extent to which a
country’s institutions favour broad-based, sustainable economic growth.
This brief description indicates the breadth of institutional economics. It emerges
from the theories of the f i (transaction. costs), markets (imperfect information),
politics (institutions used to favour interest groups) and history (institutional
change). Each of these aspects is introduced briefly.
Theory of the Firm (Transaction Costs)
A key aspect of NIE is the role ascribed to transaction costs in determining
behaviour within and between organisations. Transaction costs are ‘the costs of
arranging a contract ex ante and monitoring and enforcing it ex post’ (Matthews,
1986). More generally, they are the ‘costs of running the economic system’ (Arrow,
1969) or, figuratively, ‘the economic equivalent of friction in physical systems’
(Williamson, 1985).
NIE stems in part from Coase’s 1937 argument that minimising transaction costs
is the reason for the separate existence of the fm.A distinguishing characteristic
of the firm, he suggested, is that market relations are suspended within it.$ So the
* ‘Social rights and obligations’ or ‘rules of the game’ is a broad definition of institution. Some writers,
e.g. Platteau, 1994. prefer to narrow the definition of institutions to those rules which are explicitly
enforced, thereby excluding conventions (norms). The broad definition is used in this paper, with
the subdivision of institutions into those which are relatively fixed (labelled ‘prevailing
institutions’) and contracts, which are more flexible.
t The former institutional economics tradition saw institutions ‘as settled habits of thought common to
the generality of man’ (Veblen. 1919, p.239). Stein (1994) discusses further differences between the
‘old’ and ‘new’ institutional economics.
$ Market relations refer to the ability to choose who to buy from or sell to in each transaction, whether
repeated or unique. A contract necessarily suspends market relations for its duration, in return far
carrying out the exchange on the terms agreed. Only in spot markets do market relations prevail
continuously, since each agreed transaction is immediately complete. The firm is made up of
employment contracts of individuals, which tend to be longer term and incompletely specify the
output expected, in order to allow flexible deployment.

THE ‘NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS’ IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

24 1

lower are transaction costs, the less reason for the non-market based integration
among related activities which constitutes the firm; the greater are transaction costs,
ceteris paribus, the more it pays the firm to employ factors of production on a
longer-term basis to carry out a particular function.
Thus the firm is seen in NIE as a flexible coalition - a ‘nexus of contracts’ designed to reduce transaction costs, rather than a fixed entity. Just as economic
institutions, such as sharecropping, are a response to transactions costs, so too is the
nature of the contracts which make up the firm. The modem theory of the f m ,with
its stress on explaining integration and coordination has been developed from this
basis.
Transaction costs enter into other, related aspects. of microeconomic theory
relevant to behaviour within organisations, namely the principal-agent (Jensen and
Meckling, 1976) and X-efficiency (Liebenstein, 1966) literature. The former
explores differences and similarities in the interests of the principal (the owner of
the resources) and agent (employed to carry out a specific function) under varying
conditions of uncertainty, where monitoring costs are too great for the principal to
observe every detail of implementation. The X-efficiency debate focuses on
problems of motivation and morale within the organisation, which can be partly
principal-agent problems.

Markets (Imperfect Information and Missing Markets)

Markets rather than firms are the starting point for the other main strand in the
development of the NIE. This has concerned itself with the behavioural
implications of inadequate and unequal (asymmetric) availability of information to
potential buyers and sellers. The resulting risks might be reduced to mutual
advantage by non-market arrangements as perhaps by sharecropping agreements, or
by the emergence of insurance markets (provided that the underlying institutions
allow them to operate). This approach, associated with Stiglitz (1974, 1986) among
others, has been applied extensively in models explaining rural institutions (notably
sharecropping), that emerge in response to needs to share risk and obtain resources
(Bardhan,1989). Markets may be missing either because of the low level of
development of the economy, or because their emergence has been blocked. Thin
or absent markets mean less information and higher costs of obtaining it.
Specifically, they increase the costs of searching for information about buyers and
sellers, and about the quantities and qualities of goods or services available; they
increase the costs of bargaining to determine prices, the uncertainties in making,
monitoring and enforcing contracts, and the costs of enforcing property rights
(Eggertsson, 1990, p. 15).
The popularity of the imperfect information approach is indicated by the
pervasiveness in current economic analysis of imperfect information concepts, such
as asymmetric information, moral hazard, adverse selection, bounded rationality,
first mover advantage and opportunism. Further, the imperfect information
approach has a prominent role in wider theoretical developments, such as collective
action theory and trade theory.
The theory of common property management has generated an extensive
literature since Olson’s work on collective action (1965) and Hardin’s (1968)
‘tragedy of the commons’ assertion that natural resources held in common would
necessarily be degraded. Information plays a key role in the current consensus in

242

M.HUBBARD

that literature, which has focused on common pool resources*: renewable resources
can be well managed under common ownership provided that the common users are
a group sufficiently small, motivated and well-informed to monitor use, detect and
deter ‘free riders’, and provided they know the impact of use levels on the resource
(Wade, 1987).
In the case of trade theory, textbook analyses of trade policy have emphasised the
benefits of free trade, and often assumed perfect competition in traded goods
markets, with domestic economic efficiency the implicit,objective of government.
Yet international agricultural markets tend to be imperfect, with differentiated
products, substantial protectionism, and little evidence in commercial policy of
economic efficiency as a policy priority. In attempting to reconcile theory and
reality, recent contributions (Maclaren, 1991, p.289) demonstrate that in the
presence of imperfect information, with risk averse producers and/or consumers,
and incomplete markets for risk sharing, free trade is not necessarily the optimal
policy. Free trade is demoted from optimum to ‘rule of thumb’ and trade policy
(pflicularly use of protection instruments) becomes an institutional substitute for
rmssing insurance markets, a form of social insurance to importers, import
substituters or exporters against trade risks, for which they lobby politically.
History (Institutional Change)
The formal and informal rules which societies evolve or fail to evolve in order to
reduce transactions cost, are argued in NIE to be a key factor determining
differences in economic performance among societies. As societies-become more
economically integrated, unit production and distribution costs are reduced by
division of labour. But at the same time unit transaction costs increase, since the
face-to-face contact, knowledge and mutual interdependence of village life is lost,
creating greater uncertainty, opportunities for deception and reducing enforceability
of contracts by reciprocal obligations. ‘In Western societies over time complex
institutional structures have been devised (elaborately defined and effectively
enforced property rights, formal contracts and guarantees, corporate hierarchy,
vertical integration, limited liability, bankruptcy laws . . .) . . . to prevent . . .
transactions from being too costly and thus to allow the productivity gains of largerscale and improved technology to be realized’ (Bardhan, 1989 p.5-6). But economic
institutions do not necessarily evolve in this way. To explain the different
performance of economies historically, North (1990) argues that institutional
arrangements (e.g. property rights, labour contracts) tend to be self-perpetuating
(‘path dependent’), until trends of change in relative prices so increase costs of
maintaining existing institutions, that pressure for reallocation of resources
becomes irresistible.
Politics (Institutions Used to Favour Interest Groups)
There is an additional dimension of NIE, the political, referred to by Bates as its
‘dark side’. Underlying allocation decisions is an initial distribution of wealth and
power. ‘Lying behind the economic theory of institutions..is a political story . .
. w h i l e many kinds of institutions may provide enhanced efficiency in markets . . .
[tlhose will be created that favour ‘special interests’ (Bates, 1989, p.90). Established
* Examples of common pool resources are communal fishing lakes and rivers and grazing areas, usually

classified as non-excludable, subtractable goods. The management difficulty is in preventing
community members (and, more problematically, nonmembers of the community) from over-using
the resources, and motivating them to contribute to investment and maintenance.

THE ’NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS’ IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

243

public organisations (e.g. marketing boards) become the focus for distributional
struggles between interest groups.
Four sources of power by sectional interests over markets can be identified
(White, 1993). Power derived from the state through its defence of particular
interests; associational power, deriving from collective action by market actors (e.g.
regulation by traders associations or farmers associations); power from market
structures (e.g.monopoly), and socially embedded power (i.e. power deriving from
birth or status).
The capture of markets by sectional interests (using varying combinations of
these sources of power) is stressed in the ‘real markets’ literature (e.g. Hewitt de
Alcantera, 1992). This is a strand of institutional thinlung with its roots in social
anthropology, which attacks simplified neoclassical theory for abstracting the
notion of markets from the realities of unfair exchange under which rural people in
low income countries live. It is argued that a local elite typically controls product
and factor markets and transport in an interlinked manner, for their own benefit.
Under these circumstances liberalisation of markets and withdrawal of state
services, it is argued, may decrease competition and increase hardship. The
recommendation is for case by case reform according to local circumstances, rather
than sweeping changes.

2. Propositions of the New Institutional Economics
From the discussion above, it is clear that NIE has causation flowing both ways
between markets and institutions. It is therefore important to distinguish types of
institution. Matthews (1986) identifies four: contracts, property rights, conventions
and authority. Of these, contracts are the most flexible institution, being the means
whereby parties design transactions to their mutual advantage under varying degrees
of both market failure and institution failure. Transactions necessarily involve
implicit or explicit contracts specifying - to a greater or lesser extent - price, quality,
quantity, timing of payment and delivery, penalties and rewards to encourage
contract fulfilment and distribute costs of failure. Property rights, conventions (the
unwritten moral rules) and social authority (governmental, associational and socially
embedded power, to use White’s 1993 terms referred to earlier) make up prevailing
institutions. They are ‘prevailing’ because they change only slowly. In sum, contracts
respond to market conditions, either assisted by prevailing institutions where these
are supportive (give assurance), or hindered where they are incomplete (creating
uncertainty) andor hostile to the transaction concerned.
Figure 1 illustrates the relation already described between contracts, markets and
prevailing institutions. Contracts (which include firms as nexi of contracts) are the
intermediary institution through which markets and prevailing institutions influence
each other. Market uncertainties and market assurances (from repeated
transactions) partially determine the nature of contracts, which feed back to the
market as assurance for further transactions. Prevailing institutions also partially
determine contracts through the uncertainities and assurances they provide
regarding clarity and enforcement of property rights, the conventions which must
be conformed with, and the social authority (who decides what) which must be
recognised in contracting. Contracts feed back into prevailing institutions. They
leave prevailing institutions unchanged if they are in conformity with them. Or they
gradually change prevailing institutions, if the contracts do not conform to those
institutions but enable transactions which are economically advantageous to
society.

244

M.HUBBARD

Figure 1 Contracts as IntermediariesBetween Markets and Prevailing Institutions
uncertainties

7

uncertainties

1
PREVAILING

MARKETS

INSTITUTIONS

CONTRACTS

Business
Opportunities

Property rights
Conventions
Social authority

Including Firms

A

I
u
assurance

E

I

pressure for
institutional change

There is of course no mechanical relation between transactions, contracts and
prevailing institutions. The notion of contract suggests a discrete transaction
between independent parties, enforced ultimately by recourse to the law. But the
reality of more complex and risky contracts (e.g. management contracts for large
farms) is that the transaction is not discrete, not all contingencies can be predicted
and performance cannot be continuously measured. Success in such contracts
necessarily involves building a problem solving relationship between principal and
agent to spread risk and build trust. Similarly, the reality of many contracts, large
or small, is that the parties are not independent, either because market power is
unequal (e.g. a small farmer dealing with a monopolistic crop buyer) or social
authority is unequal (e.g. a tenant bound by tradition and debt to a land owner).
Ultimate enforcement of contracts by the law depends on whether the contract is
legal or not, on the delays and financial costs involved and sometimes on the legal
status of the parties.
The two central propositions of NIE, implicit in Figure 1, are discussed here in
relation to some current issues in agricultural development.
Proposition I . The nature of business contracts is determined by uncertainties and
assurances arising from the transactions involved and from prevailing institutions
(property rights, conventions, authority structures).
In agricultural development, there is extensive research documenting differences
in contracts in varying market conditions and institutional contexts. Examples from
the literature on farm tenancy and labour contracts include Bliss and Stem (1982),
Eswaran and Kotwal(1985), Newbery (1989), Zusman (1989), Platteau (1995) and
Sharma and Dreze (1996).
Transaction cost analysis has become the main means for analysing the impact of
market conditions on contracting behaviour. It is criticised as weak on testability.*
But at the fm and industry level the empirical analysis of transaction costs is now

* ‘IT10 the extent that the theory relies on unobservable transaction costs, it often seems to fail the test

of falsifiability; just as the present set of economic relations is justified by current (unobservable)
transaction costs, changes in the nature of economic relations are ‘explained’ by reference to
similarly unobservable changes in transaction costs’ (Stiglitz, 1986 p.263).

THE ‘NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS’ IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

245

well-established in marketing theory and practice (Moschandreas, 1994; Heskett et
al., 1994; Jaffee and Morton, 1995), particularly with regard to firms’ decisions on
vertical integration or vertical co-ordination, and decisions on mode of entry into
new markets (Krishna Erramilli and Rao, 1993). It is founded on the theoretical
basis that firms prefer to integrate and coordinate vertically the higher the
transaction costs they face. Studies (e.g. Frank and Henderson, 1992; Jaffee, 1991)
examine production and trade arrangements and attempt to explain degrees of
integration among market actors, and the types of contracts they make, from the
size and nature of transaction costs. Transaction costs for a producer are argued to
be higher the less flexible and powerful is the producer and the less predictable the
market environment. Thus transaction costs are higher the greater is asset
specificity,* the greater the uncertainty surrounding the exchange, and the less the
market power in relation to the buyers of the product and suppliers of the inputs.
The less competition in markets upstream and downstream, the less is the
producer’s market power, meaning greater discretion for the producer’s buyers and
suppliers to alter trading terms in their favour.
Jaffee’s analysis of Kenya’s horticultural exports is a recent example of a
transaction cost study in the agricultural sector of a lower income country (Jaffee,
1991). Asset specificity was estimated by the need for specialised equipment in
grading, storage and transport, and by processing economies of scale. Indicators
used for uncertainty and market structure were perishability, seasonal constraints on
the market, market concentration, segmentation, and brand name differentiation.
The study’s results indicated the importance of vertical integration between
exporting and importing f m s , mediated through long-term contracts and family
connections in the most successful horticultural export f m s , given the high degree
of uncertainty characterising the industry.
A limitation of transaction costs analysis is that it currently only provides tools
for examining the impact of the market on contracts, not the impact of prevailing
institutions. This is perhaps no disadvantage where the concern of the analysis is to
help firms make strategic decisions within a stable and developed institutional
environment. It is a substantial limitation where the institutional environment is
unstable or undeveloped as is often the case in agricultural development.
Inadequate or hostile prevailing institutions increase transaction costs, especially in
insurance and finance which rely heavily on clear property rights. Higher contract
negotiation and enforcement costs (the other side of the rent seeker’s bargain) are
the consequence, requiring political and financial influence to be effective.
One important consequence of inadequate or hostile prevailing institutions,
combined with inadequate market infrastructure and financial markets, may be low
barriers to entry and high barriers to growth, resulting in a bimodal industrial
structure. For example, in the institutionally adverse business environment of much
of Africa agricultural processing and trade often appears bimodal in structure. Large
operators tend to be vertically integrated, most conspicuously in export production,
where a multinational may internalise every stage from input provision and
extension advice to farmers, to processing and export. B.A.T. tobacco operations in
Uganda are an example.? At the other extreme of size, small informal agricultural
processors are collectively gaining market share but individually appear unable to
overcome barriers to growth. Current changes in the milling and meat processing
industries in Namibia (Hubbard 1989). Kenya (Lewa and Hubbard, 1993,
Zimbabwe and South Africa provide examples. Deregulation of urban slaughtering
* The specificity of an asset is high when it cannot easily be used for alternative production, so that

t

investing in it allows less flexibility to the owner, whose operations are then locked into that type
of production and the corresponding input and sales channels. For example. the asset specificity of
h i t trees is higher than that of annual crops, since they take several years to mature.
From own interviews with B.A.T. Uganda in 1994.

246

M.HUBBARD

and milling there have resulted in strong growth of small scale abattoirs and
hammer milling of flour, But they face substantial financial and market barriers to
individual expansion. Together these developments at the large and small ends of
the industry create a ‘missing middle’. Much of the growing informal sector
resembles North’s depiction (1990) of the ‘bazaar economy’ which emerges when
a society fails to develop adequate institutions for assurance and finance:
characterised by reliance on face-to-face contracts requiring lengthy negotiation,
instability, lack of access to capital, and little means of spreading risk.
Proposition 2. Prevailing institutions are altered by social action responding to
trend changes in relative prices

As illustrated by Figure 1, prevailing institutions (property rights, conventions
and social authority) are relatively stable parameters which, together with market
conditions, determine the nature of contracts. Their inertia is the ‘path dependence’
which is argued to account for major differences between countries’ economic
development experience. The inertia may be partly caused by increasing returns
(positive or negative) to particular institutions (Arthur, 1988). In the case of
economic growth ‘an adaptively efficient path . . . allows for a maximum of choices
under uncertainty, for the pursuit of various trial methods of undertaking activities,
and for an efficient feedback mechanism to identify choices that are relatively
inefficient and to eliminate them . . . [U]nproductive paths . . create organizations
and interest groups with a stake in the existing constraints . . . [and] . . . provide few
rewards from increases in the stock of economically useful knowledge’ (North,
1990 p.99).
The hypothesis of path dependence begs questions about institutional change:
how the economy gets locked onto one path and is eventually moved onto another.
One line of enquiry (Schotter, 1981; Sugden, 1986; Runge, 1986; Axelrod, 1988) often focusing on associational contract issues (collective action) in managing
common property forests, grazing lands and water - has used game theory to evolve
rules of behaviour from self-reinforcing, repeated games of strategy. These lead to
confidence (assurance) among the players in a well-tried strategy. Another (Hayami
and Ruttan, 1985) has attempted to endogenise ‘secondary institutions’ (mainly
property rights) in the theory of markets via induced institutional innovation.
Changing relative prices of products and factors create a demand (from consumers
and producers) for change in institutions which is supplied by political innovators.*
Boserup’s classic thesis (1965) of population pressure increasing agricultural
productivity is of this type.
Insights from both these lines of enquiry lack completeness. Circumscribed,
microlevel assurance games do not explain the larger social picture characterised by
diversity and uncertainty, to which ‘prisoners dilemma’ games with their Paretoinferior outcomes often seem more appropriate, particularly in the socially
turbulent conditions of many developing countries (Grabowski, 1988). Clearing the
‘market’ for efficiency-enhancing innovations in property rights must contend with
‘the enormity of the collective action and free-rider problems that limit the ability
of potential gainers to get their act together, (Bardhan, 1989 p.7-8), with the
diversity of country experiences of institutional change, and with the fact that
institutional innovations are often for redistributive, political reasons which reduce
rather than increase efficiency.

*

The induced innovation theory builds on Hayami and Ruttan’s earlier theory of induced technical
innovation in agriculture, in which differences in relative factor prices bias technical change towards
land saving or labour saving innovations (Hayami and Ruttan, 1985).

THE ‘NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS’ IN AGRICLTLTLlRAL DEVELOPMENT

247

Experience with attempts to bring about institutional change in agricultural
marketing in developing countries under structural adjustment programmes
demonstrate the complexity of the process.* For example, reform programmes for
grain marketing parastatals (e.g. in Kenya and Zimbabwe) typically involve phased
removal of restrictions on private marketing, greater corporate independence for the
parastatals, introduction of price bands in place of fixed prices as the target for price
stabilisation by the marketing parastatal, performance contracts for staff to increase
their efficiency, and separation of the parastatal’s commercial from its social
functions.
The social functions are defined as those which are undertaken on behalf of
government to assist farmers or consumers, usually involving buying at above the
market price, buying in remote areas, and selling at below market price. However,
uncertainties in the wider institutional environment have created difficulties:
(i)

Marketing boards are not confident that governments will actually respect
their independence. There is a property rights problem here between boards
and governments.

(ii)

Marketing boards are not confident that government will meet the social costs
they incur on government’s behalf. The advice to separate social from
commercial costs is standard, deriving from welfare economics. But this
breaks down on practical grounds if there is government failure, i.e. if the
budget is unable to meet its obligation to fund the social costs.

(iii) as long as marketing boards have a large market share and hold large reserve
stocks, investment by private traders may be discouraged through fear that
marketing boards, under political direction, will drive marketing margins
down by buying above market price and selling below market price.
Proposition 2 is the more contentious of the two NIE propositions. The
mechanism invoked by NIE theorists (e.g. North, 1990) finally to deliver
institutional change (i.e. that the trend change in relative prices imposes such great
costs that change becomes irresistible) requires collective action to bring it about.
But collective action has multiple social as well as economic determinants and is
difficult to predict. By contrast the impact of prevailing institutions and market
conditions on transactions (Proposition I), though complex, is accessible to study
through contracting behaviour.

3. Conclusion
A decade ago RCO Matthews noted:
‘[Iln the economics of institutions, theory is now outstripping empirical
research to an excessive extent . . . Theoretical modelling may or may not be
more difficult in this field than in others, but empirical work in it is confronted
by a special difficulty. Because economic institutions are complex, they d o
not lend themselves easily to quantitative measurement . . . There is a
challenge here to economists . . .’ (Matthews, 1986:917).
The challenge is being met most effectively in the measurement and analysis of
intraindustry transaction costs, which have become a valuable tool in decision
making. But this most developed part of NIE is also its most limited. In the wider

*

Information on the experience with implementation of marketing board reform from Jones and
Beynon (1993), Jiriyengwa (1993). Sankhani (1993). Sichinga (1993). Coulter (1994). Jones (1994),
Jaffee and Morton (1995) and Lewa and Hubbard (1995) plus own interviews with boards in
Zimbabwe.

248

M.HUBBARD

and more complex task of measuring the effect of prevailing institutions on
markets, NIE is at an earlier stage, Studies of contract enforcement (e.g. Fafchamps,
1996) are providing one way forward.
References
Arrow, K. (1969). The Organisation of Economic Activity: Issues Pertinent to the Choice of Market
Versus Non-Market Allocation, in The Analysis of and Evaluation of Public Expenditure: The PPB
System, Volume 1. US Joint Economic Committee, 1st Session. 59-73.
&OW.
K. and Pines,
D. (eds.), The Economy as an Evolving Complex System Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley

Arthur, W. (1988). Self-Reinforcing Mechanisms in Economics, in Anderson, P.,

Axelrod, R. (1988). The Problem of Cooperation. in Cowen T. (ed.), The Theory of Marker Failure.
Fai~fax,George Mason University Press. The Cat0 Institute, 237-253.
Bardhan, P. (1989). Alternative Approaches to the Theory of Institutions. in Economic Development, in
Bvdhan, P. (ed.) (1989), The Economic Theory of Agrarian Institutions. Oxford, Oxford
University Press. 3- 17.
Bates, R. (1989). Beyond the Miracle of the Market: The Political Economy of Agrarian Development
in Kenya. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Bliss, C. and Stem, N. (1982). Palanpur: The Economy of an Indian Village. Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Boserup, E. (1965). The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics ofAgrarian Change Under
Population Pressure. London, George Allen and Unwin.
Coase, R. (1937). The Nature of the Firm, Economica (New Series), 386405.
Coulter. J. (1994). Liberalization of Cereals Marketing in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons From
Experience. Marketing Series 9. Chatham, UK, Natural Resources Institute.
Eggensson, T. (1990). Economic Behnviour and Institutions. Cambridge Surveys of Economic
Literature, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Eswaran. M. and Kotwal. A. (1985). A Theory of Contractual Structure in Agriculture, American
Economic Review, 75(3), 352-367.
Fafchamps. M. (1996). The Enforcement of Commercial Contracts in Ghana, World Development. 24(3),
427-448.
Frank. S . and Henderson, D. (1992). Transaction Costs as Determinants of Vertical Coordination in the
US Food Industries, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 74,941-950.
Grabowski, R. (1988). The Theory of Induced Institutional Innovation: A Critique, World Development.
16(3), 385-394.
Hardin, G. (1968). The Tragedy of the Commons, Science, 162, 1243-1248.
Hayami, Y.and Ruttan, V. (1 985). Agricultural Development: An International Perspective, Baltimore,
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Heskett, J.. Jones, T. O., Loveman, G. W., Sasser. W. E. and Schlesinger. L. A. (1994). Putting the
Service-Profit Chain to Work. Harvard Business Review, 72(2), 164-174.
Hewitt de Alcantera, C. (1992). Markets in Principle and Practice. European Journal of Development
Research. 4(2), 1-17.
Hubbard. M. (1989). Current Issues in the Namibian Livestock Sector and Possible Development
Initiatives in the Short and Medium Term. Development Administration Group, University of
Birmingham.
laffee, S. (1991). Kenya's Horticultural Export Marketing: A Transaction Cost Perspective. Paper
Presented at the Globalisation of the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable System, at the University of
California, Santa Cruz, 1991. Reprinted in Abbot, J. (ed.) (1993)Agricultural and Food Marketing
in Developing Countries: Selecred Readings. Wallingford, CAB International.
Jaffee. S. and Morton, J. (eds.) (1995). Marketing Africa's High-Value Foods: Comparative Experience
of an Emergent Private Sector: Dubuque. Kendall/Hunt Publishing.
Jensen, M. and Meckling, W. (1976). Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behaviour, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure. J o u m l of Financial Economics, 3(4), 305-360.
Jiriyengwa, S. (1993). Grain Market Liberalisation and Social Goals: The Grain Marketing Board in
Zimbabwe. Food Policy. August, 3 16-324.

THE ‘NEWMSllTUTlONAL ECONOMICS’ IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

249

Jones, S. (1994). Agricultural Marketing in Africa: Privatisation and Policy Reform. Oxford, Food
Studies Group.
Jones, S. and Beynon, J. (1993). Public and Private Sectors in Reformed Food Markets in Africa.
Oxford, Food Studies Group.
Krishna Erramilli, M. and Rao, C. (1993). Service Firms’ International Entry-Mode Choice: A Modified
Transaction Cost Analysis Approach. Journal of Marketing, 57, 19-38,
Lewa, P. and Hubbard, M. (1995). Kenya’s Cereal Sector Reform Programme: Managing the Politics of
Reform. Food Policy, 20(6), 573-584.
Liebenstein, H. ( 1966). Allocative Efficiency vs. ‘X-Efficiency’. American Economic Review, 56, 392415.
Maclaren. D. (1991). Agricultural Trade Policy Analysis and International Trade Theory: A Review of
Recent Developments. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 42(3), 250-297.
Matthews. R. C. 0. (1986). The Economics of Institutions and the Sources of Growth. Economic
Journal, 96,903-918.
Moschandreas, M. (1994). Business Economics. London and New York. Routledge.
Newbery, D. (1989). Agricultural Institutions for Insurance and Stablisation, in Bardhan, P. (ed.) (1989).
The Economic Theory of Agrarian Institutions. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 267-298.
North, D. (1 990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, Mass., Haward University Press.

Platteau, J.-P. (1994). Behind the Market Stage Where Real Societies Exist: Part I: The Role of Private
and Public Order Institutions. Journal of Development Studies, 30(3), 533-577.
Platteau, J.-P. (1995). A Framework for the Analysis of Evolving Patron-Client Ties in Agrarian
Economies. World Development, 23(5), 767-786.
Runge, C. (1986). Common Property and Collective Action in Economic Development. World
Development, 14, (June), 623-635.
Sankhani. D. (1993). Grain Marketing in Transition: T h e ADMARC Case. Paper Presented to AFMESA
Workshop on Grain Marketing in Transition, October 1993, Harare. Network and Centre for
Agricultural Marketing Training in Eastern and Southern Africa (FAO).
Schotter, A. (198 1). The Economic Theory of Social Institutions. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.
Sharma. N. and Dreze, J. (1996). Sharecropping in a North Indian Village. Journal of Development
Studies, 33(1), 1-39.
Sichinga, C. (1993). The Future Role of Grain Marketing Agencies in the Light of Structural Adjustment
Policy Changes: The Case of Zambia. Paper Presented to AFMESA Workshop on Grain Marketing
in Transition, October 1993, Harare. Network and Centre for Agricultural Marketing Training in
Eastern and Southern Africa (FAO).
Stein, H. (1994). Theories of Institutions and Economic Reform in Africa. World Development, 22(12),
1833-1849.
Stiglitz. J. (1974). Incentives and Risk-Sharing in Sharecropping. Review of Economic Studies. 41,219255.
Stiglitz. J. (1986). The New Development Economics. World Development, 14(2), 257-265.
Sugden, R. (1986). The Economics of Rights, Cooperation and Wel$are. Oxford, Blackwell.
Veblen. T. (1919). The Place of Science in Modem Civilizarion and Other Essays. New York, Huebsch.
Wade, R. (1987). The Management of Common Property Resources: Finding a Cooperative Solution.
World Bank Research Observer, 2, (July), 229-234.
White, G. (1993). Towards a Political Analysis of Markets, in White G. (ed.). The Political Analysis of
Markets, IDS Bulletin. 24(3), (July), Sussex. Institute of Development Studies.
Williamson, 0. (1985). The Economic Insrirurions of Capitalism. New York, Free Press.
Zusman, P. (1989). Peasants’ Risk Aversion and the Choice of Marketing Intermediaries and Contracts:
A Bargaining Theory of Equilibrium Marketing Contracts, in Bardhan, P. (ed.), The Economic
Theory of Agrarian Institutions, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 297-3 16.

