Agricultural Economics, 3 (1989) 1-22
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands

1

Agricultural Supply Response: A Survey
J. Mohan Rao
Department of Economics, Boston University, 2 70 Bay State Road, Boston, MA 02215 (U.S.A.)

(Accepted 30 August 1988)

Abstract
Rao, J.M., 1989. Agricultural supply response: a survey. Agric. Econ., 3: 1-22.
This paper surveys the literature on agricultural supply response to prices in developing countries. Empirical estimates of elasticities depend both on the methodology adopted and on countryspecific factors relating to technology, economic structure and macro constraints. The paper seeks
to establish some general conclusions on supply responsiveness within these limitations. Supply
response to output prices at the aggregate and at the crop levels is considered first. Crop-specific
acreage elasticities range between zero and 0.8 in the short run while long-run elasticities tend to
be higher- between 0.3 and 1.2. Yield elasticities are smaller and less stable than acreage elasticities. Clearly, inter-crop pricing can be relied upon to effect shifts in the commodity composition
of agricultural output. Evidence also suggests that supply elasticities vary systematically with such
factors as price and yield risks, multiple-cropping, the importance of the crop, farm incomes, farm
size, tenancy and literacy. The most controversial and important aspect of supply response is the
effect on aggregate agricultural output of agriculture's terms of trade. Conventional time-series
estimates range from 0.1 to 0.3. A major cross-country study reports an aggregate elasticity as high
as 1.66. It is argued that cross-country estimates are apt to exaggerate aggregate responsiveness
while time-series studies underestimate it somewhat. For LDCs, a tentative range of 0.4 to 0.5
seems plausible. Hence, the distributive effects of the terms of trade are likely to be more significant than the allocative effects. Asian evidence shows that only a third of the inter-country differences in fertilizer use can be attributed to fertilizer price policies. Provided new technologies
and infrastructure are in place, fertilizer subsidies can help in technology diffusion and in overcoming credit constraints. The choice between price supports and input subsidies will depend on
a variety of country- or situation-specific factors. Nevertheless, a significant general factor favoring price supports is that they can more easily be coupled with price stabilization goals than input
subsidies. Though sparse, the available evidence on the response of marketed surplus suggests that
price policy is not a reliable instrument for regulating inter-sectoral trade.

1 . Economic incentives and supply response

The importance of agricultural price policies in economic development derives from three key characteristics of agriculture: (a) it is the dominant production and employment sector in LDCs, particularly at low levels of devel0169-5150/89/$03.50

© 1989 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.

2

opment; (b) it has significant supply and demand linkages with the rest of the
economy; and (c) the bulk of resource use decisions in agriculture are directed
by decentralized market forces. Hence, the prices of food and other agricultural
commodities are often subject to government intervention. The efficacy of such
intervention in terms of whatever objectives may be valued depends on its
effects on private incentives. The extent to which farm decisions respond to
economic incentives should, therefore, be of central concern to policy-makers
and is the focus of this paper.
The policy debate about the effect of the surplus food disposal program of
the United States (Public Law 480) upon agricultural production in recipient
countries illustrates the vital role of estimates of agricultural supply response.
The program reduced food prices in recipient countries by increasing supply
relative to demand. On the premise that supply response was positive and significant, Schultz (1960) concluded that the program was deleterious to agricultural production in these countries. Dantwala ( 1963) maintained that the
program was irrelevant to agricultural production performance because he believed supply response to be zero or insignificant. Finally, Fisher ( 1963) argued
that if the surpluses were used as buffer stocks to stabilize producer prices and
if farmers are averse to price fluctuations, then, even though the average price
was lowered by the program, the reduced price instability would increase
production.
From the farmer's point of view, within limits set by his own goals and by
institutions, infrastructure, technology and market structure, a given set of
input and output prices makes some courses of action more desirable than
others. Moreover, farm prices are an important determinant of farm incomes
which, in turn, affect the farmer's ability to increase the quantity and improve
the quality of resources available to him. These latter effects of farm prices
operate in the medium to long run through private investments in the farm
sector. Thus, the incentive content of prices consists in: (a) their effect on the
choice of production alternatives with available resources, and (b) their impact on resource accumulation. Perhaps, the more important issue here is the
extent to which long-run adjustment via investment and changes in technology
can be attributed to price policies.
The empirical resolution of this issue is complicated by the fact that important resource adjustments in the long run - such as the increased availability
of infrastructure, the pace of technological change, institutional and structural
reforms, changes in foreign exchange and fiscal constraints - are conditioned
by government policies and programs that may be relatively independent of
agricultural prices. These contextual factors may not be responsive to the private actions of farmers themselves, and hence, to price incentives; many of
them may be influenced only by direct government non-price interventions.
The analysis of long-run response must therefore distinguish changes in supply conditions that are brought about by decentralized private actions from
changes that result from centralized public actions.

3

Supply response may be considered at different levels depending on the type
of resource use question the policy-maker is immediately concerned with:
( 1) Aggregate agricultural output. If the object of concern is the pace of agricultural output growth or some other economy-wide goal, the relevant notion
is the response of an index of agricultural output to some index of the relative
price of agriculture such as its barter terms of trade with non -agriculture.
(2) Commodity composition of output. Policy-makers may wish to alter the
commodity composition of agricultural output by changing intra-agricultural
commodity price relations: food products versus raw materials, cereals versus
non-cereal foods, export products versus import substitutes, employment-intensive versus capital- or land-intensive products, etc.
(3) Marketed surplus. The immediate goal of policy may be to assure a flow
of food and raw materials to urban areas sufficient to meet industrialization
targets. Here, the relevant concept of supply is the marketed surplus and the
relevant price is an index of the price relatives between agricultural and nonagricultural consumption goods.
For both technological and economic reasons, supply response will be different at each of these levels. An important task of empirical analysis is to identify
each of them separately and account for their differences.
For many purposes of policy, aggregate data may be sufficient to measure
supply responsiveness. However, farm-level or micro studies are also important for two related reasons: (a) farm-level data permit disaggregation by regions, farm size, income and other relevant factors which may influence supply
response; such disaggregation can be used to fine-tune policy to the needs and
potentialities of different types of farms, crops and regions; (b) micro studies
allow better tests of some hypotheses regarding farmer motivation which can
provide a deeper understanding of supply behavior. In addition, macro studies
frequently fail to distinguish the specific role of price incentives from the effects of contextual factors due to methodological limitations. Unraveling some
of these effects will have to rely partly on micro-level studies.
While the results of some micro studies will be referred to where relevant in
the subsequent sections, it is germane to consider here some general microbehavioral factors in supply response which underlie the results obtained from
aggregate data. Behavioral heterogeneity in agriculture derives from the uneven distribution of ownership and operational holdings of land and from the
fragmentation and imperfections of land, labor, credit and product markets.
For convenience, small and medium farms may be characterized as peasant
farms, and large land- holders as either commercial farmers or landlords. Peasant farms are distinguished also by their reliance on family labor and their
'subsistence' orientation. That is to say, their production decisions are intimately related to their economic objectives through their labor supply behavior; their marketing decisions are significantly influenced by their propensity

4

to consume their own output; and their risk attitudes govern their willingness
to diversify production and accept new inputs. Thus, a positive relation between prices and sales may be the outcome of tradeoffs between leisure and
income, own consumption and purchased goods, and income and security. For
commercial farmers, profit tends to be the predominant motive. For landlords
who rent out their lands to tenants, supply response will reflect the interaction
between their own goals and their tenants' goals. The same macro supply response may therefore reflect very diverse behaviors depending on the relative
importance of peasant production, commercial production and tenancy.
When credit markets are imperfect, the long-run response of supply depends
on the propensity of farmers to save and invest out of their incomes. There is
evidence to suggest that these propensities vary with farm income and wealth.
Therefore, an economy with a relatively important large-farm sector may be
expected to have a higher rate of agricultural investment. At the same time, it
has been observed that large farms face higher effective costs of wage-labor
and supervision and therefore tend to substitute capital for labor. Agrarian
structure, then, is of obvious relevance for the pace of output and employment
growth. On the other hand, small farms tend to face greater costs of capital
than large farms. Given this constraint on small farms, higher farm prices for
them can be expected to promote investment by increasing the supply of equity
finance. Clearly, these various behavioral hypotheses have different implications for the responsiveness of supply to prices.
The bulk of the literature demonstrates that farmers are generally responsive to economic incentives. The above remarks imply that this general finding
should not be allowed to conceal the very real motivational and behavioral
differences among different types of farms. These differences rarely show up
as such in macro studies while they can be detected in carefully designed micro
studies.
In the rest of this paper, available empirical evidence on supply response to
prices will be scrutinized with a view to establishing some general conclusions
on the subject. In Section 2, we consider supply response to output prices at
the aggregate and at the crop levels. In addition to a critical appraisal of evidence from studies employing various methodologies, this section also considers the economic and technological factors determining differences in supply
responsiveness. Section 3 considers supply response to input price changes.
The factors that should enter into the choice between output price supports
and input subsidies are also discussed in the light of empirical and theoretical
findings. Section 4 sums up the evidence on the response of crop-specific and
aggregate marketed surplus to prices. The final section provides a stylized summary of the main conclusions.
2. Response to output prices

It is useful first to consider some methodological difficulties in the estimation of supply response. Supply elasticity should properly refer to the speed

5

and magnitude of changes in planned output in response to anticipated output
prices. But neither planned output nor anticipated price is observable: the former, because weather and other environmental factors can make observed output deviate from planned output; the latter, because the farmer only knows
past and current prices. Proxies for these variables have, therefore, to be employed and the choice of proxy influences the results obtained.
Most time-series studies are for particular crops and use acreage as the proxy
for output because acreage is thought to be more subject to the farmer's control
than output. If this single input index of output is employed, acreage elasticities provide lower bounds to output elasticities. However, insofar as land area
grows independently over time, they overestimate output elasticity if this is
not explicitly allowed for. On the price side, most researchers assume that
farmers anticipate prices from their knowledge of current and past price (following Nerlove, 1958). But farmers' expectations may not change with all
transient price changes; clearly, the statistical measurement of price expectations is problematic.
The price variable used is usually a measure of relative prices: prices paid
relative to prices received; output prices relative to input prices or crop price
relatives. These are alternative measures of incentives and the choice among
them is often dictated by the availability of reliable price data. Measures of
price risk which are properly considered an element in price incentives are
frequently not included.
A major source of differences among studies has to do with properly controlling for non-price factors affecting production such as weather, infrastructure and technological changes which may be correlated with prices. This is
particularly serious for studies of yield response to prices. Studies vary in this
regard depending on the availability of data and on the authors' judgments as
to the relevance of particular non-price variables. While cross-section analyses
avoid some of the characteristic problems of time-series studies, their use in
country studies is limited by the small variability in prices across farms or
regions. Their use in studies of supply response across countries, on the other
hand, raises difficult questions in allowing for country-specific non-price
influences.
Most time-series studies of supply response report positive output elasticities for specific crops with respect to relative price changes. Short-run acreage
elasticities range between 0.0 and 0.8 while long-run elasticities tend to be
higher - between 0.3 and 1.2. The few available estimates of crop yield response are smaller and display much less stability than acreage elasticities.
This may be, at least in part, due to the methodological difficulties relating to
yield response estimation in time-series studies (Askari and Cummings, 1974).
A well-designed study of Bangladesh (Ahmed, 1981) found that a 10% increase
in the price of rice raises output between 1.8 and 2.6%. Half of this increase

6

was attributable to yield and the other half to area increases- the latter arising mostly at the expense of jute.
Although specific crop elasticities reflect inter-crop shifts in resources and
are not particularly large, they are of considerable policy interest. A steady
deterioration in the relative price of cash crops can, for example, bring about
significant long-run reductions in their production relative to food crops. The
impact of prices depends not only on the price elasticity of supply but also on
the absolute amount ofland and other resources devoted to a crop. Thus, intercrop price relations set by policy can be relied upon to effect more than marginal shifts in the commodity composition of agricultural output.
In China as in India, the greater part of the increase in agricultural productivity in the fifties was accounted for by shifts in the cropping pattern from
food to non-food crops. This was due to the higher incentives to farmers resulting from the generally higher value of output per hectare for the latter.
However, shifts in Chinese agricultural price policy in the sixties in favor of
regional food self-sufficiency appear to have been responsible for the expansion of foodgrains at the expense of non-foodgrain commodities. Restrictive
price policies prevented the Chinese agricultural economy from securing the
gains arising for inter-regional specialization and trade (Raj, 1982). Within
the food crops category, recent experience with relative crop price policies in
India and Bangladesh has favored the rapid expansion of wheat acreage at the
expense of other crops, mainly pulses and oilseeds (Tarrant, 1982). Given the
vital role of pulses in the diet of the poor and the high cost of imports of vegetable oils, such policies ought to be re-considered.
While one reason for differing predictions of the output response to price
incentives may be methodological diversity, another lies in the fact that elasticities can differ among crops and among countries in a systematic way. The
study by Askari and Cummings (1977) is the only one addressed to this important issue of the systematic determinants of supply response. The authors
set out a number of hypotheses about these determinants and tested them
using multiple regression. They employed a total of 320 supply elasticities estimated for a variety of individual crops from studies of Thailand, Chile, India
and the United States. Although their hypotheses and results constitute only
preliminary exploration of the question, they are sufficiently important to justify reporting them here:
( 1) Crop-specific price and yield risks will dampen supply responsiveness
particularly of peasants whose livelihood may be threatened by down -side risks.
Such a negative impact was found to be important in the case oflndian peasants.
(2) Where multiple-cropping is possible and rigid patterns of land use are
not dictated by subsistence requirements, the farmer's set of choices is wider;
hence responsiveness is likely to be greater. Irrigation, which is closely associated with multiple-cropping and wider production alternatives, was found to

7

exert a significantly positive effect on supply response. Similarly, it was found
that the extent of arable land available was a positive influence.
( 3) The relation between supply response for a crop and its relative importance in the crop mix is a rather complex one. The less dominant the crop the
more easily may resources be shifted into and out of its production in response
to prices. On the other hand, the more dominant the crop, the larger will be
the stakes associated with proper response to prices: even small price changes
will warrant large resource shifts. The study reported that while the supply
response was large for relatively minor crops and for overwhelmingly important crops (as with rice in Thailand), the response was small in the case of
'major' crops occupying the middle ground between these extremes.
(4) The average income level of farmers and farm size are both expected to
favorably affect supply elasticity to price signals since they are both good indicators of the ability to bear risks and of access to credit. This hypothesis was
validated by the study.
(5) Tenants will be less responsive to price incentives than owner-cultivators because the former do not usually get the full benefit of responding to price
changes. The authors found a significant negative effect of the incidence of
tenancy on supply responsiveness.
(6) Finally, the authors hypothesized a positive relation between supply
responsiveness and the level of farmer education. This hypothesis was confirmed when supply elasticities were related to the rural male literacy rate.
Estimation methods other than the statistical derivation of supply functions
have also been employed with sometimes divergent results. Estimates of supply
elasticity obtained from profit function studies, for example, differ considerably across countries: 0.35 for China, 0.42 for Malaysia, 0.52 for Turkey, 0.90
for Thailand and 0.98 for Japan (summarized in Lau and Yotopoulos, 1979).
A disturbing aspect of these estimates is that the lower elasticities were for
single crops as with rice in Malaysia and wheat in Turkey while the higher
elasticities were for multi-crop aggregates. Using linear programming models
for the agricultural sector of Sudan, Chhibber and Hrabovszky ( 1983) report
very low elasticities for important agricultural products ranging form 0 to 0.05
with the exception of sorghum which had a supply elasticity of 0.16. While
these studies add to the diversity of estimates of crop supply response, they do
not change the previously stated conclusions radically.
The most debated aspect of price policy is the response of aggregate agricultural production to changing relative prices or to the movements in the terms
of trade for agriculture. The controversy is particularly intense for two reasons:
(a) estimates of aggregate supply elasticities vary considerably with a small
minority of studies reporting even negative supply response to prices; (b) even
small differences in aggregate response estimates imply far-reaching disagree-

8

ments over the resource allocative impact of the terms of trade. Two broad
positions have been taken:
( 1) Some economists have argued that in most developing countries, agriculture as a whole faces unfavorable prices (Schultz, 1978; Peterson, 1979). In
the belief that both private and public resources allocated to agriculture are
highly responsive to prices, they claim that adverse terms of trade are largely
to blame for slow agricultural growth and the consequent problems of poverty,
balance of payments disequilibrium and slow overall growth;
( 2) Others have been far less willing to accord the terms of trade such a
pivotal role in agricultural development. While acknowledging the importance
of price policies, they have maintained that agricultural transformation is
brought about through a complex combination of price incentives and public
investments in irrigation, research, technology diffusion and reforms in the
social and institutional structure (Krishna, 1982, Raj, 1969).
That these differences over the role of price policy are fundamental should
be obvious. That they derive from differing assessments of aggregate supply
elasticities to prices is not open to question. Particularly for land-scarce economies, a priori considerations would suggest lower aggregate output elasticities
than crop-specific elasticities. Inter-crop acreage shifts are unavailable, by definition, for agriculture as a whole. Moreover capital and labor are likely to be
less mobile between sectors than within agriculture.
In an important comparison between agricultural policies in China and India over the past three decades, Raj ( 1982) has argued that the differences in
agricultural performance have to do with differences both in terms-of-trade
and non-price policies: "The resumption of high rates of growth in agricultural
production in China from 1970 can in fact be attributed to the substantial
infrastructure that was built up in the course of the 1960s through investments
in water and soil conservation (as well as in chemical fertilizers)." Although
the terms of trade for agriculture improved during the 1970s and were necessary for higher growth, they were not sufficient. Raj draws the lesson that
India's considerably lower land yields compared to China's can only be increased with substantial public investments and organizational changes in
agriculture.
The actual estimation oflong-run aggregate supply elasticities using country
time-series data poses considerable difficulties in constructing production and
terms-of-trade indices and in the interpretation of statistical results. Notwithstanding these difficulties, a few estimates are available for particular countries. For Argentina, Reca ( 1976) found that the short-run aggregate elasticity
ranged between 0.21 and 0.35 while the long-run elasticity was between 0.42
and 0.52. A statistical study of the Philippines found that while acreage elasticities to relative crop prices were significant, yield responses were not (Mangahas et al., 1966). It concluded that price changes were not "an effective de-

9

vice for influencing aggregate output... at present levels of technology." For
the Indian Punjab, Herdt ( 1970) estimated aggregate elasticities ranging between -0.06 to 0.42. That time-series estimates are dramatically sensitive to
the specification of how farmers form price expectations was recently exemplified by a study of Ajmer district in India (Bapna, 1980). For some specifications, supply elasticities ranged between 0.2 and 0.25 while for others, they
were as high as 0.5 to 0.6.
The estimates obtained from cross-section studies not only conflict with
time-series estimates but also among themselves. Cross-country elasticities are
considerably higher than time-series estimates. Cross-farm elasticities are either
negative or not significantly different from zero.
Peterson (1979) estimated long-run supply (yield per hectare) responsiveness from cross-country data for 1962-64 and 1968-70 from 53 (developed and
developing) countries. Agricultural output was measured in wheat equivalents.
The independent variables in the supply function were 'price' (measured by
the amount of commercial fertilizer that could be purchased with 100 kg of
wheat equivalent), annual average precipitation and the number of research
publications per hectare (as a proxy for technology). The estimated aggregate
supply elasticity ranged from 1.27 to 1.66- about 8 to 10 times larger than the
commonly accepted 0.15 obtained in time-series analyses. He further noted
that real prices received by farms in LDCs have been substantially lower than
farm prices in developed countries. Prices in the top 10 countries (mostly developed) were, on average, 3.7 times greater than prices in the bottom 10 (all
LDCs). Peterson estimates that if the LDCs in his sample had set prices at the
mean value for all the countries, they would have produced an additional140
million tons of wheat equivalent and gained 3.76% per year of their combined
national income after accounting for the costs of the resources that would be
diverted to agriculture by higher prices.
Peterson has sought support for his findings from available studies of aggregate supply response for the United States. Griliches ( 1959) used estimated
input demand functions to indirectly arrive at the aggregate supply elasticity
for U.S. agriculture. He found that the implied aggregate supply elasticity is
about 0.30 in the short run and about 1.20 in the long run. Based on his findings, Griliches surmised that the hitherto prevalent "zero elasticity of supply
view of U.S. agriculture" could be discarded. But his estimates were based on
the assumption that resources supplied to agriculture were perfectly elastic at
going prices. With the characteristic resource supply rigidities of LDCs, one
would expect a significantly lower value than Griliches' estimate of 1.20.
A recent study attempted to reconcile the obviously large differences in aggregate estimates between time-series and cross-country studies ( Chhibber,
1982). The a priori arguments favoring cross-country estimates are: (a) that
they approximate true long-run supply response to prices because they are not
sensitive to transient price changes as are time-series estimates, and (b) that

10

they fully incorporate all responses of technology, public investment and structural variables to price changes. On the other hand, cross-country analyses
usually fail to control for country-specific supply factors and, if the price variable is acting as a proxy for these, overestimate the price effect. Peterson's
study is believed to greatly exaggerate response to prices by inadequately allowing for supply factors that cannot be considered causally responsive to prices.
(Peterson himself acknowledges that the long-run response drops from 1.69 to
1.27 when only one other factor- research expenditure levels- is controlled
for). To establish this, Chhibber carried out two separate econometric analyses. First using the same FAO data as in Peterson's study but allowing for an
independent irrigation variable, he found that the elasticity was further reduced from 1.27 to 0.97. Second, using Indian time-series data and a more
sophisticated formulation of price expectations formation, he found that the
long-run aggregate response was between 0.29 and 0.46. He concluded that
aggregate elasticities were rather greater than had been found from previous
time-series analyses and considerably smaller than Peterson's cross-country
estimate. Chhibber's study provides an important first step in the much-needed
reconciliation between conflicting results on aggregate response.
Additional support for these results is available from the outcome of a related debate in Asian agriculture. Timmer and Falcon ( 1975) found that 85%
of the variations in fertilizer use in major rice-producing Asian countries was
explained by the rice-to-fertilizer price ratio. By contrast, when appropriate
controls for irrigation, credit and technology were introduced in the analysis,
only one-third of such variations could be explained by prices (David, 1976).
Insofar as rice was the dominant crop in most of these countries, this last
finding appears to be closely related to the question of aggregate supply elasticity and, hence, reinforces Chhibber's findings. An additional point of relevance should be noted. Peterson's study uses the output-to-fertilizer price ratio
while Chhibber's time-series analysis is based on data for the barter terms of
trade for agriculture. Given the low incidence of fertilizer usage in LDCs, the
latter price variable seems to be the more appropriate one to use in estimation.
To complete this review of evidence, reference should be made to two crossfarm studies that reported negative aggregate elasticities. Yotopoulos and Lau
(1974) found that the total output elasticity in Indian agriculture was -0.15.
In a similar application to data from N.W. Malaysia, Barnum and Squire ( 1979)
found the elasticity to be - 0.02 for rice. Since this region of Malaysia has
virtually a mono-crop system, this estimate may be taken to be an appro ximation to the aggregate elasticity. Both results were attributed to the negative
response of agricultural labor supply to the higher agricultural incomes resulting from higher output prices. But it should be noted that other studies using
identical methodology based on profit-function analysis obtained positive elasticities (Lau and Yotopoulos, 1979).

11

3. Impact of input subsidies

The prices of inputs facing farmers are an integral aspect of economic incentives to agricultural production. Input price policies seek to change output and/
or to guide farmers to the socially optimal input mix in the presence of market
imperfections. An important issue of policy is the choice between output price
increases and input price subsidies.
The bulk of the evidence on input price policies relates to fertilizers, studies
of tractor prices, interest rates and wage rates being much less extensive. Several writers, in fact, have emphasized the importance of the output-to-fertilizer
price ratio as the key measure of economic incentives in agriculture. The studies by Timmer and Falcon (1975) on rice and on total agricultural output by
Peterson ( 1979), discussed earlier, argue that the very large differences in yields
across countries are explained principally by the similarly large differences in
the ratio of output prices to fertilizer prices. In effect, they imply that raising
output prices or, equivalently, reducing fertilizer prices will bring about rapid
agricultural growth.
The general argument against these exaggerated interpretations of the role
of price incentives has been presented in Section 2. Specifically, in the context
of fertilizer demand studies, David ( 1975) has expressed considerable skepticism about approaches that fail to incorporate non-price determinants of input
demand. Her study showed that a 10% increase in fertilizer application would
increase rice production by 1.43% when all environmental and technological
factors have adjusted upwards- that is, when suitable varieties, cultural practices and adequate water supplies have all been developed. The ceteris paribus
response rate is only 0.7%. She also found that countries differed dramatically
in this regard.
For the United States Griliches ( 1958) found that if fertilizer prices rise by
10% then fertilizer use drops by 5% in the 1st year and by about 20% in the
long run. Timmer ( 1976) has summarized available estimates using Griliches'
methodology for Brazil, India, Japan, Korea and the Philippines. The estimated long-run decline in fertilizer use for a 10% price rise ranged from only
3.4% to 66.3%, the average being about 20%. To interpret these results, consider the effects of a 10% subsidy on fertilizer. Given long-run adjustment of
varieties, water supply and techniques, this will lead to a 20% increase in fertilizer use and a 2.86% increase in supply. An important difficulty with this
methodology in the LDC context is that the long-run elasticity for fertilizer is
a composite of the effect of prices and of changes in various environmental
factors. They fail to measure the efficacy of a fertilizer subsidy taken alone.
David (1976) has addressed this issue using a more policy-relevant methodology. Her study reported the results on fertilizer price elasticities based on
a comprehensive analysis of data obtained at three different levels: aggregate
data for ten Asian countries, cross-section farm-level data for six Asian coun-

12

tries, and cross-section and time-series farm-level data for Laguna (Philippines) farmers. This study had the unique virtue of systematically allowing for
fertilizer demand differences due to non-price factors. The long-run fertilizer
demand elasticity was remarkably stable at about -0.9 for all three sets of
data. This elasticity, it should be cautioned, is again a composite figure when
all other conditions are allowed to change. When neither environment nor
varieties is permitted to change, the elasticity drops to -0.3 - which may be
compared with the estimate of about -2.0 obtained using Griliches' methodology. Thus, only one-third of the long-run fertilizer response can be explained
by price changes alone. David also found that the pure price-response of fertilizer was greater in countries with larger levels of fertilizer consumption- a
finding that makes exclusive reliance on fertilizer subsidies more difficult to
justify in poorer countries.
Historical studies of long-term trends in Japan and other East Asian countries support these conclusions. Over the past century or so these countries
experienced high rates of agricultural growth accompanying successful economic development. According to Hayami ( 1972), between 1880 and 1960, the
price of rice deflated by the general price index showed no trend. This reflected
government policy designed to keep the wage costs of labor-intensive industrialization stable without lowering the living standards of agricultural producers. However, important innovations in the fertilizer industry led to fertilizer price reductions. Between 1883 and 1937, the price of commercial fertilizer
fell by more than 60% (Hayami, 1967). Along with falling fertilizer prices,
non-price efforts to improve yields- through improving technology and infrastructure - served to maintain the growth of agricultural production. Falling fertilizer prices may have been particularly important in easing the working capital constraint of Japanese peasants (Ishikawa, 1967).
Some evidence from micro-level studies further reinforces the above conclusions. Dobbs and Foster (1972) assessed farm-level incentives to invest in
packages of yield-raising inputs (water-seed-fertilizer) for grain production in
north India. They evaluated the private rate of return to investments in added
inputs using farm-level data rather than estimate elasticities statistically. Even
at output prices 25% below the prevailing market levels, they found rates of
return varying between 77 and 1196% -well in excess of any measure of the
social opportunity cost of capital. Their conclusion was that input prices did
not seem unreasonably high to deter the adoption of these packages. Private
investment in yield-raising but lumpy inputs such as tube-wells appeared to
be effectively constrained by factors such as small size of land-holdings, land
fragmentation and credit availability.
Rosegrant and Herdt (1981) constructed a detailed farm-level decisionmaking model to simulate the joint and independent yield-raising effects of
credit and fertilizer subsidies. Using Philippines data, they found that: (a) the
quantum of credit available was far more effective in increasing yield than the

13

price of credit, and (b) fertilizer subsidies served to raise yield by increasing
the effective availability of credit. This study suggests that fertilizer subsidies
and efforts to increase available credit are policies that strongly complement
each other. Credit market failures appear to be quite widespread especially in
small-holder agriculture of poor countries.
The impact of price policies on tractorization has been addressed in anumber of studies although their focus has been on capital-labor substitution rather
than supply response. In Brazil, for instance, the operative tractor stock rose
from 8372 in 1950 to 165 870 in 1970. According to Sanders and Ruttan (1978),
this was brought about in various ways including preferential exchange rates
during the 50s and, subsidized credit with very low (often negative) interest
rates and long repayment periods in the 60s. The authors found that the ease
of substituting tractors for labor was very high so that the labor displacement
effect was substantial. This displacement also took the form of a regional shift
of production away from areas with cheap labor (the northeast) to areas with
large farms and high labor costs. It was noted that the scarcity of labor for the
large farms of the Brazilian South prompted the use of their political influence
to subsidize the substitution of capital for labor.
In the South Asian experience with the new yield-raising technologies, an
important issue is whether mechanization of land preparation and harvesting
operations was a response to the relative prices of labor and capital or whether
it was technically complementary to the bio-chemical inputs. For the Pakistan
Punjab, Mcinerney and Donaldson ( 1975), found that tractor subsidization
was correlated with a more than doubling of farm size and with a decrease in
labor use per acre of 40% but with an increase in cropping intensity of only
7%. Rao ( 1974) found no evidence of technical complementarity for the Indian
Punjab. He explained tractorization as an undesirable consequence of changing relative prices (falling tractor to wage costs and rising product prices to
tractor costs) in the context of unequal land structure. Similarly, in Mexico,
the employment impact of the green revolution was greatly restricted because
of the labor-saving mechanization favored by the large farm sector which was
able to grow rapidly owing to cheap government credit and infrastructure provision (Stevenhagen, 1970; Johnston and Cownie, 1969).
These experiences suggest that small farms and large farms frequently do
not face identical wage and capital costs due to a variety of market and institutional imperfections. This makes for a capital-using bias on large farms which
may be further reinforced by inappropriate government price policies.
How does the policy-maker decide between supporting output prices versus
subsidizing inputs? The estimates of demand and supply elasticities for inputs
and outputs are critical to this choice but the impacts on foreign exchange and
budget balances may be equally important. The decision has to rest on the
relative social and budgetary costs of these alternative policies.
The conventional wisdom is that output subsidies are superior because they

14

do not distort the mix of inputs used when raising production. Input subsidies,
in this view, are justified only when there are input market imperfections. According to Barker and Hayami (1976), the use of fertilizer subsidies in the
Philippines to achieve rice self-sufficiency was more cost-efficient than price
supports because of various difficulties in its diffusion (ignorance, risk, etc.).
Their calculations allowed for an important difficulty with input subsidies:
unlike a price support for, say, rice, input subsidies for fertilizer, water, credit,
etc., may not be amenable to targeting for specific crops. For instance, the
spillover of fertilizer subsidies (intended for rice growers) in the Philippines
to sugar producers greatly increased the total cost of the subsidy program
(though not by enough to tilt the balance in favor of price supports).
Ahmed ( 1978) extended the study of Barker and Hayami to Bangladesh. He
found that the net social benefits would be larger and the net cost to government smaller with a fertilizer subsidy than a price support program for a targeted increase of 0.5 m tons in rice. This was because: (a) the price elasticity
of rice supply was small; (b) such as it was, the rice output response undercut
jute production, a major foreign exchange earner; and (c) increased fertilizer
consumption could be domestically met. It may be added that Ahmed judged
the distributional effects to be also superior for fertilizer subsidies because the
fraction of output marketed was more unequal across farmsize groups than the
fraction of fertilizer consumed.
Evidently, the choice between output and input price incentives will depend
on a variety of country- or situation-specific factors. Two studies, nevertheless,
provide theoretical and practical pointers of a general nature.
(1) Krishna (1976) has argued that, traditionally, input subsidies are preferred on political grounds because food prices do not have to be raised and on
budgetary grounds because only farmers using the input benefit. However, he
favors output price supports, because: (a) farmers are more familiar and sensitive to them at low levels of development, and (b) output price supports are
more easily coupled with price stabilization than input subsidies. This general
recommendation is supported by practical considerations.
( 2) A theoretical argument, which has yet to be empirically tested, favoring
input subsidies, has been provided by Parish and McLaren ( 1982). If average
costs rise with production due to technical diseconomies, the cost of a subsidy
to a variable input such as fertilizer, which substitutes for fixed factors such as
land and complements other variable factors, will be lower than the cost of an
output price support. The premises of this argument are supported by empirical observations in the case of fertilizer.
4. Marketed surplus

Prices for agricultural commodities can have qualitatively different effects
on the surplus of agriculture sold to the rest of the economy than on the volume

15

of production. This distinction between production and sales is not of significance for non-foodgrain agricultural products. The problem of ensuring an
adequate flow of food surpluses to urban areas to achieve targeted rates of
growth of industry has been at the center of debates about economic development. When countries seek to achieve domestic food self-sufficiency either for
non-economic reasons of owing to acute foreign exchange constraints on food
imports, the marketed surplus issue is a particularly serious one.
Other linkages between agriculture and the rest of the economy are closely
related to the marketed surplus. The volume of marketed surplus will exceed
the reverse flow of industrial intermediate and consumption goods purchases
by agriculture to the extent that agricultural savings finance non-agricultural
investments. In India, for example, roughly two-thirds of total foodgrains output is retained for self-consumption within agriculture while, at the same time,
rural demand for industrial consumption goods is nearly two and one-halftimes
that of urban consumption (Rangarajan, 1982). Bell (1974) designates the
flow of marketed surplus due to purchases of industrial inputs such as fertilizer
as the 'obligatory' surplus and that corresponding to purchases of industrial
consumption goods such as textiles as the 'optional' surplus. In the course of
economic development, agricultural technology usually develops in ways which
increase the obligatory surplus and the growing income of the agricultural producer-consumer will permit diversification in consumption away from food so
that the optional surplus is also expected to rise.
By contrast, in the short to medium run, an increase in agricultural prices
may actually reduce the flow of marketed surplus out of agriculture. As prices
rise, agricultural incomes will rise and so will, following the evidence presented
in Section 2, output. However, the impact on own-consumption is uncertain.
Since agricultural product prices rise, rural producers will substitute away from
agricultural consumption to industrial goods. On the other hand, the increase
in their incomes as sellers will permit them to retain more of their own production. On balance, the effect on marketed surplus may turn out to be negative depending on the price and income elasticities of own consumption, the
price elasticity of supply and the fraction of output marketed. A 'perverse'
response is, of course, consistent with rational, self-interested behavior on the
part of the farmer. If farms have a high propensity to consume more of their
own production as output prices and, hence, their incomes rise, and such income effects dominate the tendency to substitute alternative consumption goods
for the own-produced goods, then policies seeking to increase the surplus sold
of food should favor 'low' rather than 'high' food prices.
Three factors increase the likelihood of a negative response. First, with low
income levels in agriculture, retentions will be high and consumption is likely
to respond positively to prices. Second, where non-food consumer goods are
not widely available in rural areas or where consumer preferences remain conservative, diversification in consumption will be slow to respond. Third, the

16

likelihood of a negative response is greater for an economy where the small
peasant sector is dominant.
Empirically, the marketed surplus response to prices remains one ofthe major unsettled issues (Krishna, 1967). Marketed surplus elasticities have been
estimated through direct and indirect means and, for specific food crops and
for foodgrains as a whole. Such studies remain few, and a number of them have
been for India.
Bardhan's (1970) was the first study to estimate the marketed surplus elasticity directly. She estimated the behavior of total foodgrains marketed using
cross-section village-level data for India and found a marketed surplus elasticity ranging between -0.33 and - 0.60. Haessel ( 1975) subsequently employed
the same data but allowed for the interaction between, and hence, simultaneous determination of, marketings and prices. The estimate of the short-run
elasticity ranged between 2.7 and 3.3. He also found that the elasticity estimates for small farmers were somewhat lower than for large farms.
Haessel's results obtained for village-level data were recently contradicted
by a macro-econometric model in which the foodgrains marketed surplus and
food prices were simultaneously determined along with many other variables
relating to the agricultural and manufacturing sectors (Ahluwalia, 1979).
Marketed surplus of foodgrains was specified to be a function of foodgrains
output, current and lagged, and of foodgrain prices and income from commercial crops, both expressed in terms of the price of manufactures. Relative foodgrain prices were determined by the marketed surplus, government food distribution and non-agricultural real income. The study found a negative and
significant response of marketed surplus in the short to medium run. Simulation results from this study showed that in the absence of (P .L.480) imports
of foodgrains, agriculture's terms of trade would have been more favorable and
domestic production offoodgrains greater; however, the marketed surplus would
have been lower by an average of 2.5% per year.
In a time-series study using Indian macro data, it was reported that the
response of marketed surplus was positive for different measures of price incentives (Bardhan and Bardhan, 1971). But the estimation did not permit
interactions between prices and sales. The elasticity of the fraction of foodgrains marketed was positive and close to unity with respect to the price of
foodgrains relative to the non-food consumables. The elasticity with respect
to the ratio of food prices to non-food agricultural products was also positive
but considerably less than one. Furthermore, theoretical analysis showed that
given a relatively high value for the income elasticity of food demand, a low
trend rate of growth of food production relative to that for non-food agricultural production could make the response of marketed surplus to long-run shifts
in agricultural production negative. For the Indian case, the authors' empirical
analysis validated the premises as well as the conclusion of their argument: the
response of marketing to trend shifts was negative and significantly greater

17

than unity. This implies that if domestic marketed food surplus is a critical
goal of policy, then, even though the price response of the surplus is positive,
long-run efforts on research and other non-price factors shifting agricultural
supply will have to be biased in favor of food production.
Analyses based on the profit function approach have also reported negative
marketed surplus elasticities. These studies estimate partial output and sales
elasticities at the household level when no feedback effects due to labor supply
and resulting income changes are permitted and general elasticities when such
effects are allowed. In a study for Malaysia, the partial marketed surplus elasticity was 0.66 while the general elasticity was -0.08 (Barnum and Squire,
1979). In an Indian cross-farm study, the partial and general supply elasticities
were 1.17 and -0.15, respectively (Yotopoulos and Lau, 1974). With plausible
price and income elasticities of consumption, these estimates would also imply
a switch from positive partial to negative general elasticities of the surplus sold.
Another study for South Korea found that elasticities were comparable to those
obtained for Malaysia owing to the strength ofthe feedback effects (Ahn, Singh
and Squire, 1981).
Toquero et al. ( 1975) estimated the price elasticity of the marketed surplus
for rice in the Philippines for mono-culture farmers. They found that home
consumption of rice was not sensitive to prices. Since the supply was responsive to prices, the surplus showed a positive response: 0.41 to 0.67 in the short
run and 0.69 to 0.95 in the long run. The elasticity of surplus with respect to
output shifts was considerably higher at 1.38. They cautioned that their analysis "does not imply that price supports or import restrictions which raise farm
prices are adequate to mobilize the marketable surplus." The choice, for instance, between price incentive and research investments to shift food supply
would have to reflect their relative costs as alternatives to increase the marketed surplus. Another study for the Philippines found that the elasticities
range from 0.20 to above 1.00 for specific crops (Mangahas et al., 1966). They
were higher for rice than for corn. Since the study found no yield response to
prices, its conclusion was that prices could not be relied upon as an instrument
for raising the long-run marketed surplus. Behrman's ( 1966) study for rice in
Thailand estimated the marketed surplus elasticity to be around 0.45 in the
short run and about 1.04 in the long run.
These mixed and somewhat pessimistic findings relating price policy and
the marketed surplus of food need to be placed in the more general context of
long-run interactions between agriculture and the rest of the economy. Price
policy, the evidence seems to suggest, cannot always be relied upon to ensure
the adequate flow of food supplies to meet the needs of the non-agricultural
sectors. Any increase in non-agricultural food demands due to industrial investments and employment growth may reduce the marketed surplus, raise
food costs and, hence, increase the wage bill in private and public non-agricultural production. Recent work on two-sector growth models emphasize this

18

wage goods constraint (Taylor, 1983 ). Mellor (1982) has pointed out that rapid
population growth coupled with acceleration of per capita incomes due to economic development will tend to accelerate the overall rate of growth of food
demand. His calculations suggest that the annual rate of growth of food demand is strongly related to the level of development: 3.0% (very low income),
3.9% (low income), 5.3% (medium income), 4% (high income) and 1.3% (very
high income). It is conceivable that with such accelerated food demand growth,
the terms of trade will shift in favor of food/ agriculture. Given the evidence
discussed above, it should be clear that non-price mechanisms may then be
required to maintain reasonable rates of growth of the marketed surplus and
effect structural transformation. This conclusion, of course, assumes a closed
economy.
6. Conclusions

This paper has attempted to integrate and critically evaluate the available
evidence on the resource allocative effects of agricultural price incentives.
Pointed generalizations are precluded partly because of wide differences in
methodology and estimates found in the studies reviewed. They are inadvisable
also because the evidence suggests that supply elasticities depend on countryspecific factors relating to technology, economic structure and macro constraints. The highlights of the review can be summed up briefly:
(1) Crop-specific acreage elasticities range between zero and 0.8 in the shortrun while long-run elasticities tend to be higher- between 0.3 and 1.2. Yield
responses to prices are smaller and display much less stability than acreage
elasticities.
( 2) Although specific crop elasticities reflect inter-crop shifts in resources
and are not notably large, they are of considerable policy interest. Inter-crop
price relations set by policy can be relied upon to effect modest shifts in the
commodity composition of agricultural output as between, for example, food
and non-food crops.
( 3) One reason for the wide range in crop-specific elasticities is the fact that
elasticities can systematically differ among crops and among countries. Evidence suggests that these determinants of supply elasticities include technological factors such as crop-specific yield risks, the feasibility of multiple-cropping and the availability of arable land; economic factors such as crop-specific
price risks, the relative importance of the crop, farm incomes and farm size,
and the incidence of tenancy; and sociological dimensions such as the level of
farmer literacy. Price policy in any particular context should be designed after
evaluating these and other factors determining supply response.
(4) The most controversial aspect of supply response relates to the response of aggregate agricultural output to agriculture's terms of trade. The
importance of this issue derives from the fact that even small differences in

19

aggregate response estimates imply far-reaching disagreements over the resource allocative impact of the terms of trade. Conventional time-series estimates range from 0.1 to 0.3. A major cross-country study reports an aggregate
elasticity as high as 1.66. Cross-farm micro-macro studies report negative aggregate elasticities. A critical review of the literature reveals that cross-country
estimates exaggerate aggregate supply responsiveness to prices while time-series studies underestimate the response somewhat. For LDCs, a tentative range
of 0.4 to 0.5 seems plausible. It would seem that major shifts in the terms of
trade will alter resource allocation betwen sectors much less than the distribution of incomes.
( 5) If Asian experience is any guide, it appears that only about a third of
the inter-country differences in fertilizer use can be attributed to fertilizer price
policies. The remaining two-thirds are explained by environmental factors such
as the level of technology, available infrastructure including irrigation, credit
constraints and agrarian structure. The response of fertilizer use to price subsidies also depends positively on the level of fertilizer use. This implies that
fertilizer subsidies will be less reliable as a way of inreasing use in poor than in
rich countries. Provided new technologies and infrastructure are in place, fertilizer subsidies can serve the useful purpose of rapid technological diffusion
and of overcoming credit constraints.
( 6) Small farms and large farms frequently do not face identical wage and
capital costs. If corrective price policies or other interventions are not devised,
the large farm sector will display a strong capital-using bias with strong negative effects on employment and only weak positive effects on supply.
( 7) The optimal choice between price supports and input subsidies will depend on a variety of country- or situation-specific factors. Of particular importance are their relative effects on the government and the foreign balance.
Nevertheless, a significant general factor favoring price supports is that they
can more easily be coupled with price stabilization goals than input subsidies.
At the same time, fertilizer subsidies can be expected to have an advantage
over price supports in certain specific situations. The relative size of this advantage is presently unknown.
(8) Available evidence on the response of the marketed surplus is limited
and fragmentary. Such as it is, together with a priori considerations, the evidence seems to suggest that price policy cannot always be relied upon to ensure
the flow of adequate food supplies to meet demand in the non-agricultural
sectors. The long-run expansion of food surpluses for industrialization in a
closed economy will have to rely, in the main, on non-price efforts to shift the
food supply function rapidly. If cheap food imports are feasible and at reasonably stable prices, LDCs may be able to avoid making painful policy tradeoffs
in this respect.

20

References
Ahluwalia, I., 1979. An analysis of price and output behavior in the Indian economy: 1951-1973.
J. Dev. Econ., 6: 363-390.
Ahmed, R., 1978. Price support vs. fertilizer subsidy for increasing rice production in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh Dev. Stud., 6: 119-138.
Ahmed, R., 1981. Agricultural price policy under complex socio-economic and natural constraints:
the case of Bangladesh. Rep. 27, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington,
DC, 78pp.
Ahn, C.Y., Singh, I. and Squire, L., 1981. A model of an agricultural household in a multi-crop
economy: the case of Korea. Rev. Econ. Stat., 63: 520-525.
Askari, H. and Cummings, J., 1974. Output price response in agriculture: an evaluation. Indian J.
Agric. Econ., 29: 165-17 4.
Askari, H. and Cummings, J., 1977. Agricultural Supply Response: A Survey of Econometric Evidence. Praeger, New York, 443 p.
Bapna, S., 1980. Aggregate Supply Response of Crops in a Developing Region. Sultan Chand and
Sons, Delhi.
Bardhan, K., 1970. Price and output response of marketed surplus of foodgrains: a cross-sectional
study of some North Indian villages. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 52: 51-61.
Bardhan, K. and Bardhan, P., 1971. Price response of marketed surplus of foodgrains. Oxford
Econ. Pap., 23: 255-267.
Barker, R. and Hayami, Y., 1976. Price support versus input subsidy for food self-sufficiency in
developing countries. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 58: 617-628.
Barnum, H. and Squire, L., 1979. An econometric application of the theory of the farm household.
J. Dev. Econ., 6: 79-102.
Behrman, J., 1966. Price elasticity of the marketed surplus of a subsistence crop. J. Farm Econ.,
48: 875-893.
Bell, C., 1974. A note on 'perverse' producer responses to changes in prices. In: D. Lehmann (Editor), Peasants, Landlords and Governments. Holmes and Meier, New York, pp. 262-268.
Chhibber, A., 1982. Dynamics of price and non-price response of supply in agriculture. Stanford
University, Stanford, CA.
Chhibber, A. and Hrabovszky, J.P., 1983. Agricultural price and investment policy in the Sudan:
a linear programming approach. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome.
Dantwala, M., 1963. International planning to combat the scourge of hunger throughout the world.
Ann. Collect. Econ., 34: 71-95.
David, C., 1975. A model of fertilizer demand in Asian rice economy: a micro-macro analysis.
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
David, C., 1976. Fertilizer demand in the Asian rice economy. Food Res. lnst. Stud., 15: 109-124.
Dobbs, T. and Foster, P., 1972. Incentives to invest in new agricultural inputs in northern India.
Econ. Dev. Cult. Change, 21: 101-117.
Fisher, F., 1963. A theoretical analysis of the impact offood surplus disposal on agricultural production in recipient countries. J. Farm Econ., 45: 863-875.
Griliches, Z., 1958. The demand for fertilizer: an economic interpretation of a technical change.
J. Farm Econ., 40: 591-606.
Griliches, Z., 1959. The demand for inputs in agriculture and a derived supply elasticity. J. Farm
Econ., 41: 309-322.
Haessel, W., 1975. The price and income elasticities of home consumption and marketed surplus
of food grains. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 57: 111-115.
Hayami, Y., 1967. Innovations in the fertilizer industry and agricultural development: the Japanese experience. J. Farm Econ., 49: 403-412.
Hayami, Y., 1972. Rice policy in Japan's economic development. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 54: 19-31.

21
Herdt, R., 1970. A disaggregate approach to aggregate supply. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 52: 512-520.
Ishikawa, S., 1967. Economic Development in Asian Perspective. Kinokuniya Bookstore Co., Tokyo.
Johnston, B. and Cownie, J., 1969. The seed-fertilizer revolution and labor force absorption. Am.
Econ. Rev., 59: 569-582.
Krishna, R., 1967. Agricultural price policy and economic development. In: H. Southworth and
B. Johnston (Editors), Agricultural Development and Economic Growth. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, NY, pp. 497-540.
Krishna, R., 1982. Some aspects of agricultural growth, price policy and equity in developing
countries. Food Res. Inst. Stud., 18: 219-260.
Lau, L. and Yotopoulos, P., 1979. Applications of the profit function to selected countries: summary and conclusions. Food Res. Inst. Stud., 17: 107-114.
Mangahas, M., Recto, A. and Ruttan, V., 1966. Price and market relationships for rice and corn
in the Philippines. J. Farm Econ., 48: 685-703.
Mcinerney, J. and Donaldson, G., 1975. The consequences of farm tractors in Pakistan. Staff
Work. Pap. 210, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Mellor, J., 1982. Third world development: Food, employment and growth interactions. Am. J.
Agric. Econ., 64: 304-311.
Nerlove, M., 1958. The Dynamics of Supply: The Estimation of Farmers' Response to Price. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 268 pp.
Parish; R. and McLaren, K., 1982. Relative cost-effectiveness of input and output subsidies. Aust.
J. Agric. Econ., 26: 1-13.
Peterson, W., 1979. International farm prices and the social cost of cheap food policies. Am. J.
Agric. Econ., 59: 12-21.
Raj, K.N., 1969. Some questions concerning growth, transformation and planning of agriculture
in developing countries. J. Dev. Flann., 1: 15-38.
Raj, K.N., 1982. Agricultural growth in China and India: Role of price and non-price factors.
Economic and Political Weekly, January 15.
Rangarajan, C., 1982. Agricultural growth and industrial performance in India. Res. Rep. 33, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Rao, C.H.H., 1974. Employment implications of the Green Revolution and mechanization: a case
study of the Punjab. In: N. Islam (Editor), Agricultural Policy in Developing Countries. Wiley,
New York, pp. 341-350.
Reca, L., 1976. Argentina: Country case study of agricultural prices and subsidies. Staff Work.
Pap. 386, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Rosegrant, M. and Herdt, R., 1981. Simulating the impacts of credit policy and fertilizer subsidy
on Central Luzon rice farms. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 63: 655-665.
Sanders, J. and Ruttan, V., 1978. Biased choice of technology in Brazilian agriculture. In: H.
Binswanger and V. Ruttan (Editors), Induced Innovation. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD.
Schultz, T.W., 1960. Impact and implications offoreign surplus disposal on underdeveloped economies. J. Farm Econ., 42: 1019-1030.
Schultz, T.W., 1978. On economics and politics of agriculture. In: T.W. Schultz (Editor), Distortions of Agricultural Incentives. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN, pp. 3-23.
Stevenhagen, R., 1970. Social aspects of agrarian structure in Mexico. In: R. Stevenhagen (Editor), Agrarian Problems and Peasant Movements in Latin America. Anchor Books.
Tarrant, J., 1982. Food policy conflicts in Bangladesh. World Development, 10.
Taylor, L., 1983. Structuralist Macroeconomics. Basic Books, New York, 234 pp.
Timmer, C.P., 1976. Fertilizer and food policy in LDCs. Food Policy, 2: 143-154.
Timmer, C.P. and Falcon, W., 1975. The political economy of rice production and trade in Asia.
In: L. Reynolds (Editor), Agriculture in Development Theory. Yale University Press, New
Haven, CT, pp. 373-410.

22
Toquero, Z., Buff, B., Anden-Sacsina, T. and Hayami, Y., 1975. Marketable surplus functions for
a subsistence crop: Rice in the Philippines. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 57: 705-709.
Yotopoulos, P. and Lau, L., 1974. On modelling the agrarian sector in developing countries: an
integrated approach of micro and macroeconomics. J. Dev. Econ., 1: 105-127.

