Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

Under the hood
Issues in the specification and interpretation of
spatial regression models
Luc Anselin
Regional Economics Applications Laboratory (REAL) and Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Abstract
This paper reviews a number of conceptual issues pertaining to the implementation of an explicit “spatial” perspective in
applied econometrics. It provides an overview of the motivation for including spatial effects in regression models, both from a
theory-driven as well as from a data-driven perspective. Considerable attention is paid to the inferential framework necessary
to carry out estimation and testing and the different assumptions, constraints and implications embedded in the various
specifications available in the literature. The review combines insights from the traditional spatial econometrics literature as
well as from geostatistics, biostatistics and medical image analysis.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Spatial econometrics; Spatial autocorrelation; Spatial processes; Model specification

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a virtual explosion in the
application of spatial models in a range of fields in the
social sciences in general, and in applied economics in
particular (recent reviews are given in, e.g. Anselin and
Bera, 1998; Goodchild et al., 2000; Anselin, 2001b,c).
Over time, the methodology of spatial econometrics
(Paelinck and Klaassen, 1979; Anselin, 1988) has matured and evolved from an aspect of spatial statistics
with primary application in regional science and analytical geography (Ord, 1975; Cliff and Ord, 1981),
to an increasingly visible thread in formal econometric theory (for example, Conley, 1999; Kelejian and
Prucha, 1999, 2001; Baltagi and Li, 2001; Lee, 2002).
Similarly, when dealing with aggregate cross-sectional
data in empirical work, testing for spatial autocorreE-mail address: anselin@uiuc.edu (L. Anselin).

lation and estimating models that formally incorporate spatial effects is no longer exceptional. Arguably,
spatial regression techniques are beginning to become
part of the toolbox of applied econometrics. In agricultural and resource economics, illustrations of this
perspective can be found in Benirschka and Binkley
(1994), Bockstael (1996), Weiss (1996), Nelson and
Hellerstein (1997), Bell and Bockstael (2000), Florax
et al. (2001), Hurley et al. (2001), Anselin et al. (2002),
Irwin and Bockstael (2002), Kim et al. (2002) and Roe
et al. (2002), among others.
While undoubtedly considerable progress has been
made, most applications of spatial econometrics are
rather limited in the way in which spatial interaction
is incorporated in the model specifications. The typical approach is to distinguish between so-called spatial lag and spatial error models (see Anselin, 1988).
The former incorporate a spatially lagged dependent
variable (Wy) on the right hand side of the regression

0169-5150/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 0 7 7 - 4

248

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

model. Spatial error autocorrelation is either modeled
directly, following the general principles of geostatistics, or by utilizing a spatial autoregressive process
for the error term (for a recent review of these models,
see Anselin and Bera, 1998; Anselin, 2001b). What
is not always well understood in this process is that
different spatial models induce sometimes radically
different spatial correlation patterns, which do not
necessarily match the underlying theoretical interaction model.
In this paper, I review some issues in the specification and interpretation of spatial regression models.
The objective is to pull together results from a variety
of disciplines in which different modeling strategies
have been pursued, including spatial econometrics,
biostatistics, medical image analysis and geostatistics.
The review is aimed at a general audience of applied
econometricians, without assuming familiarity with
spatial econometrics. Hence, the approach taken is
primarily pedagogic and mostly a reformulation and
elaboration of ideas that have been outlined in some
form in earlier review papers (specifically, Anselin
and Bera, 1998; Anselin, 2001b,c, 2002). The emphasis throughout is less on technical aspects than on
the underlying concepts and intuition. The objective
is to highlight unusual results and suggest additional
ways in which spatial models may be introduced in
applied econometrics. A more technical treatment is
pursued in a companion paper.
The focus of the paper is exclusively on spatial correlation in linear regression models, leaving
the discussion of spatial heterogeneity aside.1 Also,
space–time models and spatial panel specifications are
not considered explicitly, although most of the structures considered can be implemented in a space–time
context without modification. 2
The remainder of the paper consists of four sections
and a conclusion. First, theoretical motivations for the
inclusion of spatial dependence in a regression model
are considered. This is followed by a similar focus
on data-driven motivations. Next, a number of con1 For a general review of approaches to model spatial heterogeneity in a regression context, see, among others, Anselin (1988,
1990), Casetti (1997), Fotheringham et al. (1998) and LeSage
(2002).
2 See for example Elhorst (2001) for a recent review of some
of the issues, and Anselin (1988, 2001b), for the specification of
spatial panel data models.

ceptual issues are reviewed that pertain to the foundations for statistical inference in spatial regression models, including data models, the construction of spatial
weights and asymptotics. Finally, some comments are
formulated on the issue of ecological regression, i.e.
the application of spatial regression models to aggregate units, such as counties or states.

2. Theory-driven specifications
The inclusion of spatial effects in applied econometric models is typically motivated either on theoretical grounds, following from the formal specification
of spatial interaction in an economic model, or on
practical grounds, due to peculiarities of the data used
in an empirical analysis. I consider the theoretical
perspective first.
In their description of the definition of spatial
econometrics, Paelinck and Klaassen (1979) stressed
the importance of spatial interdependence, the asymmetry of spatial relations, and the relevance of factors
located in “other spaces”. This early formulation
of the importance of spatial interaction was mostly
based on pragmatic grounds. However, more recently, these concerns are also reflected in theoretical
economic models of interacting agents and social
interaction. Such models deal with questions of how
the interaction between economic agents can lead to
emergent collective behavior and aggregate patterns,
and they assign a central role to location, space and
spatial interaction. The substantive concepts receive
different labels in various subfields, such as social
norms, neighborhood effects, peer group effects, social capital, strategic interaction, copy-catting, yardstick competition and race to the bottom, to name
a few. However, an important commonality is the
need to formally specify the range and strength of
the relations between the interacting agents, which in
empirical practice translates into the need to specify
a structure for spatial correlation.
Examples of such theoretical frameworks in economics are models of complex behavior built on
principles from statistical mechanics, such as interacting particle systems and random field models (Brock
and Durlauf, 1995; Akerlof, 1997; Durlauf, 1997);
macroeconomic models with mean field interaction
(Aoki, 1996); models for neighborhood spillover

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

249

effects (Durlauf, 1994; Borjas, 1995; Glaeser et al.,
1996); and models of increasing returns, path dependence and imperfect competition underlying the new
economic geography (Fujita et al., 1999).
Rather than providing a detailed review of how
specific spatial econometric models follow from these
theoretical considerations, I will first focus on two
particularly interesting forms that have seen considerable application in practice: spatial reaction functions
and potential variables. Next, I present some remarks
on spatial latent variable models.

relevant in a situation where a farmer would determine
the amount of farmland devoted to a crop by taking
into account the amounts allocated by the other farmers in the system. Consequently, the objective function
for each agent is:

2.1. Spatial reaction function

The spatial lag model (1) is an implementation of
the reaction function obtained by specifying a linear
functional form for R and by restricting the set of interacting agents to the “neighbor” structure expressed
in the spatial weights W . Even though this imposes
a large number of zero constraints in W in the structural form (1), the corresponding reduced form reveals
a global range of spillovers:

A spatial reaction function (Brueckner, 2002) expresses how the magnitude of a decision variable for
an economic agent depends on the magnitudes of the
decision variables set by other economic agents.3 This
provides the theoretical basis for a so-called spatial
lag model, or, mixed regressive, spatial autoregressive
model (Anselin, 1988):
y = ρWy + Xβ + ε,

(1)

where, as usual, y is an n×1 vector of observations on
the dependent (decision) variable, W is an n × n spatial weights matrix that formalizes the network structure (nodes and links) of the social network of the n
agents,4 ρ is the spatial autoregressive parameter, X
is an n × k matrix of observations on the exogenous
variables, with an associated k × 1 regression coefficient vector β, and ε is a vector or random error
terms.
Brueckner (2002) develops two theoretical frameworks for strategic interaction that yield a reaction
function as the equilibrium solution. One is referred
to as a spillover model, in which an agent i chooses
the level of a decision variable, yi , but the values of
the y chosen by other agents (say,y−i , where the −i
subscripts refers to all agents other than i) affect its
objective function as well. For example, this would be
3 Brueckner (2002) develops his argument in the context of
public economics and refers to the “agents” as “jurisdictions,”
which are the decision-making agents in this setting. Here, I will
use the more generic term agents. See also Section 5 for a discussion of the interpretation of reaction functions when the units are
aggregates of agents, which is an important distinction.
4 A more formal treatment of the spatial weights is postponed
until Section 4.2.

U (yi , y−i ; xi ),

(2)

with xi as a row vector of (exogenous) characteristics
of i. The solution to the usual objective maximization
problem yields the reaction function as:
yi = R(y−i , xi ).

y = (I − ρW )−1 Xβ + (I − ρW )−1 ε,

(3)

(4)

in which the “Leontief inverse” (I − ρW )−1 links the
decision variable yi to all the xi in the system through
a so-called spatial multiplier. In addition, (4) illustrates how the dependent variable yi at i is determined
by the error terms at all locations in the system, and
not just the error at i. This simultaneity makes the
spatially lagged Wy variable endogenous, which necessitates specialized estimation techniques, such as
maximum likelihood estimation or instrumental variables approaches (see, e.g. Ord, 1975; Anselin, 1988;
Kelejian and Robinson, 1993; Kelejian and Prucha,
1998).
The particular form of the spatial multiplier in
(4) is only one example out of a taxonomy of models for spatial spillovers, as presented in Anselin
(2002). Different ranges for the spatial spillovers can
be incorporated by applying the spatial lag operator
(pre-multiplication by the spatial weights matrix W ) to
the y, X or ε terms in a regression specification. However, it is important to note that models that include
Wy all induce a global form of spillovers. Local forms
of spillover are obtained from spatial lags for the explanatory variables (WX, see Section 2.2) and particular error covariances, such as those induced by a spatial
moving average model and a spatial error components model (see Anselin, 2002; Anselin and Moreno,

250

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

2002). These do not seem to fit the strategic interaction
framework.
Brueckner (2002) illustrates how a number of empirical applications of strategic interaction models are
special cases of his spillover model, with applications
to state expenditures, pollution abatement and other
forms of yardstick competition.5
A second theoretical framework is referred to as
the resource flow model. Here, the agent’s decision
variable is not directly affected by the levels chosen
by other agents, but only indirectly. The indirect effect
follows from the presence of the value of a “resource”
in the individual agent’s objective function:
U (yi , si , xi ),

(5)

where si is the amount of the resource available to
agent i. For example, this could pertain to a farmer’s
decision of how much irrigation to apply to a field,
where the resource si would be the amount of water available for this purpose. The interaction between
agents follows from the way in which the resource is
distributed among them, which depends both on the
characteristics of each agent (xi , for example, the type
of crop grown on the field), as well as on the decisions
taken by the other agents (how much water they use):
si = H (yi , y−i ; xi ).

(6)

After substituting (6) into (5), the interaction variables y−i become part of the objective function, and
the resulting equilibrium solution takes the same form
as the reaction function (3) for the spillover model.
Brueckner (2002) illustrates how a number of tax competition and other strategic interaction models fall in
the resource flow category and thus also suggest a spatial lag specification.6
It is important to note that the spillover and the resource flow models both lead to the same spatial lag
econometric specification. Put differently, the spatial
econometric model as such is not sufficient to identify
the economic mechanism that leads to the presence
(and empirical evidence) of spatial interaction. This is
an example of the inverse problem, which is pervasive
5 Familiar examples are Case et al. (1993), Besley and Case
(1995), Murdoch et al. (1997), and Bivand and Szymanski (1997,
2000).
6 Examples are Brueckner (1998) and Saavedra (2000), among
others.

in spatial data analysis (see, for example, Chilès and
Delfiner, 1999, Chapter 8). A similar problem is encountered in the interpretation of a spatial lag model
as the expression of a spatial diffusion process.7 While
diffusion processes will lead to equilibrium outcomes
that are compatible with a spatial lag specification,
other processes may yield the same outcome as well.
In other words, these different processes are observationally equivalent.
The essence of the problem is that a single crosssectional data set contains insufficient information to
identify the precise nature of the underlying mechanism. This is only one example of the kinds of identification problems encountered in spatial econometric
models, as shown by Manski (1993) and Kelejian and
Prucha (1997), among others.8
2.2. Potential variables
A potential variable formally expresses the importance of “other spaces” in a regression specification.
The theoretical motivation for this goes back to the
early treatment of spatial interaction in the regional
science literature by Isard (1960). There, the potential
for interaction between an origin i and all destinations
j was formulated as a sum of “mass” terms in the
destination, suitably downscaled by a distance decay
function. Specifically, with zj as a measure of mass
(e.g. income, population size) and f (dij ) as a distance
decay function, the potential at i becomes:
Pi =

f (dij )zj .

(7)

j

Note that the destinations need not be the same as the
origins for this concept to work, although they typically are.9 Commonly used distance decay functions
7 See, for example, the discussion in Baller et al. (2001) and
Messner and Anselin (2002).
8 In point pattern analysis, this identification problem is referred
to as the problem of true versus apparent contagion. In a nutshell,
the information in a cross-section is not sufficient to distinguish
between clustering as resulting from a contagious process, or
clustering as a result of spatial/structural heterogeneity (for details,
see, among others, Upton and Fingleton, 1985; Cressie, 1993).
9 For example, in Anselin et al. (1997) a variable is included
that incorporates the effects of counties surrounding an MSA, as
a “ring” variable, whereas those counties are not part of the data
set for the dependent variable.

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

are the negative exponential, f (dij ) = e−γ dij , and the
−γ
inverse distance function, f (dij ) = dij .10
A concept related to notion of a potential is the spatial cross-regressive term or spatially lagged explanatory variable (WX), discussed in Florax and Folmer
(1992). Such a variable consists of a weighted sum of
values at other locations, or, for each observation i:
[Wx]i =

wij xj ,

(8)

j =i

where the importance of each link i–j is expressed in
the weights. The weights are perfectly general, and can
include the distance decay specifications given above.
Typically, they are based on geographic contiguity of
the units of observation. The non-zero elements in
the ith row of W determine the range of interaction
that affects location i, or, the range of spatial spillover.
In contrast to the spatially lagged dependent variable that follows from the spatial reaction function,
the spatial cross-regressive term does not imply a
multiplier effect. Whether its range is global (including all other observations) or local (limited to
a few “neighbors”) depends on the specification of
the spatial weights, that is, on the extent to which
zero restrictions (of the form wij = 0) have been
imposed.
In a regression specification, the same variables may
be included in non-lagged and spatially lagged form,
as in
y = Xβ + WXγ + ε,

(9)

where zero restrictions can be imposed on specific
elements of the parameter vectors β and γ . In addition,
when both the original values (xk ) and the spatial lag
(Wxk ) for the same variable are included, tests for
the importance of distance decay can be performed
(distance decay implies γk < βk ). Finally, in contrast
to the spatial lag model, the spatial cross-regressive
specification does not require specialized estimation
methods and ordinary least squares remains unbiased
for γ .
10 The parameter γ is either estimated jointly with the other parameters of the model, which turns it into a non-linear specification, or set a priori. Common choices in the inverse distance model
are the integers 1 and 2, the latter following from the Newtonian
gravity model. See Isard (1960), for an extensive discussion.

251

2.3. Spatial latent variable models
So far, the theoretical models considered were formulated for a continuous dependent variable y. In applied econometrics, a more relevant specification often
pertains to discrete dependent variables, where only
a limited number of values are observed, such as the
presence or absence of an action, or whether one out
of a small number of alternative decisions has been
taken. The standard approach to modeling such phenomena is to develop a specification for an unobserved
underlying latent dependent variable for each agent,
say yi∗ . The link between the latent variable and the observed discrete phenomenon is obtained by specifying
a threshold, say c, such that yi is observed whenever
yi∗ > c. A typical application of this approach is in
spatial land use models, where only the outcome is observed (one out of a set of discrete land use decisions),
but the decision process is related to a latent variable,
such as profitability, in a random utility framework.
A spatial latent variable model is a specification for
this process where spatial correlation is introduced between the decision variables and/or in the error structure of the model. As a familiar point of departure,
consider a latent linear regression model, where the
unobserved dependent variable yi∗ is related to a 1 × k
row vector of explanatory variables xi and an error
term εi :
yi∗ = xi β + εi .

(10)

A matching spatial lag model would then be
y ∗ = ρWy∗ + Xβ + ε,

(11)

or, equivalently:
yi∗ = ρ

j =i

wij yj∗ + xi β + εi ,

(12)

where y ∗ is the full n × 1 vector of the latent dependent variables. Note that this is compatible with a
spatial reaction function for the latent variables, but
not necessarily for the observed discrete outcomes. In
other words, it is the latent Wy∗ that is present in the
actors’ objective functions, such as Eq. (2), but not the
observed Wy. For example, this would imply that it is
the unobserved profitability of the neighbors parcels
that enters in the utility function of a spatial land use
model, but not the observed actual land uses.

252

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

The matching reduced form of the latent spatial lag
process is as in (4), but again pertaining to the vector
of latent variables:
y ∗ = (I − ρW )−1 Xβ + (I − ρW )−1 ε,

(13)

or
y ∗ = (I − ρW )−1 Xβ + u,

(14)

where u = (I − ρW )−1 ε.
For simplicity, let the threshold c = 0 and let yi
be binary, taking on the value of 1 whenever yi∗ > 0.
From (13), it follows that:
yi∗ =

j

aij xj β + ui ,

(15)

where aij is the element (i, j ) of the Leontief inverse
matrix (I − ρW )−1 , and ui =
j aij εj . The summation over j implies that yi∗ is determined not only
by xi , but also by all the other xj in the system, and
not only by εi , but by the other error terms εj in the
system as well.
The discrete variable yi is observed whenever yi∗ >
0 in (15), or
j

aij xj β + ui > 0.

(16)

For a symmetric random variable ui , this yields the
familiar condition
Prob[yi = 1] = Prob[ui < gi (X, W, β, ρ)],

(17)

where gi =
j aij xj β depends on X, W , β and
ρ. Note that in (17), ui is not i.i.d. as in the usual
(non-spatial) model, but is a random variable whose
marginal distribution is determined (in part) by the covariance matrix of the multivariate random vector u.
In the case of a standard normal εi , i.e. for a spatial probit model, the random vector u will be multivariate normal with a covariance matrix Cov[u] =
[(I −ρW ) (I −ρW )]−1 . An important consequence of
this complex covariance structure is that the marginal
ui will be heteroskedastic. This makes standard probit estimation inconsistent. In addition, due to the
high degree of covariance, it is necessary to integrate
out the n − 1 other random variables in order to obtain the marginal distribution for each individual ui .
Note that when εi does not follow a normal distribution, the transformed multivariate random variable

(I − ρW )−1 ε is not necessarily well defined. For example, this is the case for a logit specification and for
models of counts (Poisson models), where the resulting multivariate specification is intractable.
The essence of the problem is again the simultaneity
of the yi∗ , which precludes an easy solution such as


Prob[yi = 1] = Prob εi < ρ
j =i

wij yj∗ + xi β  .
(18)

This expression is not operational, since the yj∗ that
enter in the inequality condition are not observed, and
are themselves determined by yi∗ .
This simultaneous model contrasts with a conditional approach, in which either yj or Prob[yj = 1]
are (assumed to be) observable. An implication of the
conditional approach is that the spatial pattern of the
yj cannot be explained by the model. In other words,
in order to be operational, a conditional model requires
that the values of the yj for the neighbors are obtained
separately from the spatial model (12). More importantly, the two approaches are not equivalent, a point
sometimes lost in the interpretation of results obtained
in empirical practice.
A distinct advantage of the conditional approach is
that standard estimation techniques can be applied, as
long as the spatial lag term can be inserted as an observable on the right hand side of the condition (18). In
practice, this can be implemented by a judicious spatial resampling (cluster sampling of non-contiguous
clusters), although this typically involves a substantial
loss of information.11 In contrast, the complexity of the
multivariate interactions in (17) invalidates standard
probit or tobit techniques and requires specialized estimation and tests. This is still very much an active
area of research. A number of suggestions have been
formulated, such as the use of the expectation, maximization (EM) approach (McMillen, 1992), general
method of moments (GMM) estimation (Pinkse and
Slade, 1998), and simulation estimators, such as recursive importance sampling (Vijverberg, 1997; Beron
11 For example, if observations typically have four neighbors,
the effective sample size in a non-contiguous subsample would
be one-fourth of the original sample size. This loss of degrees of
freedom will result in a lower precision of the estimates, limiting
this approach in practice to very large data sets.

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

and Vijverberg, 2002) and the Gibbs sampler (LeSage,
2000).12

3. Data-driven specifications
In practice, the motivation for applying a spatial
econometric model is typically not driven by formal
theoretical concerns, but instead is a result of data
“problems”. For example, the scale and location of the
process under study does not necessarily match the
available data, such as when agricultural land markets
are studied with data at the county level. This mismatch will tend to result in model error structures that
show a systematic spatial pattern. Also, explanatory
variables are often “constructed” by spatial interpolation to make their scale compatible with that of the
dependent variable. Again, this spatial prediction will
tend to result in prediction “errors” that show systematic spatial variation. This problem is commonly encountered in models where economic outcomes are
related to environmental or resource variables, such
as air or water quality. Spatially aggregate measures
of the latter are computed by interpolating measures
obtained for a small set of monitoring stations, whose
locations do not coincide with those of the economic
agents. Another often encountered situation is when
data on important variables are missing, and those
variables show spatial structure, as is often the case in
studies of tropical land use and deforestation. A common characteristic of these data problems is that the
error term in a regression model will tend to be spatially correlated.13
In contrast to theory-driven models, which can be
referred to as dealing with substantive spatial correlation, the correlation in the error models is referred
to as a nuisance. From a technical viewpoint, the parameters used in the specification of the structure of
12

A review of estimation issues in spatial latent variable models
is contained in Fleming (2002). Testing for spatial autocorrelation
in probit and tobit models is considered in Kelejian and Prucha
(2001) and Pinkse (2002).
13 This pertains not only to the error terms in classical linear
regression models, but extends to generalized linear models (such
as Poisson regression models) and generalized additive models
(e.g. models for rates) as well. Examples can be found in Gotway
and Stroup (1997), Waller et al. (1997a,b), Best et al. (1999),
Lawson (2001), MacNab and Dean (2002), among others.

253

the spatial correlation can therefore often be considered to be nuisance parameters, which facilitates estimation in some instances.14 The main objective of the
econometric exercise is to obtain unbiased/consistent
and efficient estimates for the regression parameters
in the model (β), while taking into account the spatial
structure incorporated in the error covariance matrix.
Formally, the main interest is in the familiar regression model:
y = Xβ + ε,

(19)

where the error covariance matrix, Cov[εε ], or, equivalently, E[εε ], specifies spatial covariance when the
off-diagonal elements are non-zero, E[εi εj ] = 0 (for
i = j ), in accordance with a given “spatial ordering”
(Kelejian and Robinson, 1992). Specific forms for the
covariance structure are either specified directly (in
so-called direct representation models) or follow from
a spatial stochastic process model (such as a spatial
autoregressive or spatial moving average model).
3.1. Spatial filtering
An interesting perspective in the context of spatial correlation as a nuisance is the so-called spatial filtering approach. Similar to first differencing
for time series, one can consider a form of spatial differencing.15 However, unlike the time series
case, for row-standardized spatial weights, the first
differencing leads to singularity, since ρ = 1 is outside the proper parameter space. For general, not
row-standardized weights the parameter space is typically constrained to values much smaller than 1,
so that (unscaled) first differencing is similarly not
allowed.
More formally, a spatial first difference can be expressed as:
y − Wy = (X − WX)β + u,

(20)

or,
(I − W )y = (I − W )Xβ + u.

(21)

Since the row elements of W sum to 1, the matrix
(I − W ) is singular. Instead of using a “pure” first
14
15

For a review of the econometric issues, see Lancaster (2000).
For some early examples, see Martin (1974) and Getis (1995).

254

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

difference, a spatial autoregressive parameter must be
included, as in
(I − ρW )y = (I − ρW )Xβ + u.

(22)

The operation where a vector (or matrix) of data is
pre-multiplied with the matrix expression (I − ρW )
is called a spatial filter. Further pre-multiplying both
sides of the equation by (I − ρW )−1 yields
y = Xβ + (I − ρW )−1 u,

(23)

which is equivalent to a model with a spatially autoregressive error term:
ε = (I − ρW )−1 u,

(24)

(I − ρW )ε = u,

(25)

ε = ρW ε + u.

(26)

In other words, specifying a spatial autoregressive
process for the error term is equivalent to carrying
out a standard regression on spatially filtered variables. However, unlike the time series case, the spatial autoregressive parameter cannot be obtained from
a straightforward auxiliary regression, but estimation
must be carried out jointly with that of the other model
parameters. As a result, the spatial filter is mostly a
convenient interpretation, but not a solution to the estimation problem.
Similar to the approach taken in (12), the spatial lag
model (1) can be expressed as a spatial filter as well.
However, the filter only pertains to the left hand side
of the equation, as in
(I − ρW )y = Xβ + u.

(27)

This can be interpreted as a way to clean the dependent
variable y of the effects of spatial correlation, while
maintaining the “correct” (i.e. consistent and efficient)
estimates for β. However, as in the spatial error model,
it is not possible to estimate the parameter ρ separately
from the other parameters of the model, so that there
is no gain in the estimation. Moreover, model (27)
relates deviations from a spatial mean in y to levels for
X, which may not be appropriate in many contexts. It
should only be considered as a last resort, when there
is no substantive basis for a lag model, but strong
empirical evidence in its favor, such as indicated by the
results of model diagnostics. Typically, however, other
problems, such as scale mismatch, a poor selection

of the weights and more serious misspecifications are
likely to be the culprit and should be considered before
resorting to an interpretation of the lag model as a
spatial filter.

4. Inferential framework
In this section, I review some issues that are seldom
made explicit in applied work, but that are fundamental
for the statistical inference in spatial econometrics.
Three aspects in particular are considered: the data
model underlying the statistical analysis, the choice of
spatial weights and distance decay functions, and the
asymptotic approach toward inference.
4.1. Data model
In his classic text, Cressie (1993) outlines a taxonomy for spatial statistical analysis, distinguishing
between point pattern analysis, geostatistical models and so-called lattice or regional models. In point
pattern analysis, the main interest focuses on the
location of the observations as such, and whether
this suggests clustering or other non-random patterns. Since point pattern analysis is seldom used in
economic analysis, it will not be further considered
here.16 Instead, the focus is on the distinction between the geostatistical and lattice approaches and
the contexts in which they are appropriate in applied
econometrics.
The fundamental difference between the geostatistical and lattice approaches can be related to the notion of a data model from the computer data base
and geographic information science literatures. A data
model is an abstraction of reality in a form amenable
for analysis by a computer. In dealing with spatial
data, the basic distinction is between objects and fields
(Goodchild, 1992).17
Objects are discrete entities and are typically represented in a geographic information systems (GIS) as
points, lines and polygons (in a so-called vector GIS).
16 Apart from Cressie (1993), early comprehensive reviews of
point pattern statistics are provided in Ripley (1981), Diggle (1983)
and Upton and Fingleton (1985). A “modern” approach, based on
Bayesian hierarchical modeling is outlined in Wolpert and Ickstadt
(1998), Ickstadt and Wolpert (1999) and Best et al. (2000).
17 See also Egenhofer et al. (1999) for a recent overview.

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

In economic analysis, these objects correspond to economic agents or “jurisdictions,” with discrete locations
in space, such as addresses, census tracts and counties.
In contrast, fields pertain to continuous spatial distributions, represented as surfaces (in a so-called raster
GIS). In economic analysis, one can envisage fields
as price or risk surfaces, for example in the study of
land values, crop yields or air quality.
Sometimes it is not immediately obvious whether
an object or field approach is more appropriate. For
example, land values could be studied as characteristics of discrete spatial objects (parcels) or could
be viewed as samples from a continuous land value
surface. Similarly, location-specific yield measures
in a precision agriculture application could be conceived of as samples from a continuous yield surface, or alternatively, be associated with a regular
lattice overlaid on the field. The implications of the
choice of framework for statistical inference are farreaching.
Of the two, the object view and associated lattice
data perspective seem to be more natural for the study
of discrete economic agents, and is the one typically
associated with spatial econometrics. However, unlike
“standard” econometric analysis, the observations in a
spatial analysis of objects are no longer a representative sample from a population of objects. Instead, they
consist of a single data point on the complete spatial
pattern among them.
For example, a cross-sectional data set on economic
variables for US states is not a sample from a population of imaginary states, but its spatial pattern (e.g.
as shown by a map for state incomes) is a single observation from all the possible stochastic patterns that
an underlying mechanism may generate. In order to
carry out statistical inference, a notion of a superpopulation or spatial random process is required (e.g. a
Markov random field, MRF). This assumes the existence (conceptually) of a stochastic process that may
generate many possible spatial patterns, of which the
observed data is one. The objective of the analysis is
then to characterize the spatial process by means of
the observed spatial pattern. Both a spatial lag and
a spatial error specification can be accommodated in
this framework.
A number of unusual features of this approach are
worth pointing out. Since the complete spatial pattern
is the observation in lattice models, missing values

255

are hard to deal with.18 In other words, a fully filled
out space must be observed, without any “holes”. For
example, in the analysis of land values or crop yields
for parcels in a region, this would require that all the
parcels in the region are observed.
Also, typically, the spatial units (such as US states)
are contiguous and exhaust the space, so that a notion
of interpolation is impractical. For example, it would
be hard to imagine predicting for a “state” in between
Kansas and Colorado. Instead, spatial prediction applies to extrapolation, or the application of a model
estimated from the observed spatial pattern to another
set of spatial units, outside the observed set, or for a
different time period.
In a lattice approach, observations can be viewed as
nodes on a network, with links between them indicating the connectedness between nodes. This representation is very general, and easily extends beyond a pure
geographic setting to economic and social networks
(e.g. Friedkin, 1998). It requires the formal specification of the network structure, which is implemented
by means of spatial weights (see Section 4.2).
A slightly different case occurs where a sample
of discrete units is observed, each with a relevant
set of “neighbors,” as in some cluster sample designs. For example, this may occur for a data set of
land use by parcel, where each observation is matched
to its nearest neighbors. While similar to the lattice
setup, an important distinction is that the values for
the neighbors are assumed known, and the pattern for
the neighbors themselves is not explained. More precisely, the conditional distribution of land uses, conditional upon that observed for the neighbors is being
modeled, not the joint distribution of all the land uses
in the system. This important distinction was also encountered in the discussion of spatial latent variable
models.
When the data model is a field, a geostatistical
perspective is appropriate, since it views the observations as sample points from a continuous surface. The
objective of a geostatistical analysis is to infer the
spatial distribution for the surface from information
18 Note that this pertains to a classical statistical analysis. In a
Bayesian viewpoint, both data and parameters are considered to
be random, so that missing values can be incorporated in the same
way as unobserved parameter values. A review of issues pertaining
to “data augmentation,” although without treating spatial aspects
of the issue can be found in Tanner (1996).

256

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

provided by the pairwise association between the
sample points, expressed as a function of the distance
that separates them (for extensive reviews, see, among
others, Cressie, 1993; Goovaerts, 1997; Chilès and
Delfiner, 1999; Stein, 1999).
The geostatistical perspective is a natural framework when dealing with an incomplete set of spatial
observations, where the objective is to predict values
for unobserved locations. This focus on spatial interpolation (kriging), is a distinctive characteristic of
geostatistics, and contrasts with the emphasis on estimation and inference in the lattice perspective. For applied econometric work, it is important to note that in
a geostatistical approach to spatial regression models,
the main interest therefore lies in optimal prediction
(rather than estimation), exploiting the spatial patterns
in the error term. In a geostatistical approach, there is
no direct counterpart to a spatial lag model or spatial
reaction function.
An additional aspect of the geostatistical perspective is that the choice of the number and location of
sample points becomes part of the analysis, in contrast
to the lattice perspective, where the locations are given
and fixed. The optimal design of spatial sampling networks is a topic that is receiving increasing attention,
particularly in the area of environmental monitoring.19
In applied work, it is important to select the proper
data model for the analysis. Primarily, this boils down
to making a distinction between a design consisting of
discrete objects and a design that is conceptualized as
a sample from a continuous spatial surface. In many
applications in applied econometrics, the latter is artificial when it comes to modeling economic agents.
However, when the set of spatial observations is incomplete (i.e. with missing values or holes in the layout), the geostatistical/field approach is the only one
that remains internally consistent. Also, a hybrid form
is possible, when some of the explanatory variables
are “interpolated” from a geostatistical model, but the
model itself pertains to discrete agents, leading to a
spatial errors in variables specification (see Anselin,
2001c).
The contrast between the two data models is summarized in Table 1.
19 Some recent reviews of the salient issues can be found in
Arbia and Lafratta (1997), Müller (1998), and Wikle and Royle
(1999), among others.

Table 1
Implications of data models

GIS
Spatial data
Location
Observations
Spatial arrangement
Statistical analysis
Prediction
Models
Asymptotics

Object

Field

Vector
Points, lines, polygons
Discrete
Process realization
Spatial weights
Lattice
Extrapolation
Lag and error
Expanding domain

Raster
Surfaces
Continuous
Sample
Distance function
Geostatistics
Interpolation
Error
Infill

4.2. Spatial weights
A fundamental problem in the analysis of spatial
correlation in a pure cross-sectional setting is the lack
of identification of the parameters of the complete
covariance matrix. The covariance matrix contains
n potentially different variance terms σi2 as well as
n(n − 1)/2 off-diagonal terms σij (= σji , since the
covariance matrix is symmetric). Clearly, a single
cross-section of n observations contains insufficient
information to allow for the estimation of the individual variance–covariance terms. Asymptotics do
not help, since the problem gets worse as the sample size grows (an incidental parameter problem). In
sum, it will be necessary to impose a structure on
the variance–covariance and to express it as a function of a small number of estimable parameters. In
spatial regression analysis, this is approached from
two main perspectives, matching the data models
outlined in Section 4.1. In a geostatistics-inspired
approach, the covariance is specified directly as a
function of the distance between pairs of observations. Different specifications for this distance decay
function have been employed, but most are some
variant of a negative exponential model. Examples
and a discussion of estimation and identification
issues can be found in Cook and Pocock (1983),
Mardia and Marshall (1984), Dubin (1988, 1992),
Dubin et al. (1999), and Anselin (2001a), among
others.
In contrast, using an object view and corresponding lattice model, the covariance structure follows indirectly from the specification of the spatial weights
matrix that underlies a spatial process model (Markov
random field). Different specifications for the weights

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

and their consequences are reviewed in the remainder
of this section.
Before proceeding with this, it is worthwhile to
briefly consider a third way of imposing structure, referred to in the literature as spatial error components.
The full covariance structure follows from decomposing the error term into components and imposing a
model for the variance and covariance of these terms.
This approach is prevalent in hierarchical and multilevel modeling, where one error component is association with a model for (excess) heterogeneity and
the other with a model for spatial variation, following the suggestion of Besag et al. (1991). Examples
of the incorporation of spatial random effects in hierarchical Bayesian models in biostatistics are reviewed
in, among others, Waller et al. (1997a,b) and Best
et al. (1999). Applications using a multilevel modeling
framework are illustrated in Langford et al. (1999a,b),
Leyland et al. (2000) and Leyland (2001). Error components were introduced in spatial econometric specifications by Kelejian and Robinson (1995).20
Formally, the spatial weights matrix is an n × n
positive matrix (W ) which specifies “neighborhood
sets” for each observation. In each row i, a non-zero
element wij defines j as being a neighbor of i. By
convention, an observation is not a neighbor to itself,
so that the diagonal elements are zero (wii = 0). Note
that this definition is much broader than the term
neighbor suggests. In most applications in applied
econometrics, the neighbors are contiguous spatial
units, as in Fig. 1, but this can be easily generalized
to any network structure. For example, in Fig. 2,
the six observations are nodes on a network and the
existence of a neighbor relation matches the links between the nodes.21 The layouts in both Figs. 1 and 2
yield the same 6 × 6 spatial weights matrix, illustrated
on the left hand side of Table 2 (from Anselin and
Smirnov, 1996). This is usually referred to as a binary
contiguity matrix, since the weights are set to one for
neighbors, and zero for others. For ease of interpretation and to make the parameter estimates between
different models more comparable, the spatial weights

Fig. 1. Example spatial layout.

Table 2
Spatial weights matrix
0
1
0
1
1
0

1
0
0
1
1
0

See Anselin and Moreno (2002) for a review of some technical issues associated with specifying and testing for spatial error
components.
21 Figs. 1 and 2 were first used as illustrations in Anselin and
Smirnov (1996).

0
0
0
0
1
1

1
1
0
0
1
0

1
1
1
1
0
0

0
0
1
0
0
0

0.00
0.33
0.00
0.33
0.25
0.00

0.33
0.00
0.00
0.33
0.25
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.25
1.00

0.33
0.33
0.00
0.00
0.25
0.00

0.33
0.33
0.50
0.33
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.00
0.00

matrix is typically row-standardized, as shown on
the right hand side of Table 2. Each element in the
standardized matrix, wijs = wij / j wij , is between
0 and 1, which suggests that a spatial lag operation
(pre-multiplying a vector of observations by W ) corresponds to an averaging of the neighboring values.22
The specification of the weights matrix is a matter of some arbitrariness and is often cited as a major
weakness of the lattice approach. A range of suggestions have been offered in the literature, based on contiguity, distance, as well as more general metrics.23
A number of issues related to the specification of
spatial weights require careful consideration in practice. First, even when the weights are based on simple
22

20

257

Note that the resulting matrix is no longer symmetric, since
wij = i wji , which needs to be accounted for in the computations of maximum likelihood estimates.
23 For more extensive reviews, see Cliff and Ord (1973, 1981),
Upton and Fingleton (1985), Anselin (1988) and Anselin and Bera
(1998).
j

258

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

Fig. 2. Spatial network structure.

contiguity, different weights structures may result for
the same spatial layout. In the classic example of a regular square grid layout, the options are referred to as
the rook case (only common boundaries), the bishop
case (only common vertices) and the queen case (both
boundaries and vertices). Depending on the criterion
chosen, a location will have either four (rook, bishop)
or eight (queen) neighbors on average (apart from edge
effects). This implies quite different covariance structures for the associated random processes. Even in irregular spatial layouts, a decision must be made as to
whether units that only share a common vertex should
be considered to be neighbors (queen) or not (rook).
In practice, the construction of the neighbor structure of irregular spatial units is based on the digital
boundary files in a GIS. Imprecision in the storage
of the polygons and vertices can cause problems in
this respect, yielding “islands” or other unexpected
connectedness structures when deriving the spatial arrangement from these boundary files.24
A second type of problem occurs when the spatial
weights are based on a distance criterion, such that
two units i and j are defined as neighbors when the
distance between them (or, for areal units, the distance
between their centroids) is less than a given critical
value. When there is a high degree of heterogeneity
in the spatial distribution of points or in the areas of
regions, there may be no satisfactory critical distance.
In those instances, a “small” distance will tend to yield
a lot of islands (or, unconnected observations). Also, a
24 In GIS terminology, the polygons should be “clean” before the
topology can be “built”.

distance chosen to ensure that each unit has at least one
neighbor may result in an unacceptably large number
of neighbors for the smaller units.
In empirical applications, this problem is encountered when building distance-based spatial weights for
US counties (western counties have much larger areas
than eastern counties) or urban census tracts (core
census tracts are much smaller than suburban census
tracts). Similarly, when modeling land use or land values based on parcel data, problems will occur when the
area of the parcels is highly variable. A common solution to this problem is to constrain the neighbor structure to the k-nearest neighbors, thereby precluding
islands and forcing each unit to have the same number of neighbors. Whether or not this is appropriate
in any given situation remains an empirical matter.25
A third issue may arise when the weights are based
on “economic” distance (Case et al., 1993) or another
general metric, such as derived from a social network structure (Doreian, 1980). Care must be taken
to ensure that the resulting weights are meaningful, finite and non-negative. In addition, the “zero-distance
problem” must be accounted for. The latter occurs
when a distance measure, such as dij = |zi − zj |, becomes zero, due to rounding problems or because two
observations show identical socio-economic profiles.
As a result, inverse distance weights such as wij =
1/dij are undefined.
25 One consequence of the choice of k-nearest neighbor weights is
that the weights matrix becomes asymmetric. This is qualitatively
different from a row-standardized (asymmetric) matrix derived
from a symmetric contiguity matrix (for technical details, see
Smirnov and Anselin, 2001).

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

It is also important to maintain the weights matrix
as exogenous. When the same variables are used to
compute a general distance metric as are included in
the model, the weights are unlikely to remain exogenous. Consequently, the resulting model specification
becomes highly non-linear with endogeneity that must
be instrumented out. Typically, this is not the result
one has in mind when designing a weights matrix.
A slightly different type of “economic” weights follows when a block structure is imposed, as in Case
(1991, 1992). This is a form of hierarchical spatial
model, where all units that share a common higher order level are considered to be neighbors. For example,
this would make all counties in the same state neighbors, yielding a block-diagonal spatial weights matrix. This structure precludes neighbors between the
higher order levels and between lower order units that
may be contiguous across higher order levels (such
as neighboring counties in adjoining states). When
implemented in row-standardized form, this type of
weight also has a peculiar side effect. Since each
weight in effect becomes wij = 1/ng , where ng is the
number of units in the higher order level (counties in a
state), the effect of each individual neighbor will disappear as ng → ∞. This happens in the limit, since
the asymptotics operate on the cross-sectional dimension. Consequently, in the limit, the weights matrix
becomes effectively zero, eliminating the effect of the
spatial correlation.
Interestingly, this “economic weights” specification
is the one employed in a recent paper by Lee (2002),
where it is argued that OLS is consistent for the spatial
lag parameter (the standard result is that it is not).
Given the peculiar structure for the weights, this turns
out to be a very special result, and does not pertain to
the type of spatial “correlation” typically implemented
in empirical spatial econometric work. Also, it would
seem that the result is of limited practical use, since
any type of meaningful correlation structure should
not disappear in the limit.
The various weights specifications considered so far
all share the property that their elements are fixed. It
is straightforward to extend this notion and to incorporate parameters in the weights matrix, for example
when the weights reflect the notion of a potential (see
β
Section 2.2), as in wij = 1/dij , or wij = e−βdij (see
Anselin, 1988, Chapter 3). The generalized Cliff–Ord
weights are another well-known example, with wij =

259

β

bijα /dij , where bij is the share of the common border
between units i and j in the perimeter of i (and, typically, bij = bji ), and α and β are parameters (Cliff and
Ord, 1973, 1981). In practice, these parameters are often set a priori, for example yielding a “gravity” like
model with wij = 1/dij2 .26
However, when the parameters of the weights elements are jointly estimated with the parameters in the
model, the resulting specification is highly non-linear
(for examples, see Anselin, 1988; Bolduc et al., 1992,
1995). Moreover, when a scaling factor, such as a
spatial autoregressive coefficient, is included together
with parameterized weights, both sets of parameters
are not necessarily identified. It is also important to
note that a weights matrix parameterized as a distance
function is not equivalent to the direct representation
model for the covariance. The structure of the corresponding covariance depends not only on the weights,
but also on the choice of the spatial process. However,
irrespective of the latter, there is no one-to-one match
between the weights and the covariance.
It is also important to keep in mind that weights that
are a function of distance depend on the scale of the
distance metric. Ignoring this scale-dependence may
lead to unexpected results (such as zero weights matrix) when the coordinate units from which the distances are computed are non-standard.
There is very little formal guidance in the choice of
the “correct” spatial weights in any given application.
When the focus is on a model for substantive spatial
dependence, care should be taken to match the spatial
interaction patterns suggested by the theoretical framework (for example, a spatial reaction function implying a specific range of interaction). In other situations,
the specification is much more ad hoc and sensitivity
analysis of the results is very important. In practice,
model validation techniques, such as a comparison of
goodness-of-fit, or cross-validation, may provide ways
to eliminate bad choices. Fortunately, empirical investigations can increasingly exploit both time and space
dimensions (spatial panel data analysis), which opens
26 Other examples found in the literature are w =
Ni Nj /dij ,
ij
where N stands for the population (or mass) in an area (Ferr´andiz
et al., 1995), or wij = Ni Nj /dij with a cutoff distance beyond
which all weights are set to zero (Ferr´andiz et al., 1999), or also
wij = e−dij /δ (Best et al., 1999). In the latter example, δ was set
to a value of 33 to make the magnitude of the weight equal to
0.01 for two units that were the median inter-unit distance apart.

260

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

up a number of opportunities to relax the structure
of the weights matrix and employ non-parametric or
semi-parametric methods to estimate a generic covariance structure, avoiding some of the strong priors required in the cross-sectional setting.27
4.3. Asymptotics
Classical (as opposed to Bayesian) statistical inference in models that incorporate spatial correlation
is based on asymptotic properties.28 These properties
only hold under a fairly restrictive set of assumptions,
or, regularity conditions, which impose constraints on
the degree of heterogeneity and range of dependence
of the spatial stochastic process that is considered to
generate the data. Unlike what is often assumed, these
regularity conditions and the associated laws of large
numbers (to prove consistency) and central limit theorems (to ascertain asymptotic normality) are quite
special and not straightforward generalizations of the
time series case of dynamic heterogeneous processes
(treated, for example, in Pötscher and Prucha, 1997).
A few of the distinguishing characteristics of asymptotics in space are worth considering.
In a spatial setting, there are two fundamentally
different ways to grow the “sample” to the limit (i.e.
to obtain n → ∞). These approaches match the
two different data models considered in the paper.
In the field perspective and associated geostatistical
approach to spatial modeling, the asymptotics are
based on a fixed region, from which an increasingly
denser sample of points is taken, or infill asymptotics
(Cressie, 1993). Intuitively, the denser and denser
samples provide more and more information on the
27 See also Frees (1995), Driscoll and Kraay (1998) and Chen
and Conley (2001) for a lattice perspective, and Sampson and
Guttorp (1992), Guttorp and Sampson (1994) and Damian et al.
(2001) for a geostatistical approach.
28 In a Bayesian approach to spatial regression analysis, both
the data and the model parameters are considered to be random
variables. Inference is based on an analysis of the posterior distribution of the model parameters, which is constructed by combining a prior distribution with a likelihood using Bayes’ theorem.
In spatial regression analysis, this requires the specification of
priors for the structure and the parameters of the spatial covariance matrix (in addition to the other model parameters). Recent
overviews of this approach are provided in Clayton and Kaldor
(1987), Handcock and Stein (1993), Ecker and Gelfand (1997),
LeSage (1997), Wikle et al. (1998), Best et al. (1999), Berger
et al. (2001), and Damian et al. (2001), among others.

spatial distribution of the underlying surface. In contrast, in the object view and associated lattice model
approach, there is no surface, and the asymptotics are
obtained by adding more and more discrete objects to
the sample, or, by expanding the domain.
The two paradigms are not equivalent. In fact, properties that hold under one framework do not necessarily hold under the other (Lahiri, 1996). To illustrate
this point, consider a setting where the spatial weights
matrix defines neighbors as those points within a given
fixed distance band. In an expanding domain framework, there is no problem, since adding new objects
only affects the neighbor structure for those observations at the margin.29 In other words, the number of
neighbors and the implied “range” of spatial correlation is not (substantially) affected by growing the
sample. In contrast, with infill asymptotics, the sample
would become increasingly denser, resulting in more
and more points meeting the critical distance criterion
for each observation. Therefore, the number of neighbors will increase with the sample size, effectively removing the spatial correlation (for row-standardized
weights) as the sample grows. This runs counter to the
regularity conditions required for expanding domain
asymptotics.
In a nutshell, the regularity conditions required for
the expanding domain asymptotics in lattice models
boil down to limits on the heterogeneity of the process
(variance and higher order moments) and constraints
on the range of spatial dependence. The latter can be
thought of as a formal expression of Tobler’s “first law
of geography,” according to which everything depends
on everything else, but “close” things more so (Tobler,
1979). Similar regularity conditions are required in the
geostatistical approach, to ensure that the covariance
structure that follows from the specified distance decay function is positive definite (for technical details,
see Cressie, 1993). Formally, the conditions pertain
to summability and differentiability of the elements
of the covariance matrix. An extensive and unifying
technical treatment of these issues was recently provided by Kelejian and Prucha (1998, 1999, 2001) (for
29 However, as discussed in Anselin and Kelejian (1997), the fact
that the weights change at the boundary is a non-standard situation.
As Kelejian and Prucha (1998, 1999) have pointed out, this requires
the use of triangular arrays as well as specialized central limit
theorems in order to establish the asymptotic properties.

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

antecedents, see also Magnus, 1978; Mardia and
Marshall, 1984; Mandy and Martins-Filho, 1994).
In applied spatial econometrics based on the lattice
approach, sufficient conditions are typically satisfied
by limiting the number of neighbors in the weights and
ensuring this does not grow with the sample size. Conditions on the heterogeneity are complicated by the
fact that many spatial processes induce heteroskedasticity (or, non-stationarity), which must be properly accounted for.30 In practice, weights based on contiguity
or similar principles (distance bands) will satisfy these
regularity conditions. Matters are less straightforward
when complex weights are introduced (such as parameterized distance functions) for which it is not always
possible to establish that the regularity conditions are
satisfied. Evidence of the violation of these assumptions is sometimes provided by “weird” results, such
as negative variance estimates and explosive spatial
interaction functions.

5. Ecological regression
In empirical practice, the estimation of models such
as a spatial reaction function, specified in the form of a
spatial lag model (1), is often carried out for aggregate
spatial units of observation, such as counties or census tracts. In the statistical literature, this is referred to
as ecological regression, and often criticized as yielding invalid inference, the so-called ecological fallacy
problem. More precisely, the ecological fallacy pertains to cross-level inference or cross-level bias. This
is what happens when parameters and other characteristics of a distribution are estimated at an aggregate
level, but behavioral and socio-economic relations are
inferred for another, disaggregate level.

261

of Gehlke and Biehl (1934), Robinson (1950) and
Goodman (1953).31 In economics, this issue is closely
related to the aggregation problem, or the extent
to which micro-relationships can be inferred from
macro-estimates (for recent review of the relevant issues, see Stoker, 1993). In general, unless extremely
rigid (and unrealistic) homogeneity constraints are
imposed, it is impossible to transfer findings from the
macro-level to a micro-interpretation.32
In practice, this is easily overlooked, but even in
very simple situations, and with a high degree of homogeneity, the ecological approach creates problems
of interpretation. Consider a regression at the individual level, where individuals are stratified by group, and
both individual-level variates as well as group-wise
aggregates are included in the model (the example is
adaptated from Greenland, 2002, p. 390):
yik = α + xik β + x¯k γ + εik ,

(28)

where xik is a characteristic of individual i in group
k (e.g. income for household i in county k) and
x¯k =
i xik /nk (with nk as the group size) is the
group average for that characteristic (e.g. county average income). In the literature, β is referred to as
the individual effect and γ as the contextual effect.33
The corresponding macro-regression relates the group
averages to each other, or
y¯k = α + x¯k (β + γ ) + ε¯ k ,

(29)

with the group averages as y¯k = i yik /nk . When the
groups do not contain an equal number of members,
the error term in (29) will become heteroskedastic. In
other words, at the aggregate level, heteroskedasticity
should be expected, and an i.i.d. assumption for the
errors is incompatible with the aggregation rule.
In addition, the coefficient of the average x¯k in the
aggregate model no longer allows for the separate

5.1. Ecological fallacy
An enormous literature has been devoted to the
problem of ecological fallacy in sociology, political
science and economics, going back to the classics
30 Note that in some treatments stationarity is a crucial assumption, which rules out spatial processes that induce heteroskedasticity. See, for example, the central limit theorems based on
Bolthausen (1982) used as the basis for the GMM estimator in
Conley (1999). Also, note that in a geostatistical approach, there
is no such induced heteroskedasticity.

31 For recent overviews of this extensive literature, see also Achen
and Shively (1995) and King (1997).
32 In a very stylized setting, often used in voting rights analysis,
King (1997) has suggested a “solution” to this problem, which he
refers to as “ecological inference” or ei. The essence of this approach is to treat the unobserved individual parameters in a random
coefficient framework and to simulate their posterior distribution,
using additional information from individual-level constraints. For
a discussion of the role of spatial effects in this model, see Anselin
and Cho (2002).
33 For a related discussion of identification issues in economic
models of interaction, see Manski (1993).

262

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

identification of the individual and contextual effects,
but confounds the two. More precisely, even when
there is no within-group heterogeneity (all the groups
have the same β and γ coefficients), the estimate
from the aggregate model only corresponds with an
individual-level coefficient when there is no contextual effect (γ = 0). Similarly, it only corresponds to
a “pure” contextual effect when there is no individual
effect (β = 0).34
5.2. Spatial aggregation
In spatial analysis, an additional twist is added to
the ecological regression problem, in that it is not
only the level of aggregation that matters, but also
how “elemental units” are combined spatially. This is
referred to as the zoning problem or the modifiable
areal unit problem (MAUP), first illustrated by the
“million or so correlation coefficients” in Openshaw
and Taylor (1979). Considerable attention has been
paid to the interrelation between MAUP and spatial
correlation (Arbia, 1989). More recently, statisticians
have approached this problem as a special case of the
change of support problem (COSP) (see Cressie, 1996;
Gotway and Young, 2002).
Extending the example in (28) with a spatial autoregressive term, some of the complexities of spatial ecological regression become apparent. At the individual
level, a spatial lag specification would be:
n

yik = ρ

wij yjh + α + xik β + x¯k γ + εik ,

(30)

j =1

where it is important to note that the non-zero weights
in wij are not limited to neighbors that belong to the
same group. The specification in (30) is typically what
one has in mind when implementing a spatial reaction
function for economic agents i.
By comparison, a spatial lag specification at the
aggregate level, for the groups g, with g = 1, . . . , G,
would be:
G

y¯k = λ

wkg y¯g + α + x¯k (β + γ ) + ε¯ k ,

(31)

g=1

with wkg as the elements of a group-level spatial
weights matrix of dimension G × G that reflects
34

See Greenland (2002) and also Stoker (1993) for a more
elaborate discussion.

the neighbor structure for the aggregate spatial
units.
While the regressive part in (31) is a straightforward
extension of the non-spatial case, the autoregressive
part is not an aggregate of the spatial autoregressive
terms in (30). Several factors preclude a simple aggregation. Consider the case of an aggregated spatial
weights matrix based on simple contiguity that would
be constructed from collapsing the rows and columns
for the elements in each group. Formally, this is accomplished by means of an n × G aggregation matrix
H , with elements hig = 1 for i ∈ g and zero otherwise, such that
W G = H W n H,

(32)

with W n as the individual-level weights. This yields
G obtained as the
a G × G matrix with elements wkg
n
sums of all the weights wij for which i ∈ k and j ∈
g. If the original weights W n contained non-zero elements for agents in the same group, the aggregate
weights from (32) should have non-zero diagonal elements, wkk = 0. This is typically ruled out (see
Section 4.2). Therefore, zero diagonals in the weights
for an aggregate-level model are inconsistent with a
spatial aggregation of the individual spatial weights.
The aggregated between-group weights wkg (with
k = g) are the sum of the weights for individual
agents that were cross-group neighbors in each group
(the number of weights wijn = 0 for which i ∈ k and
j ∈ g). In a spatial aggregation over irregular units,
the share of such neighbors in each group is unlikely
to be constant, yielding unequal weights wkg for any
given k. In contrast, in a typical group-level application, contiguity weights would be set equal for all
elements in the same row, again violating the proper
spatial aggregation.
More importantly, the aggregate over groups of the
individual-level spatial lag terms is not equal to the
spatial lag of the aggregate values. This can be traced
back to the aggregation over the reduced form (4). At
the individual level, the yik are a weighted average
of the xj in the system, with the weights for each
i corresponding to the row elements of the inverse
matrix A = (I − ρW )−1 . Formally, and ignoring the
structure of the error term, at the individual level,
n

yik =

aij (α + xjh β + x¯jh γ ) + e,
j =1

(33)

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

where j is the index of the individual observation and
h is a generic group indicator. The summation in (33)
is over all j and includes elements in group k as well
as in other groups in the system. The weights in aij are
unequal. The aggregation of A by means of the matrix
H used above will yield a group level spatial multiplier
AG = H AH. For the same reasons as outlined for
the spatial weights, the spatial multiplier matrix for
the groups ([I − λW G ]−1 ) will be inconsistent with
a spatial aggregation of the individual-level weights.
As a result, the group average of the individual yik
obtained from the reduced form will not equal the y¯k
from the group-level reduced form.
Given these problems, one might be tempted to dismiss spatial lag models estimated for aggregate units.
Clearly, a naive interpretation of the parameters of
such a model is misguided when they are considered
as proxies for individual-level parameters that reflect
substantive spatial dependence, e.g. as implied by a
spatial reaction function. However, there remain many
contexts where the interest is in the aggregate object
considered in its own merit, and not as an aggregation
of lower level units. For example, in many applications of policy evaluation, the focus would be on state
or county-level economic indicators as such, without
requiring an explicit link to the micro-units. In such
situations, there is no problem with the use of ecological spatial lag models as specification of substantive
economic relations.35

6. Conclusions
As a spatial perspective is becoming increasingly
common in applied econometric work, it is important
to keep in mind the formal framework within which
proper estimation and inference can be carried out.
Different model specifications imply different spatial
correlation structures that may not always be compatible with the economic theory behind the interaction
model. The data are often problematic, and prevent the
use of an optimal spatial scale in many empirical situations. Choices must be made about the data model and
appropriate statistical paradigm. The specification of
spatial weights is often ambiguous and the conceptual
35 See also Schwartz (1994), for related arguments in the public
health arena.

263

interaction model does not always match the formal
simultaneous or conditional specification. Moreover,
the danger of ecological fallacy lurks everywhere.
With more user friendly software available, these
important choices may be hidden from the analyst, or a
particular perspective forced on the unsuspecting practitioner. The goal of this paper was to focus attention
on a number of conceptual issues that must be resolved
in order to obtain a sound design for a spatial econometric analysis. While the discussion was mostly informal, the main ideas remain valid and hopefully will
guide applied econometricians in future spatial work.
A more technical treatment is offered in a companion
paper.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NSF Grant
BCS-9978058 to the Center for Spatially Integrated
Social Science (CSISS) and by NSF/EPA Grant
SES-0084213. Parts of the paper were presented earlier at the Pre-Conference Workshop on Spatial Analysis, Annual Meetings of the American Agricultural
Economics Association, Chicago, IL, the ICPSR Summer Workshop on Spatial Regression, Ann Arbor, MI,
the Joseph Havlicek Jr. Memorial Lecture in Applied
Econometrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, and short courses at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, and the
University at Albany, Albany, NY. Comments, questions and suggestions from the participants at these
presentations contributed to refining the arguments
outlined in the paper and are greatly appreciated.
References
Achen, C.H., Shively, W.P., 1995. Cross-Level Inference.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Akerlof, G.A., 1997. Social distance and social decisions. Econometrica 65, 1005–1027.
Anselin, L., 1988. Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Anselin, L., 1990. Spatial dependence and spatial structure instability in applied regression analysis. J. Reg. Sci. 30, 185–207.
Anselin, L., 2001a. Rao’s score test in spatial econometrics. J.
Stat. Plann. Inference 97, 113–139.
Anselin, L., 2001b. Spatial econometrics. In Baltagi, B. (Ed.),
Companion to Theoretical Econometrics. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford, pp. 310–330.

264

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

Anselin, L., 2001c. Spatial effects in econometric practice in
environmental and resource economics. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
83 (3), 705–710.
Anselin, L., 2002. Spatial externalities, spatial multipliers and
spatial econometrics. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev. (in press).
Anselin, L., Bera, A., 1998. Spatial dependence in linear regression
models with an introduction to spatial econometrics. In: Ullah,
A., Giles, D.E. (Eds.), Handbook of Applied Economic Statistics. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 237–289.
Anselin, L., Cho, W.T., 2002. Spatial effects and ecological inference. Political Anal. 10 (3), 276–297.
Anselin, L., Kelejian, H.H., 1997. Testing for spatial error autocorrelation in the presence of endogenous regressors. Int. Reg.
Sci. Rev. 20, 153–182.
Anselin, L., Moreno, R., 2002. Properties of tests for spatial error
components. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. (in press).
Anselin, L., Smirnov, O., 1996. Efficient algorithms for construcating proper higher order spatial lag operators. J. Reg. Sci. 36,
67–89.
Anselin, L., Varga, A., Acs, Z., 1997. Local geographic spillovers
between university research and high technology innovations.
J. Urban Econ. 42, 422–448.
Anselin, L., Bongiovanni, R., Lowenberg-DeBoer, J., 2002. A
spatial econometric approach to the economics of site-specific
nitrogen management in corn production. Technical Report
02-T-2. Regional Economics Applications Laboratory (REAL),
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL.
Aoki, M., 1996. New Approaches to Macroeconomic Modelling.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Arbia, G., 1989. Spatial Data Configuration in Statistical Analysis
of Regional Economic and Related Problems. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Arbia, G., Lafratta, G., 1997. Evaluating and updating the sample
design in repeated environmental surveys: monitoring air quality
in Padua. J. Agric. Biol. Environ. Stat. 2, 451–466.
Baller, R., Anselin, L., Messner, S., Deane, G., Hawkins, D., 2001.
Structural covariates of US county homicide rates: incorporating
spatial effects. Criminology 39 (3), 561–590.
Baltagi, B., Li, D., 2001. Double length artificial regressions for
testing spatial dependence. Econ. Rev. 20 (1), 31–40.
Bell, K.P., Bockstael, N.E., 2000. Applying the generalized moments estimation approach to spatial problems involving microlevel data. Rev. Econ. Stat. 82, 72–82.
Benirschka, M., Binkley, J.K., 1994. Land price volatility in a
geographically dispersed market. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 76, 185–
195.
Berger, J.O., Oliveira, V.D., Sansó, B., 2001. Objective Bayesian
analysis of spatially correlated data. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 96,
1361–1374.
Beron, K.J., Vijverberg, W.P., 2002. Probit in a spatial context: a
Monte Carlo approach. In: Anselin, L., Florax, R.J., Rey, S.J.
(Eds.), Advances in Spatial Econometrics. Springer, Heidelberg
(in press).
Besag, J., York, J., Mollié, A., 1991. Bayesian image restoration
with two applications in spatial statistics. Ann. Inst. Stat. Math.
43, 1–59.
Besley, T., Case, A., 1995. Incumbent behavior: vote-seeking, taxsetting and yardstick competition. Am. Econ. Rev. 85, 25–45.

Best, N.G., Arnold, R.A., Thomas, A., Waller, L.A., Conlon, E.M.,
1999. Bayesian models for spatially correlated disease and
exposure data. In: Bernardo, J., Berger, J., Dawid, A., Smith,
F. (Eds.), Bayesian Statistics 6. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY, pp. 131–156.
Best, N.G., Ickstadt, K., Wolpert, R.L., 2000. Spatial Poisson regression for health and exposure data measured at disparate resolutions. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 95, 1076–1088.
Bivand, R., Szymanski, S., 1997. Spatial dependence through local
yardstick competition: theory and testing. Econ. Lett. 55, 257–
265.
Bivand, R., Szymanski, S., 2000. Modeling the spatial impact of
the introduction of compulsory competitive tendering. Reg. Sci.
Urban Econ. 30, 203–219.
Bockstael, N.E., 1996. Modeling economics and ecology: the importance of a spatial perpective. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78, 1168–
1180.
Bolduc, D., Laferrièrre, R., Santarossa, G., 1992. Spatial autoregressive error components in travel flow models. Reg. Sci.
Urban Econ. 22, 381–385.
Bolduc, D., Laferrièrre, R., Santarossa, G., 1995. Spatial autoregressive error components in travel flow models, an application
to aggregate mode choice. In: Anselin, L., Florax, R.J. (Eds.),
New Directions in Spatial Econometrics. Springer, Berlin,
pp. 96–108.
Bolthausen, E., 1982. On the central limit theorem for stationary
mixing random fields. Ann. Prob. 10, 1047–1050.
Borjas, G.J., 1995. Ethnicity, neighborhoods, and human-capital
externalities. Am. Econ. Rev. 85, 365–390.
Brock, W.A., Durlauf, S.N., 1995. Discrete choice with social
interactions. I. Theory. Working Paper W5291. National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Brueckner, J.K., 1998. Testing for strategic interaction among local
governments: the case of growth controls. J. Urban Econ. 44,
438–467.
Brueckner, J.K., 2002. Strategic interaction among governments:
an overview of empirical studies. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev. (in press).
Case, A.C., 1991. Spatial patterns in household demand. Econometrica 59, 953–965.
Case, A.C., 1992. Neighborhood influence and technological
change. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 22, 491–508.
Case, A., Rosen, H.S., Hines, J.R., 1993. Budget spillovers and
fiscal policy interdependence: evidence from the states. J. Public
Econ. 52, 285–307.
Casetti, E., 1997. The expansion method, mathematical modeling,
and spatial econometrics. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev. 20, 9–33.
Chen, X., Conley, T.G., 2001. A new semiparametric spatial model
for panel time series. J. Econ. 105, 59–83.
Chilès, J.-P., Delfiner, P., 1999. Geostatistics, Modeling Spatial
Uncertainty. Wiley, New York.
Clayton, D., Kaldor, J., 1987. Empirical Bayes estimates of agestandardized relative risks for use in disease mapping. Biometrics 43, 671–681.
Cliff, A., Ord, J.K., 1973. Spatial Autocorrelation. Pion, London.
Cliff, A., Ord, J.K., 1981. Spatial Processes: Models and Applications. Pion, London.
Conley, T.G., 1999. GMM estimation with cross-sectional dependence. J. Econ. 92, 1–45.

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267
Cook, D., Pocock, S., 1983. Multiple regression in geographic
mortality studies, with allowance for spatially correlated errors.
Biometrics 39, 361–371.
Cressie, N., 1993. Statistics for Spatial Data. Wiley, New York.
Cressie, N., 1996. Change of support and the modifiable areal unit
problem. Geogr. Syst. 3, 159–180.
Damian, D., Sampson, P.D., Guttorp, P., 2001. Bayesian estimation
of semi-parametric non-stationary spatial covariance structures.
Environmetrics 12, 161–178.
Diggle, P., 1983. Statistical Analysis of Spatial Point Patterns.
Academic Press, London.
Doreian, P., 1980. Linear models with spatially distributed data,
spatial disturbances or spatial effects. Sociological Methods
Res. 9, 29–60.
Driscoll, J.C., Kraay, A.C., 1998. Consistent covariance matrix
estimation with spatially dependent panel data. Rev. Econ. Stat.
80, 549–560.
Dubin, R., 1988. Estimation of regression coefficients in the
presence of spatially autocorrelated errors. Rev. Econ. Stat. 70,
466–474.
Dubin, R., 1992. Spatial autocorrelation and neighborhood quality.
Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 22, 433–452.
Dubin, R., Pace, R.K., Thibodeau, T.G., 1999. Spatial autoregression techniques for real estate data. J. Real Estate Lit. 7,
79–95.
Durlauf, S.N., 1994. Spillovers stratification and inequality. Eur.
Econ. Rev. 38, 836–845.
Durlauf, S.N., 1997. Statistical mechanics approaches to socioeconomic behavior. In: Arthur, B.W., Durlauf, S.N., Lane, D.A.
(Eds.), The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, pp. 81–104.
Ecker, M., Gelfand, A., 1997. Bayesian variogram modeling for
an isotropic spatial process. J. Agric. Biol. Environ. Stat. 2,
347–369.
Egenhofer, M.J., Glasgow, J., Günther, O., Herring, J.R., Peuquet,
D.J., 1999. Progress in computational methods for representing
geographical concepts. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 13 (8), 775–796.
Elhorst, J.P., 2001. Dynamic models in space and time. Geogr.
Anal. 33, 119–140.
Ferrándiz, J., López, A., Llopis, A., Morales, M., Tejerizo, M.,
1995. Spatial interaction between neighbouring counties: cancer
mortality data in Valencia (Spain). Biometrics 51, 665–678.
Ferrándiz, J., López, A., Sanmartín, P., 1999. Spatial regression
models in epidemiological studies. In: Lawson, A., Biggeri,
A., Böhning, D., Lesaffre, E., Viel, J.-F., Bertollini, R. (Eds.),
Disease Mapping and Risk Assessment for Public Health. Wiley,
New York, pp. 203–215.
Fleming, M., 2002. Techniques for estimating spatially dependent
discrete choice models. In: Anselin, L., Florax, R.J., Rey, S.J.
(Eds.), Advances in Spatial Econometrics. Springer, Heidelberg
(in press).
Florax, R.J., Folmer, H., 1992. Specification and estimation of
spatial linear regression models: Monte Carlo evaluation of
pre-test estimators. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 22, 405–432.
Florax, R.J., Voortman, R., Brouwer, J., 2001. Spatial dimensions
of precision agriculture: estimating millet yield functions for
Sahelian coversands. Technical report. Department of Spatial
Economics, Free University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

265

Fotheringham, A.S., Brundson, C., Charlton, M., 1998. Geographically weighted regression: a natural evolution of the expansion method for spatial data analysis. Environ. Plann. A 30,
1905–1927.
Frees, E.W., 1995. Assessing cross-sectional correlation in panel
data. J. Econ. 69, 393–414.
Friedkin, N.E., 1998. A Structural Theory of Social Influence.
Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Fujita, M., Krugman, P., Venables, A., 1999. The Spatial Economy:
Cities, Regions and International Trade. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Gehlke, C.K., Biehl, K., 1934. Certain effects of grouping upon
the size of the correlation coefficient in census tract material.
J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 29, 169–170.
Getis, A., 1995. Spatial filtering in a regression framework: examples using data on urban crime, regional inequality, and government expenditures. In: Anselin, L., Florax, R.J. (Eds.), New
Directions in Spatial Econometrics. Springer, Berlin, pp. 172–
185.
Glaeser, E.L., Sacerdote, B., Scheinkman, J., 1996. Crime and
social interactions. Q. J. Econ. 111, 507–548.
Goodchild, M.F., 1992. Geographical data modeling. Comput.
Geosci. 18, 401–408.
Goodchild, M.F., Anselin, L., Appelbaum, R., Harthorn, B., 2000.
Toward spatially integrated social science. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev.
23 (2), 139–159.
Goodman, L.A., 1953. Ecological regression and behavior of
individuals. Am. Sociological Rev. 18, 663–664.
Goovaerts, P., 1997. Geostatistics for Natural Resources
Evaluation. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Gotway, C.A., Stroup, W.W., 1997. A generalized linear model
approach to spatial data analysis and prediction. J. Agric. Biol.
Environ. Stat. 2 (2), 157–178.
Gotway, C.A., Young, L.J., 2002. Combining incompatible spatial
data. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 97, 632–648.
Greenland, S., 2002. A review of multilevel theory for ecologic
analyses. Stat. Med. 21, 389–395.
Guttorp, P., Sampson, P., 1994. Methods for estimating heterogeneous spatial covariance functions with environmental applications. In: Patil, G., Rao, C. (Eds.), Handbook of Statistics XII:
Environmental Statistics. North-Holland/Elsevier, New York,
NY, pp. 663–690.
Handcock, M.S., Stein, M.L., 1993. A Bayesian analysis of kriging.
Technometrics 35, 403–410.
Hurley, T., Kilian, B., Malzer, G., Dikici, H., 2001. The value of
information for variable rate nitrogen applications: a comparison
of soil test, topographical and remote sensing information.
Technical report. Department of Applied Economics, University
of Minnesota.
Ickstadt, K., Wolpert, R.L., 1999. Spatial regression for marked
point processes. In: Bernardo, J., Berger, J., Dawid, A., Smith,
A. (Eds.), Bayesian Statistics 6. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY, pp. 323–341.
Irwin, E.G., Bockstael, N.E., 2002. Interacting agents, spatial externalities and the evolution of residential land use patterns. J.
Econ. Geogr. 2, 31–54.
Isard, W., 1960. Methods of Regional Analysis. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

266

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267

Kelejian, H.H., Prucha, I., 1997. Estimation of spatial regression
models with autoregressive errors by two stage least squares
procedures: a serious problem. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev. 20, 103–111.
Kelejian, H.H., Prucha, I., 1998. A generalized spatial two stage
least squares procedures for estimating a spatial autoregressive
model with autoregressive disturbances. J. Real Estate Finance
Econ. 17, 99–121.
Kelejian, H.H., Prucha, I., 1999. A generalized moments estimator
for the autoregressive parameter in a spatial model. Int. Econ.
Rev. 40, 509–533.
Kelejian, H.H., Prucha, I., 2001. On the asymptotic distribution of
the Moran I test statistic with applications. J. Econ. 104 (2),
219–257.
Kelejian, H.H., Robinson, D.P., 1992. Spatial autocorrelation: a
new computationally simple test with an application to per
capita country police expenditures. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 22,
317–333.
Kelejian, H.H., Robinson, D.P., 1993. A suggested method of
estimation for spatial interdependent models with autocorrelated
errors and an application to a county expenditure model. Papers
Reg. Sci. 72, 297–312.
Kelejian, H.H., Robinson, D.P., 1995. Spatial correlation: a suggested alternative to the autoregressive model. In: Anselin, L.,
Florax, R.J. (Eds.), New Directions in Spatial Econometrics.
Springer, Berlin, pp. 75–95.
Kim, C.-W., Phipps, T.T., Anselin, L., 2002. Measuring the benefits
of air quality improvement: a spatial hedonic approach. J.
Environ. Econ. Manage. (in press).
King, G., 1997. A Solution to the Ecological Inference Problem:
Reconstructing Individual Behavior from Aggregate Data.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Lahiri, S., 1996. On the inconsistency of estimators under infill
asymptotics for spatial data. Sankhya A 58, 403–417.
Lancaster, T., 2000. The incidental parameter problem since 1948.
J. Econ. 95, 391–413.
Langford, I.H., Leyland, A.H., Rasbash, J., Goldstein, H., 1999a.
Multilevel modelling of the geographical distributions of
diseases. Appl. Stat. 48, 253–268.
Langford, I.H., Leyland, A.H., Rasbash, J., Goldstein, H., Day, R.J.,
McDonald, A.-L., 1999b. Multilevel modelling of area-based
health data. In: Lawson, A., Biggeri, A., Böhning, D., Lesaffre,
E., Viel, J.-F., Bertollini, R. (Eds.), Disease Mapping and Risk
Assessment for Public Health. Wiley, Chichester, pp. 217–228.
Lawson, A.B., 2001. Statistical Methods in Spatial Epidemiology.
Wiley, New York.
Lee, L.-F., 2002. Consistency and efficiency of least squares
estimation for mixed regressive, spatial autoregressive models.
Econ. Theory 18 (2), 252–277.
LeSage, J.P., 1997. Bayesian estimation of spatial autoregressive
models. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev. 20, 113–129.
LeSage, J.P., 2000. Bayesian estimation of limited dependent
variable spatial autoregressive models. Geogr. Anal. 32, 19–35.
LeSage, J.P., 2002. A family of geographically weighted regression
models. In: Anselin, L., Florax, R.J., Rey, S.J. (Eds.), Advances
in Spatial Econometrics. Springer, Heidelberg (in press).
Leyland, A.H., 2001. Spatial analysis. In: Leyland, A.H., Goldstein,
H. (Eds.), Multilevel Modelling of Health Statistics. Wiley,
Chichester, pp. 143–157.

Leyland, A.H., Langford, I.H., Rabash, J., Goldstein, H., 2000.
Multivariate spatial models for event data. Stat. Med. 19, 2469–
2478.
MacNab, Y.C., Dean, C.B., 2002. Spatial-temporal modelling of
rates for the construction of disease maps. Stat. Med. 21, 347–
358.
Magnus, J., 1978. Maximum likelihood estimation of the GLS
model with unknown parameters in the disturbance covariance
matrix. J. Econ. 7, 281–312 (Corrigenda, J. Econ. 10, 261).
Mandy, D., Martins-Filho, C., 1994. A unified approach to asymptotic equivalence of Aitken and feasible Aitken instrumental
variables estimators. Int. Econ. Rev. 35, 957–979.
Manski, C.F., 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects:
the reflexion problem. Rev. Econ. Stud. 60, 531–542.
Mardia, K., Marshall, R., 1984. Maximum likelihood estimation of
models for residual covariance in spatial regression. Biometrika
71, 135–146.
Martin, R., 1974. On spatial dependence, bias and the use of first
spatial differencing in regression analysis. Area 6, 185–194.
McMillen, D.P., 1992. Probit with spatial autocorrelation. J. Reg.
Sci. 32, 335–348.
Messner, S.F., Anselin, L., 2002. Spatial analyses of homicide
with areal data. In: Goodchild, M., Janelle, D. (Eds.), Spatially
Integrated Social Science. Oxford University Press, New York,
NY (in press).
Müller, W.G., 1998. Collecting Spatial Data, Optimum Design of
Experiments for Random Fields. Physica, Heidelberg.
Murdoch, J.C., Sandler, T., Sargent, K., 1997. A tale of two collectives: sulfur versus nitrogen oxides emission reduction in
Europe. Economica 64, 281–301.
Nelson, G.C., Hellerstein, D., 1997. Do roads cause deforestation?
Using satellite images in econometric analysis of land use. Am.
J. Agric. Econ. 79, 80–88.
Openshaw, S., Taylor, P., 1979. A million or so correlation coefficients. In: Wrigley, N. (Ed.), Statistical Methods in the Spatial
Sciences. Pion, London, pp. 127–144.
Ord, J.K., 1975. Estimation methods for models of spatial
interaction. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 70, 120–126.
Paelinck, J., Klaassen, L., 1979. Spatial Econometrics. Saxon
House, Farnborough.
Pinkse, J., 2002. Moran-flavored tests with nuisance parameter.
In: Luc, A., Florax, R.J., Rey, S.J. (Eds.), Advances in Spatial
Econometrics. Springer, Heidelberg (in press).
Pinkse, J., Slade, M.E., 1998. Contracting in space: an application
of spatial statistics to discrete-choice models. J. Econ. 85, 125–
154.
Pötscher, B., Prucha, I.R., 1997. Dynamic Nonlinear Econometric
Models. Springer, Berlin.
Ripley, B.D., 1981. Spatial Statistics. Wiley, New York.
Robinson, W., 1950. Ecological correlations and the behavior of
individuals. Am. Sociological Rev. 15, 351–357.
Roe, B., Irwin, E.G., Sharp, J.S., 2002. Pigs in space: modeling
the spatial structure of hog production in traditional and nontraditional production regions. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 84 (2), 259–
278.
Saavedra, L.A., 2000. A model of welfare competition with
evidence from AFDC. J. Urban Econ. 47, 248–279.

L. Anselin / Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 247–267
Sampson, P.D., Guttorp, P., 1992. Nonparametric estimation of
nonstationary spatial covariance structure. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.
87, 108–119.
Schwartz, S., 1994. The fallacy of ecological fallacy: the potential
misuse of a concept and the consequences. Am. J. Public Health
84, 819–823.
Smirnov, O., Anselin, L., 2001. Fast maximum likelihood estimation of very large spatial autoregressive models: a characteristic
polynomial approach. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 35, 301–319.
Stein, M.L., 1999. Interpolation of Spatal Data, Some Theory for
Kriging. Springer, New York.
Stoker, T.M., 1993. Empirical approaches to the problem of aggregation over individuals. J. Econ. Lit. 33, 1827–1874.
Tanner, M.A., 1996. Tools for Statistical Inference. Springer, New
York, NY.
Tobler, W., 1979. Cellular geography. In: Gale, S., Olsson, G.
(Eds.), Philosophy in Geography. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp. 379–
386.
Upton, G.J., Fingleton, B., 1985. Spatial Data Analysis by Example, vol. 1, Point Pattern and Quantitative Data. Wiley, New
York.

267

Vijverberg, W.P., 1997. Monte Carlo evaluation of multivariate
normal probabilities. J. Econ. 76, 281–307.
Waller, L., Carlin, B., Xia, H., 1997a. Structuring correlation
within hierarchical spatio-temporal models for disease rates.
In: Grégoire, T., Brillinger, D., Russek-Cohen, P., Warren,
W., Wolfinger, R. (Eds.), Modeling Longitudinal and Spatially
Correlated Data. Springer, New York, pp. 309–319.
Waller, L., Carlin, B., Xia, H., Gelfand, A., 1997b. Hierarchical
spatio-temporal mapping of disease rates. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.
92, 607–617.
Weiss, M.D., 1996. Precision farming and spatial econometric analysis: research challenges and opportunities. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
78, 1275–1280.
Wikle, C.K., Royle, J.A., 1999. Space–time dynamic design of
environmental monitoring networks. J. Agric. Biol. Environ.
Stat. 4 (4), 489–507.
Wikle, C.K., Berliner, L.M., Cressie, N., 1998. Hierarchical Bayesian space–time models. Environ. Ecol. Stat. 5, 117–154.
Wolpert, R.L., Ickstadt, K., 1998. Poisson/gamma random field
models for spatial statistics. Biometrika 85, 251–267.

