Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Farm size and the determinants of productive efficiency in
the Brazilian Center-West
Steven M. Helfand*, Edward S. Levine
Department of Economics, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA

Abstract
This paper explores the determinants of technical efficiency, and the relationship between farm size and efficiency, in the
Center-West of Brazil. This is the region where agricultural production and total factor productivity have grown the fastest since
1970. It is also a region characterised by unusually large farms. Technical efficiency is studied with Data Envelopment Analysis
and county level data disaggregated by farm size and type of land tenure. The efficiency measure is regressed on a set of
explanatory variables which includes farm size, type of land tenure, composition of output, access to institutions and indicators
of technology and input usage. The relationship between farm size and efficiency is found to be non-linear, with efficiency first
falling and then rising with size. Type of land tenure, access to institutions and markets, and modern inputs are found to be
important determinants of the differences in efficiency across farms.
# 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: Q100; O300
Keywords: Brazil; Agriculture; Productivity; Efficiency; DEA

1. Introduction
The majority of studies of agricultural productivity
in developing countries support the view that there is
an inverse relationship between productivity and farm
size (Berry and Cline, 1979; Barrett, 1996). If correct,
land reform could contribute to improving both equity
and efficiency in agriculture. Most of these studies,
however, are based on partial measures of productivity
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 909 827 1572.
E-mail addresses: shelfand@mail.ucr.edu (S.M. Helfand),
tedlevine@earthlink.net (E.S. Levine).

such as yield which are biased in favor of small
producers. It is likely that the inverse relationship
would be less pronounced, or perhaps even reversed, if
a measure of total factor productivity (TFP) were used
instead. It has also been suggested that the inverse
relationship might weaken in a region characterised by
rapid modernization. This paper explores the relationship between farm size and technical efficiency in
exactly this type of environment. The Center-West
(CW) is the region of Brazil where production and
TFP have grown the fastest since 1970. Gasques and
Conceic¸a˜o (2001) and Vicente et al. (2001) both
estimate annual TFP growth rates for the CW to be in

0169-5150/$ – see front matter # 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2004.09.021

242

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

the 4–5% range for the period 1970–1995, or about
twice the national average. It is also a region
characterised by unusually large farms: the average
farm size in the CW is about six times the national
average.
A second objective of this paper is to extend the
recent Brazilian literature on total factor productivity
growth in agriculture to an analysis of the determinants of productivity. We do this in two ways. First,
most recent studies have limited themselves to the
measurement of TFP. Only one has sought to analyse
the determinants of TFP in an econometric framework
(Vicente et al., 2003). In this paper we regress a
measure of technical efficiency on a set of explanatory
variables which includes farm size, type of land
tenure, composition of output, access to institutions,
and indicators of technology and input usage. Second,
previous studies have been based on national or state
level data. These have provided a valuable first
approximation to productivity change in the past
several decades. The Brazilian agricultural sector,
however, is far too heterogeneous for us to be satisfied
with studies conducted at this level. In this paper, we
use data from 426 counties, 15 farm size classes and
four types of land tenure. This permits us to avoid
many of the issues of aggregation bias present in
previous studies, and generates a far richer set of data
for studying the determinants of efficiency.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly
presents the Data Envelopment Analysis methodology
that is used to estimate technical efficiency. Section 3
describes the data and the construction of the
variables. Section 4 analyses the empirical results,
with an emphasis on farm size and Section 5 provides
conclusions.

DEA is a non-parametric technique and that it can
accommodate multiple outputs and inputs. In addition,
the econometric theory has yet to be developed for
incorporating spatial correlation into a stochastic
frontier model.
We use output distance functions to characterise the
frontier of a multiple-input multiple-output production
technology, and the proportional distance of each
observation from the frontier. The following notation
is used. The production possibilities set P is the
combination of all pairs of inputs x and outputs y that
are feasible, where x and y are vectors. Inputs and
outputs are assumed to be freely disposable, and P is
assumed to be non-empty, closed, and convex. The
output distance function D0 is
 


1
(1)
D0 ðx; yÞ ¼ inf u : x; y 2 P
u
where u is a non-negative scalar that measures the ratio
of the observed vector of outputs to the maximum
vector that could be achieved, given the input vector, if
all outputs were expanded proportionally. The inverse
of the output distance function, the Farrell outputoriented measure of technical efficiency, is used here
as a measure of efficiency. The Farrell measure equals
one for efficient firms on the frontier, and then
increases with inefficiency.
Farrell efficiency measures can be found as the
solution to a linear programming problem under
alternative assumptions about returns to scale. With K
farms, N inputs, M outputs and the assumption of
constant returns to scale (CRS), the following linear
program must be solved for every observation:
½D0 ðx; yÞÀ1 ¼ max u
ðz;uÞ

s:t:
2. Methodology
We use Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) to
calculate productive efficiency (Fa¨ re et al., 1994).
Efficiency is defined in a relative sense, as the distance
between observed input–output combinations and a
best practice frontier. DEA is one of several
techniques that can be used to calculate a best practice
production frontier (Coelli et al., 1998; Kumbhakar
and Lovell, 2000). The principal advantages of DEA,
as opposed to stochastic frontier estimation, are that

uk ymk

K
X
zk ymk ; m ¼ 1; . . . ; M

(2)

k¼1
K
X

zk xnk

k¼1

zk ! 0;

xnk ;

n ¼ 1; . . . ; N
k ¼ 1; . . . ; K

where the zk are variables which show the intensity
with which each farm is used in order to construct
the frontier of the production possibilities set. The
linear program solves for the maximum value
of u given the constraints that the proportionally
expanded vector of outputs and the vector of inputs

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

are in the feasible set, and that the intensity variables
are non-negative.
Two caveats are in order. First, the efficiency scores
may be very sensitive to measurement error for the
farms that define the best practice frontier. We explore
this issue in the empirical application. Second, we use
the term ‘inefficiency’ solely to mean the distance
between a given farm and the best practice frontier.
There are many reasons why a farm might not be
operating on the best practice frontier, and most of
these are unlikely to relate to x-inefficiency. Excluded
variables such as land quality, market failures that lead
to non-separable household decisions, credit market
constraints that lead farms to choose input-output
bundles that appear inefficient in relation to unconstrained farms, and different vintages of technology
are all possible reasons why rational farmers might not
be operating on the frontier. The challenge, it seems to
us, is to identify the relative importance of these
alternative sources of ‘inefficiency’.

3. The data
The data for this study come from the 1995/1996
Agricultural Census in Brazil (IBGE, 1998). For the
DEA analysis, we use aggregate output and five
inputs. We briefly explain the construction of these
variables here. In Section 4, which presents the results
of the econometric analysis, we explain the variables
that are used in the second stage to study the
determinants of efficiency.
Output (Y): This variable is defined as the gross
value of agricultural output net of three categories of
items. First, to avoid the double counting of animals
that takes place when animals are purchased and sold
at different stages of the production process, we
deducted the value of purchases of cattle, hogs,
chickens and fertilised eggs. Cattle, hogs, and
chickens account for over 99% of the value of animal
production in the CW. Second, we deducted the value
of production of ‘rural industry’, which accounts for
2% of the value of agricultural production in the CW.
Preliminary estimates revealed that for most products
the value added in rural industry was extremely close
to zero. Because of data limitations, it was much
simpler to exclude rural industry than estimated
intermediate inputs. Finally, we excluded the value of

243

‘extractive’ and ‘forestry’ products to be consistent
with our decision to exclude forest and woodland
areas. These products only accounted for 1.6% of the
value of agricultural output in the region, while forest
and woodland represented 29% of the utilised area.
Utilised area (X1): 90% of the value of output in the
CW comes from temporary crops and cattle. With this
in mind, we constructed the area variable to include
natural and permanent pastures, land utilised for
crops, and productive land that was not being used.
These categories accounted respectively for 58, 7 and
2% of the utilised land. The excluded categories were
forest and woodland (29%) and unusable land (4%).
Labour (X2): First, we constructed a variable for
family labour by treating males and females as equals,
and by only counting half of the family labour under
14 years of age. Second, we constructed a variable for
hired labour along the lines of Guanziroli et al. (2001).
These authors devised an approach to correct for the
fact that (a) temporary workers should not be counted
as full-time equivalent workers, and (b) many farms,
especially the large ones, hire contracting firms in an
effort to avoid paying social security and other labour
taxes. Finally, we added family and hired labour
together in order to construct the labour variable in
full-time equivalent units.
Tractors (X3): Tractors are measured in the
equivalent of a 75 horsepower tractor, which was
the midpoint of the modal horsepower class (50–
100 hp).
Animals (X4): Many studies of TFP have not used
animals as an input, even when they were considered
part of output. We aggregated animals based on their
relative prices in the CW of Brazil. We then used the
stock of animals in cattle equivalents as a proxy for the
stock of capital in animal production.
Purchased inputs (X5): We created an input
variable based on the expenditures for (a) fertiliser,
(b) chemicals (such as pesticides and herbicides), (c)
seeds, (d) fuel, and (e) feed and medicine for animals.
Finally, we created ‘representative farms’ for each
farm size, of each type of land tenure, in each county.
This was necessary because we did not have access to
farm level data. We used data from all 426 counties in
the CW (excluding the Federal District) that was
aggregated into 15 size classes and 4 types of tenure.
After removing unusable observations, the final
dataset covered 237,595 establishments aggregated

244

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

into 9304 representative farms, implying an average of
25 establishments per representative farm.

4. Empirical results
We first calculated the median value of output per
hectare (Y/X1) and the median value of output per unit
of labour (Y/X2) for each farm size class. The data
were consistent with a broad body of international
evidence on the relationship between farm size and
productivity. On the one hand, there was a strong
inverse relationship between value of output per
hectare and farm size, reflecting the intensive use by
small farms of their scarce factor of production-land.
Labour productivity, in contrast, was much higher on
large farms where the opportunity cost of labour is
greater. The relationship between total factor productivity (or technical efficiency under CRS) and farm
size is influenced by the partial productivities of land,
labour, and all other inputs.
We calculated the technical efficiency scores
according to the methodology in Section 2 and the
assumption of constant returns to scale. We then
regressed the efficiency scores on different combinations of explanatory variables as reported in Table 1.
We estimated all of the regressions with county level
fixed effects to take account of spatial heterogeneity,
such as differences in soil quality, that was not
captured in the regressors. We used a GLS procedure
that allowed for heteroscedasticity across the 426
counties. Further, because each observation in our data
set contains mean values of each of the variables over
all farms in a given tenure type-size-county cell, we
used the number of establishments represented by
each observation to construct weights to correct for the
heteroscedasticity (not only across counties, but also
across tenure types and sizes) that otherwise arises
from regression on cell means or ‘‘grouped data’’
(Kmenta, 1971). In practice, the estimation techniques
mattered little and the estimated coefficients from all
of the regressions proved quite robust to alternative
specifications and to the inclusion/exclusion of
different sets of variables.
Regression (1) estimates the unconditional relationship between the log of technical inefficiency and
the log of farm size. We added a quadratic term to
capture non-linearities that we observed in a prior

graphical analysis of the mean inefficiency by farm
size. Both coefficients were statistically significant at
least at the 1% level. In Fig. 1 we have plotted the
curve ‘size’ based on the coefficients from regression
(1). The curve depicts a non-linear relationship
between inefficiency and farm size, with inefficiency
first rising and then falling as farm size grows. The
modal farm size class of 20–50 ha might be considered
as a target size for land reform in this region, and for
this reason we have set its level of inefficiency equal to
one in the figure. Relative to this group, which
accounts for 21% of the farms in the region, farms in
the 200–500 range are estimated to be about 20% less
efficient. While farms smaller than 20 ha are even
more efficient, the analysis here will focus on farms
above 20 ha which represent 78% of the farms in the
region and more then 95% of all variables other than
labour.1
In addition to farm size, the next four regressions
control for differences in inefficiency due to land
tenure status. We included dummies for renters,
sharecroppers and occupants to differentiate them
from landowners. The inclusion of tenure dummies in
model (2) did not change the coefficients on size. The
results indicate that renters were somewhat more
efficient than owners (negative coefficients indicate
lower inefficiency), occupants were less efficient, and
sharecroppers had mixed results. It is likely that
renters were more efficient in this region because they
were a more homogenous group of market oriented
farmers relative to owners who were the majority. In
our final model – regression (5) – the partial effect of
differences in land tenure on inefficiency is relatively
small compared with that of most other determinants
of productivity. We estimate that renters were 14%
more efficient than owners, while sharecroppers and
occupants were 5 and 7% less efficient.
In addition to land tenure, regression (3) controls
for differences in the composition of output. Relative
to the excluded category – cattle – producers that
specialised in higher value activities (temporary
crops, horticulture, permanent crops, and hogs and
chickens) had lower levels of inefficiency. A
coefficient equal to À1 would imply that a one
1

Some authors, such as Rezende (2003), argue that small family
farms are not viable in the CW due to the long drought period and
the relative scarcity of off-farm employment.

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

245

Table 1
Regression results for the determinants of technical efficiency: dependent variable = ln(inefficiency)
Variable

(1)

Farm size
Size
0.45
À0.04
Size2
Land tenure (relative to owners)
Renter
Sharecropper
Occupant
Composition of output (relative to cattle)
Temporary crops
Horticulture
Permanent crops
Hogs and chickens
Other
Access to institutions/public goods
Credit
Electricity
Technical assistance
Cooperatives
Market access
Technology and inputs
Machines
Irrigation
Fertiliser
Pest and disease control
Soil conservation
Mechanical milking
Artificial insemination
Log likelihood
À4396

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.45
À0.04

0.32
À0.03

0.37
À0.03

0.39
À0.03

À0.39
À0.23
0.11

À0.11
0.10
0.18

À0.19
À0.00a
0.06

À0.14
0.05a
0.07

À1.22
À1.98
À1.36
À1.39
0.95

À1.20
À1.60
À1.31
À1.31
0.58

À1.05
À1.25
À1.26
À1.26
0.58

À0.16
À0.55
À0.27
À0.30
À0.56

À0.05a
À0.48
À0.15
À0.22
À0.53

À2432

À0.11
À0.28
À0.33
À0.08b
À0.21
À0.86b
À0.09a
À2308

À4240

À2962

Notes: All regressions have county fixed effects (not reported) and allow for heteroscedasticity across counties using as GLS procedure. All
coefficients are statistically significant at least at the 1% level unless designated with the following symbols:
a
Not statistically significant at the 5% level.
b
Statistically significant at the 5% level.

percentage point increase in the share of production
coming from temporary crops, for example, translates into a 1% increase in technical efficiency. Based
on the coefficients from this regression, the conditional relationship between size and inefficiency is
graphed in Fig. 1 as ‘composition of output’. Because
cattle production accounted for nearly half of the
value of output for farms over 50 ha, but less than
25% for farms under 10 ha, controlling for these
differences reduces the efficiency disadvantage of
large producers. Thus, the ‘composition’ curve is
higher than the ‘size’ curve below the 20–50 ha class
and lower than it above this size. The advantage of
farms in the 20–50 ha class over larger farms drops to
a maximum of 8.4%.

Regression (4) incorporates variables intended to
capture access to institutions and public goods. Thus,
the variables credit, electricity, technical assistance
and cooperatives all measure the share of establishments in each representative farm that uses these
items. These variables range between zero and one.
Market access, in contrast, is intended to capture the
degree to which market oriented farms are likely to
be more efficient than farms producing for their own
consumption. This variable is measured as the value
of sales divided by the value of production. All five
variables are associated with lower inefficiency.
Market orientation and use of electricity had the
largest impact, followed by participation in cooperatives and use of technical assistance, with credit

246

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

Fig. 1. Conditional effect of farm size on inefficiency (normalized as a fraction of the 20–50 ha group).

having the smallest impact.2 Based on the coefficients from this regression, the curve ‘institutions’ in
Fig. 1 shifts up substantially relative to the previous
scenario, reflecting the fact that large farms tended to
have preferential access to these institutions, and
controlling for this advantage would increase the
relative inefficiency of these farms. Thus, farms in
the 1000–2000 range were now estimated to be the
least efficient. They were 36% less efficient than
farms in the 20–50 ha class, or nearly twice the
maximum efficiency difference that was observed in
the base case. This is powerful evidence of the
importance of providing small farms with access to
these institutions.
Regression (5) controls, in addition, for a variety of
factors related to the level of technology and the use of
inputs. All variables are measured as the share of
2
We are surprised by the small size of the coefficient on credit.
This was the most important difference from earlier, unweighted
results. However, separate regressions using credit/size interaction
terms, revealed that the effect of credit on inefficiency varies
substantially across size groups. We hope to shed additional light
on these results in future research.

establishments that report using the designated item.
Thus, an increase in the share of farms using
machines, irrigation, fertilisers, pest and disease
control or soil conservation, all contribute to reducing
inefficiency. Mechanical milking has the largest effect
of all of these variables. Based on the coefficients from
this regression, the curve ‘technology/inputs’ in Fig. 1
shows that when we also control for differences in the
use of technology and inputs, the relative inefficiency
of large farms is even greater than in the previous
scenarios. The relative disadvantage of farms in the
1000–2000 ha class rises to 46% in this case.
However, due to the indivisibilities that exist with
certain technologies, such as tractors, providing small
and medium farmers with greater access to these
inputs might require institutional innovations such as
the development of rental markets for the services
provided by these inputs.
Finally, we estimated a number of variations on our
models to check the robustness of the results and to
examine the spatial nature of our data. Due to space
limitations, we restrict ourselves to summarising the
most important conclusions.

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

First, to evaluate the quadratic specification of the
size-inefficiency relationship, we estimated our five
models using a series of farm size dummies in place of
the log of size and square of log of size, and graphed the
results. The resulting graphs did, indeed, approximate
an inverted, U-shaped curve fairly closely, indicating
that the quadratic specification is appropriate.
Second, to test the sensitivity of the DEA results to
measurement error for the observations that define the
frontier, we removed the 0.5% (or 47) most efficient
observations, re-ran DEA, and re-estimated the model.
With only a few exceptions, the signs of the estimated
coefficients remained the same, as did their magnitudes relative to the others in the same ‘group’ (e.g.
composition of output). Most importantly, the shape of
the size-inefficiency relationship represented in Fig. 1
remained similar, although inefficiency now reached a
maximum in the 2000–5000 farm size category rather
than in the 1000–2000 class. Thus, it is unlikely that
measurement error on the frontier substantially
affected our results.
Third, we considered whether the exclusion of
forest and woodland areas as inputs understated the
relative inefficiency of large farms, because these
farms may hold large amounts of undeveloped land for
speculation, as a hedge against inflation or for
prestige, and therefore do not use it efficiently for
production. To test this, we recomputed our DEA
results, excluding only ‘unusable land’ (4% of land in
the CW) from our land input variable, and without
excluding extractive products, forestry products or
rural industry from our output variable. The new
coefficients were, again, similar in sign and magnitude
in nearly every case, and the quadratic relationship
between size and inefficiency was essentially
unchanged. The efficiency advantage of farms in
the 20–50 ha group (in model 5) was still 46% over the
1000–2000 class. Thus, the exclusion of forest and
woodland does not appear to bias downward the
efficiency disadvantage of large farms. We want to be
cautious about generalising this result, given the
unique features of this region: the unusual dynamism
of agricultural growth in the region, driven principally
by large farms.
Fourth, we conducted two tests to explore the
impact on efficiency of transportation costs, location
and spatial correlation of the errors in our regression
models. First, we computed the correlation coefficient

247

between the 426 fixed effects in model (5) and an
estimate of transportation costs between each county
and Sa˜ o Paulo, the economic center of Brazil.3 The
correlation coefficient of only 0.11 indicates that the
fixed effects mainly capture other county level fixed
factors, such as soil quality and rainfall, which appear
to be much more important in explaining efficiency
than county level economic distance from Sa˜ o Paulo.
Second, the version of this paper presented in South
Africa in August, 2003, reported results for a model
that allowed for spatial correlation in the errors across
counties using a SUR framework. The results were
almost identical to model (5) reported here. We
conclude that the spatial nature of our data does not
appear to be biasing our results.
Finally, to determine whether the dummies for land
tenure types were sufficient to control for differences
between owners, renters, sharecroppers and occupants, we estimated our models separately for each of
the tenure types. Fig. 2 shows the relationship between
size and inefficiency implied by the coefficients of
model (5) for each of the four tenure types. Although
we did find some differences in the coefficients across
models, the U-shaped relationship between size and
inefficiency remained in every case.
Interestingly, Fig. 2 shows that the relative
inefficiency of large renters was less than that of
large owners. In fact, renters of farms greater than
5000 ha were actually more efficient than those in the
20–50 ha group. Unlike in many other parts of the
world where renters might be more like sharecroppers,
renters in the Brazilian Center-West were a relatively
homogeneous group of market oriented farmers.
Surprisingly, renters made greater use than owners
of those modern inputs, technologies and institutions
recorded by the Agricultural Census that were
associated with lower levels of inefficiency.4 It is
3

We would like to thank Newton de Castro, a professor at the
UFRJ in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and a Co-PI on the research project
NEMESIS for graciously providing us with this transportation cost
variable. Because of perfect multicollinearity between this countylevel variable and our fixed effects, we could not include it in our
models.
4
Not only did renters sell a larger share of their value of output
to the market than owners in each size category, they also specialised much more heavily in temporary crops (rather than cattle) and
were more likely to use credit, technical assistance, machines,
fertilisers and soil conservation measures.

248

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

Fig. 2. Conditional effect of farm size on inefficiency by tenure type (normalized as a fraction of the 20–50 ha group).

likely that large renters also made greater use of
unobserved factors, which could explain the relative
efficiency advantage of this group.
In general, the inverse relationship between size
and efficiency weakened as we moved from tenure
types associated with lower technologies (occupants)
to those associated with greater market orientation and
greater use of modern technologies, inputs and
institutions (renters). Thus, while our pooled regression results accurately represented the situation of
owners, which accounted for 88% of the establishments in this region, there were important differences
across tenure types in the size-inefficiency relationship. These differences merit further study.

5. Conclusions
In this paper we used Data Envelopment Analysis
(DEA) to estimate the technical efficiency of farms in
the Center-West of Brazil, and then studied the
determinants of efficiency with regression techniques.
Future research should explore the robustness of the

results presented here by comparing them with
estimates from a stochastic frontier production function.
There are important policy implications that can be
derived from the analysis in this paper. The results
indicate that access to institutions and goods that are
often provided by the public sector, such as market
access via infrastructure creation and rural electrification, were among the most important determinants of
differences in efficiency. Other important determinants included the use of inputs such as irrigation and
fertilisers, and differences in the composition of
output. These results identify the types of policies and
production practices that could contribute to increased
technical efficiency in this region.
We also showed the relationship between farm size
and technical efficiency to be more complex than what
is normally believed. Rather than an inverse relationship, where productivity falls as farm size rises, we
found a U-shaped relationship. For farms up to about
1000–2000 ha, efficiency did fall as farm size rose, but
beyond this size it started to rise again. The most
important reasons why the inverse relationship broke
down relate to preferential access by large farms to

S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Agricultural Economics 31 (2004) 241–249

institutions and services that help lower inefficiency
(such as rural electricity, technical assistance and access
to markets) as well more intensive use of the
technologies and inputs that raise productivity. The
access of large farmers to such efficiency-improving
inputs and institutions may partially explain the
dramatic TFP growth in this region relative to the rest
of Brazil. However, if one could create an environment
in which small to medium size farms had equal access to
productivity enhancing institutions, and improved
access to modern technologies and inputs, then these
farm could still produce more efficiently than farms in
the 2000–20,000 ha range. Thus, even in the CenterWest of Brazil, a region characterised by extremely
large farms and relatively high levels of technology,
land reform continues to provide the possibility of
simultaneously improving equity and efficiency. Its
success, however, is strongly conditioned by the
complementary institutions, investments and services
that permit small and medium size farms to compete on
a level playing field.
Finally, we found important differences in the size–
efficiency relationship across land tenure types. While
all types exhibited a U-shaped relationship, the U-shape
was most pronounced for renters, which was the most
market oriented type and which made the greatest use of
the institutions and modern inputs associated with
higher levels of efficiency. The U-shape attenuated,
more closely approximating a monotonic inverse
relationship, as we moved to the land tenure type
(occupants) associated with lower market orientation
and lower technology. These results lend further
support to the view that differential access to
institutions, and use of technologies and inputs, can
significantly alter the usual findings of an inverse
relationship between farm size and productivity.

Acknowledgements
This paper was written as part of a larger project on
spatial economics called NEMESIS (www.nemesis.
org.br). The project is based at IPEA in Rio de Janeiro

249

and has been supported by a grant from the Brazilian
government under a program called PRONEX. We
would like to thank Gerva´ sio Castro de Rezende,
Eusta´ quio Reis, Keith Griffin, and Tim Coelli for
valuable comments on an earlier draft.

References
Barrett, C.B., 1996. On price risk and the inverse farm
size–productivity relationship. J. Dev. Econ. 51 (2), 193–
216.
Berry, R.A., Cline, W., 1979. Agrarian Structure and Productivity in
Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 248.
Coelli, T., Rao, D.S.P., Battese, G.E., 1998. An Introduction to
Efficiency and Productivity Analysis. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, 275.
Fa¨ re, R., Grosskopf, S., Lovell, C.A.K., 1994. Production Frontiers.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 296.
Gasques, J.G., Conceic¸a˜ o, J.C.P., 2001. Transformac¸o˜ es Estruturais da Agricultura e Produtividade Total Dos Fatores. In:
Gasques, J.G., Conceic¸a˜ o, J.C.P. (Eds.), Transformac¸o˜ es
da Agricultura e Polı´ticas Pu´ blicas. IPEA, Brasilia, pp.
17–92.
Guanziroli, C., Romeiro, A., Buainain, A.M., Di Sabbato, A.,
Bittencourt, G., 2001. Agricultura Familiar e Reforma Agra´ ria
no Se´ culo XXI. Editora Garamond Ltda, Rio de Janeiro,
284.
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografı´a e Estatistica IBGE, 1998. Censo
Agropecua´ rio 1995–1996. IBGE, Rio de Janeiro.
Kmenta, J., 1971. Elements of Econometrics. Macmillan Publishing
Co., New York, 655.
Kumbhakar, S.C., Lovell, C.A.K., 2000. Stochastic Frontier Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 333.
Rezende, G.C., 2003. Ocupac¸a˜ o Agrı´cola, Estrutura Agra´ ria e
Mercado de Trabalho Rural no Cerrado: O Papel do Prec¸o da
Terra, dos Recursos Naturais e das Polı´ticas Pu´ blicas. In:
Helfand, S.M., Rezende, G.C. (Eds.), Regia˜ o e Espac¸o no
Desenvolvimento Agrı´cola Brasileiro. IPEA, Brasilia, pp.
173–212.
Vicente, J.R., Anefalos, L.C., Caser, D.V., 2001. Produtividade
Agrı´cola no Brasil, 1970–1995. Agricultura em Sa˜ o Paulo SP
39 (2), 1–23.
Vicente, J.R., Anefalos, L.C., Caser, D.V., 2003. Influeˆ ncia de
Capital Humano, Insumos Modernos e Recursos Naturais na
Produtividade Agrı´cola. In: Helfand, S.M., Rezende, G.C.
(Eds.), Regia˜ o e Espac¸o no Desenvolvimento Agrı´cola Brasileiro. IPEA, Brasilia, pp. 265–296.

