AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 197-200
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Introduction to the special issue on spatial
analysis for agricultural economists
Gerald C. Nelson*
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 305 Mumford Hall, 1301 W Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Abstract

The goal of this special issue is to introduce agricultural economists to new analytical approaches involving spatial data.
This paper provides a brief history of the special issue and an introduction to von Thiinen' s model of the determinants of land
use and rent that underlies all spatial analysis.
© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Spatial analysis

The goal of this special issue is to introduce agricultural economists to new analytical approaches involving spatial data (data that include the co-ordinates on
the surface of the earth, sometimes referred to as georeferenced). The genesis of this issue was two learning
workshops-at the International Association of Agricultural Economics Meetings, Berlin, August 2000
and the American Agricultural Economics Association Meetings, Chicago, August 2001. The format of
the workshops was a morning session with overview
papers and a series of afternoon hands-on sessions,
where participants were able to experiment with software and data, working through a problem involving
spatial data and techniques. The four papers following this introduction (Nelson and Geoghegan, 2002;
Bell and Irwin, 2002; Bullock et al., 2002; Anselin,
2002) are based on the overview sessions. The remaining papers were selected from the submissions
in response to a call for papers to complement the
overviews.

* Tel.: +1-217-333-6465; fax: +1-217-333-5538.
E-mail address: g-nelson@staff.uiuc.edu (G.C. Nelson).

The remainder of this article introduces the key
concepts in spatial analysis-that location matters
and that near things matter more than far things.
For geographers, the importance of the related concepts of the centrality of location and the influence
of neighbours parallels the centrality of constrained
(by resource or budget) utility maximisation concepts
for economists. Interestingly, the geographers' equivalent of Adam Smith, Johann Heinrich von Thtinen, 1
used agricultural markets to illustrate the importance
of location and the resulting transport costs to a
central market in determining production (land use
choices) at various locations and the resulting land
1 Johann Heinrich von Thiinen was a "North German landowner
from the Mecklenberg area. Although educated at Gi:ittingen, he
spent most of his life managing his rural estate, Tellow. In the
first volume of his treatise, The Isolated State (1826), he laid
down the first serious treatment of spatial economics, connecting
with the theory of rent. His second volume (1850) developed
the essence of the marginal productivity theory of distribution in
a mathematically precise way .... Nearing his death, he asked
that his famous equation for the marginal product of labour, or
natural wage (w = -J7iji), be carved into his tombstone." From
http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/profiles/thunen.htm, accessed on 14
August 2002.

0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: SO 169-5150(02)00081-6

G. C. Nelson! Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 197-200

198

Farm price of vegetables

Farm price of wheat
/

,/

Jl.//

Land use:
vegetables
Land use:
wheat

Fig. 1. The von Thiinen model of farm price, land use and land
rent.

rent. 2 The von Thiinen concepts that underlie all
spatial analysis are introduced next.
The basic von Thiinen model is captured in Fig. 1. In
a featureless plain, surrounding a central market, two
crops can be grown-wheat and vegetables. All locations have identical production characteristics, including profit-maximising operators, but transport costs
to the central market, with exogenously determined
prices, differ by crop. The price of vegetables in the
central market (a) is higher than the price of wheat
(b) but vegetables are more expensive to transport.
Hence, the farm vegetable price falls more quickly
than the farm wheat price as distance from the market
increases. 3 Beyond point 'c', the farm price of wheat
is higher than vegetables. The result is a series of concentric rings of land use around the central market, indicated in the bottom part of the graph. In the shaded
2 As is so often the case, Paul Samuelson has penetrating insights about the economic theory underlying von Thiinen's work
(Samuelson, 1983).
3 Note that while output prices fall with distance from the central
market, input prices increase. In this simple version of the von
Thiinen model, no purchased inputs are used.

area, vegetables are grown; in the next ring wheat. Beyond 'd', neither crop is profitable and land is left in
its natural state. Even though the productive characteristics of the farms are identical, the effect of transport cost is declining land rents with distance from the
central market.
Once differences in land productivity, prices, transport costs and multiple markets are introduced, the
analysis becomes more complex but the basic insights
of the importance of location and transport cost in determining land use remain. Identifying and explaining those land uses quantitatively provides conceptual,
data, and modelling challenges.
The four overview papers start from the basic insights of von Thiinen. The first three papers provide
reviews of the concepts, literature, data and examples
of analysis in three topic areas-land use in developing countries, the rural-urban interface, and precision
agriculture. The final overview paper introduces the
econometric issues that arise when location information is available. The first overview paper (Nelson and
Geoghegan, 2002) reviews the theory and practice of
modelling land use in developing countries where official data sources seldom include georeferenced values.
The use of remotely sensed data provides an especially
important alternative. The motivating issue for the research in this area can be summarised in the phrase "do
roads cause deforestation?" More generally, how does
infrastructure development and policy changes that alter transport costs or prices at the central market alter
the relative profitability of different land use choices?
Does it become profitable to convert forested land to
some other land use? Papers in this issue by Mertens
et al. (2002), Muller and Zeller (2002), Munroe et al.
(2002), Swinton (2002), and Vance and Geoghegan
(2002) explore land use issues in several developing
countries and with a variety of innovative techniques.
The second overview paper, by Bell and Irwin
(2002), looks at the issues confronting planners, real
estate developers and environmentalists at the changing rural-urban interface. As suburbs expand and
single family home lot sizes grow, pressure follows
to convert agricultural land to residential real estate
or open space such as parks and forest preserves.
These issues have received the most attention in developed countries where data sources are relatively
more abundant and this paper emphasises analytical
techniques in data-rich environments. It should be

G. C. Nelson/ Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 197-200

noted, however, that the most rapid growth of urban
areas is taking place in the developing world and
the analytical techniques presented are applicable to
those economies as well.
In all spatial analysis research, a key issue is the relevant unit of analysis. Should it be US counties, I km
square grids from weather satellites, or 30m cells
from moderate resolution satellites or aerial photos?
Ideally the scale should be closely associated with the
area over which an individual decision-maker has control and information. Bullock et al. (2002) examine
precision agriculture technologies and their relatively
slow acceptance by farmers. This set of technologies
(including yield monitors and precision input application) makes it possible to collect data on some
important production attributes within a field. They
demonstrate that complementary information can be
essential to ensuring the profitability of a new technology. The paper by Florax et al. (2002) demonstrates
that these concepts are relevant even for Sahelian
farmers.
The final paper in the overview section (Anselin,
2002) introduces the reader to the additional complexities in econometric analysis that arise when spatial
relationships exist. In a 'traditional' analysis involving spatial data (for example, estimating a production
function based on input and output data) the location
of the observations is assumed to be irrelevant. However, if there is some kind of spatial relationship, either among the dependent variables (a forest at one
location causes neighbouring locations to have forests
as well) or in the error structure (caused perhaps by
similar soil types in neighbouring locations), parameter estimates can be inefficient and/or biased. Anselin
reviews the conceptual issues that arise with spatial
data and analysis, providing insights from the traditional spatial econometrics literature as well as from
geostatistics, biostatistics and medical image analysis. Of particular importance to land use analysis is
his discussion of latent variable estimation with spatial data. Since land use is the result of an unobservable decision process (choosing a land use that has the
highest expected profit), qualitative choice estimation
techniques are used. Anselin reviews the additional
complications this causes and suggests techniques to
correct for it.
The papers in this issue demonstrate the application
of many different kinds of analytical techniques (logit,

199

probit, hazard analysis, Bayesian analysis, combining
remotely sensed and household survey data, simulation), to spatial economic problems in many areas of
the world (The Amazon, Australia, Bangladesh, Honduras, Kenya, Mexico, Peru, The Sahel, Vietnam). The
reader will find interesting new approaches to many
important issues addressed in agricultural and regional
economics.

Acknowledgements

I would like to acknowledge a great debt to all
the reviewers for the papers considered for this special issue. I would also like to thank the organisers
of the Berlin 2000 Meetings of the IAAE and the
Chicago 2001 Meetings of the AAEA, and the editor
of Agricultural Economics for making possible the
development of these papers and the opportunity to
make them available in a single publication. This material is based upon research supported in part by the
Cooperative State Research, Education and Extension Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, under
Project No. ILLU 05-0361. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
publication are those of the author, who is solely responsible for the analysis and conclusions presented
here.

References
Anselin, L., 2002. Under the hood: issues in the specification and
interpretation of spatial regression models. Agric. Econ. 27.
Bell, K., Irwin, E.G., 2002. Spatially explicit micro-level modeling
of land-use change at the rural-urban interface. Agric. Econ.
27.
Bullock, D.S., Lowenberg-DeBoer, J., Swinton, S., 2002. Adding
value to spatially managed inputs by understanding site-specific
yield response. Agric. Econ. 27.
Florax, R., Voortman, R., Brouwer, J., 2002. Spatial dimensions of
precision agriculture: a spatial econometric analysis of millet
yield on Sabelian coversands. Agric. Econ. 27.
Mertens, B., Poccard-Chapuis, R., Piketty, M.G., Lacques, A.E.,
Venturieri, A., 2002. Crossing spatial analyses and livestock
economics to understand deforestation processes in the Brazilian
Amazon: the case of Sao Felix do Xingu in South Pant Agric.
Econ. 27.
Miiller, D., Zeller, M., 2002. Land use dynamics in the central
highlands of Vietnam: a spatial model combining village survey
data with satellite imagery interpretation. Agric. Econ. 27.

200

G.C. Nelson/Agricultural Economics 27 (2002) 197-200

Munroe, D.K., Southworth, J., Tucker, C.M., 2002. The dynamics
of land-cover change in western Honduras: exploring spatial
and temporal complexity. Agric. Econ. 27.
Nelson, G.C., Geoghegan, J., 2002. Modeling deforestation and
land use change: sparse data environments. Agric. Econ. 27.
Samuelson, P.A., 1983. Thunen at two hundred. J. Econ. Lit. 21,
1468-1488.

Swinton, S., 2002. Capturing household-level spatial influence
in agricultural management using random effects regression.
Agric. Econ. 27.
Vance, C., Geoghegan, J., 2002. Temporal and spatial modeling of
tropical deforestation: a survival analysis linking satellite and
household survey data. Agric. Econ. 27.

