Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
SCIENCE @DIRECTO

AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Access to credit, plot size and cost inefficiency among
smallholder tobacco cultivators in Malawi
Gautam Hazarika a,*, Jeffrey AI wang b, 1
a

Department of Business Administration, The University of Texas at Brownsville, 80 Fort Brown, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA
b Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA

Received 8 May 2001; received in revised form 14 August 2002; accepted 15 August 2002

Abstract
Using data from the Malawi Financial Markets and Household Food Security Survey, this paper examines the effect of access
to credit from formal sources, and tobacco plot size, on cost inefficiency among Malawian smallholder tobacco cultivators.
Farm-specific cost inefficiency is estimated within the framework of stochastic frontier analysis. Access to credit is measured
as the sum of household members' self-reported credit limits at credit organisations, arguably a truer measure of an exogenous
credit constraint than credit program participation or actual loan uptake. It is found that tobacco cultivation is significantly
less cost inefficient per acre on larger plots. While access to credit by itself has no statistically discernible effect on cost
inefficiency, it reduces the gain in cost efficiency from a larger plot size.
© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: 0130; Q120
Keywords: Tobacco; Malawi; Plot size; Agricultural finance; Cost efficiency

1. Introduction
Improvement in the efficiency of agricultural production, including productivity growth, is an essential component of any rural growth strategy. In
sub-Saharan Africa, where price-based adjustment
policies have not led to broad-based economic growth,
gain in the efficiency of agricultural production is
viewed as necessary for economic growth and the
alleviation of rural poverty. Rural finance may contribute by facilitating the purchase of costly inputs and
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-956-544-8953;
fax: + 1-956-548-8736.
E-mail addresses: ghazarika@utb.edu (G. Hazarika),
alwangj@vt.edu (J. Alwang).
1 Tel.: +1-540-231-6517; fax: +1-540-231-7417.

the adoption of alternative crops. Besides, financial
services may be packaged to deliver technical expertise. Improved access to rural finance may, thus, be
associated with increased productivity and decreases
in cost inefficiencies.
Conditions in Malawi underscore the potential benefits of improved efficiency in agricultural production. Malawi is among the 10 poorest countries in
the world, with a GNP per capita estimated at US$
190 (World Bank, 2000) and social indicators that are
consistent with widespread poverty. The country is
predominantly rural: <25% of the population resides
in urban centres-and agriculture dominates the rural
economy. Malawian agriculture is characterised by extreme dualism: smallholders under traditional tenure
on the one hand, and either lease- or free-held estate farms on the other, constitute the major tenure

0169-5150/03/$ - see front matter© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
doi: 10.1016/50169-5150(03)00020-3

100

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

types. Estate farms were viewed through the 1970's
and 1980's as the engines of rural growth, and the
former Banda dictatorship used policies that favoured
the estates. These policies included exclusive marketing rights for high-value crops, other marketing policies that squeezed smallholders, and access to subsidised inputs and credit. While Malawian agricultural growth was fairly strong during the 1970's and
early 1980's, this growth was illusory since it did not
spread to the smallholder sector. Smallholders currently constitute around 70% of the Malawian population and about 90% of the country's poor. The median area under cultivation by smallholders is a mere
0.6 ha (World Bank, 1995). The high concentration
of poor in rural areas with small landholdings helps
justify the government's current focus on agricultural
intensification among smallholders as an engine of
poverty-reducing growth.
Recent policy reforms designed to benefit smallholders have focused on two crops: hybrid maize varieties and burley tobacco. Malawian smallholders devote some 70% of their land to maize, mostly local
varieties. Hybrid maize has not been widely adopted
for several reasons, including the fact that the preferred flinty hybrids only became available in the early
1990's, the high relative cost of fertiliser, and lack of
credit. The new policy reforms are expected to promote uptake of hybrid maize and, thus, release land
for production of more profitable and mostly export
crops. Burley tobacco is the most likely candidate to
replace maize acreage. Burley tobacco is currently
grown on some 150,000 ha of land and accounts for
at least 70% of Malawi's foreign exchange earnings
(about US$ (mUS$) 375 million, annually). The importance of this crop to the Malawian economy has
earned it the sobriquet 'green gold'.
Until recently, the Government of Malawi promoted
production of high-value cash crops like tobacco in the
estate sector. Prior to 1990, under the Special Crops
Act of 1972, smallholders were prohibited from marketing tobacco. Smallholders' share of tobacco quotas
has, however, increased since 1990. Smallholder marketing quotas were first offered in the post-reform
era to members of tobacco growers' clubs. An intermediate buyer program was introduced in 1993 that
allowed even non-members of tobacco clubs to sell
tobacco to registered traders. The number of smallholders producing tobacco has significantly increased

as a result of these policy changes (Zeller et al.,
1997).
The smallholder burley tobacco program reflects a
substantial change in the Malawian agricultural development strategy away from estate-led growth toward
a broad-based smallholder focus. Burley tobacco is
now seen as an engine that will provide resources to
cash-starved smallholders, will integrate them into the
cash economy, and allow flexibility and experimentation in the rural sector. The success of the program
depends upon the spread of burley tobacco production
to resource-poor farmers, the ability of smallholders
to efficiently produce high-quality tobacco products,
and complementaries between tobacco production and
other on-farm enterprises.
By examining the relationship between plot size
and cost inefficiency per acre in tobacco production,
this paper aims to discover whether the government's
promotion of smallholder tobacco cultivation has involved an equity-efficiency trade-off. A negative relation between cost inefficiency and tobacco plot size
would suggest that the policy of de-emphasising tobacco production in the estate sector while encouraging it in smallholdings has fostered equity at the
expense of efficiency.
This paper also examines the effect of smallholders'
access to credit upon their efficiency in tobacco production. It is well known that the capital requirements
of tobacco farming are substantial. For example, Zeller
et al. (1997) find that input expenditures per hectare
in Malawi are much greater for tobacco than for
maize or most other crops and that the cropping share
of tobacco in smallholdings is positively and significantly correlated with farmer access to credit. Hence,
improving access to credit may be a necessary step
toward achieving more widespread burley tobacco production. However, besides encouraging the spread of
tobacco production, improved credit access may raise
efficiency in tobacco farming by enabling farmers to
better purchase inputs in cost minimising proportions
and to avail of improvements in production technology. The relationship between credit availability and
economic efficiency in the Malawian smallholder
tobacco sector has not previously been thoroughly
investigated.
The paper's empirical strategy, utilising data from
the Malawi Financial Markets and Household Food
Security Survey, consists of two steps, though in

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

keeping with recent econometric advances, the paper
later attempts to combine the two steps into a single
step. First, farm-specific cost inefficiency per acre is
estimated within the framework of stochastic frontier
analysis (e.g. Parikh et al., 1995). Next, the estimated
cost inefficiency is related to farm and household
characteristics including tobacco plot size and access
to credit from formal sources. It is found that cost
inefficiency is negatively and significantly correlated
with tobacco acreage. Hence, the government's focus
on smallholder led growth may indeed have involved
an equity-efficiency trade-off. It is also found that
while access to credit by itself has no statistically significant effect on cost inefficiency, credit availability
has the counter-productive effect of reducing the gain
in cost efficiency from an increase in tobacco acreage.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents a discussion of the relation
between credit access and cost efficiency in agriculture. The section also discusses empirical issues in the
measurement of access to credit. Section 3 presents
the econometric model and discusses estimation. The
data are described in Section 4, as are the empirical
results. Section 5 presents a summary of the findings
and the paper's conclusion.

2. Credit programs and cost efficiency in
agriculture
Cost efficiency results from both technical efficiency and allocative efficiency. Technical efficiency
refers to a producer's ability to obtain the highest possible output from a quantity of inputs. Consider a unit
isoquant with capital and labour as the inputs. This
isoquant is the locus of the minimum capital-labour
combinations necessary to produce a unit of output.
Hence, production is technically efficient along it. The
producer of a unit of output using a capital-labour
combination that lies above this isoquant is, therefore,
technically inefficient.
Allocative efficiency refers to a producer's ability to
maximise profit given technical efficiency. A producer
may be technically efficient but allocatively inefficient.
For example, the producer in the preceding paragraph
may put forth a unit of output using a combination of
capital and labour that lies on the unit isoquant but that
is more expensive than a different combination of in-

101

puts on the isoquant. The cheapest input combination
would, of course, be the point of tangency between
an isocost line and the unit isoquant. Allocative efficiency also applies to the producer's ability to choose
the optimal level of output, or even the optimal output
mix.
Access to credit may raise allocative efficiency in
agriculture. For example, a farmer unable to obtain
market inputs in sufficient quantities may substitute
non-market inputs such as the labour of family members. However, given the opportunity cost of family
labour, the farmer's input combination may be more
costly than an alternative combination consisting of
more purchased inputs and less family labour. Credit
may allow the farmer to utilise market and non-market
inputs in a cost minimising combination. Credit may
also raise allocative efficiency by increasing a farmer's
ability to bear risk. For example, a farmer with access to credit may become willing to adopt riskier but
potentially more profitable technologies, or to plant a
more drought prone but higher value crop.
Credit access may also raise the farmer's level of
technical efficiency. For example, credit may enable a
farmer to adopt more capital-intensive methods of production, i.e. to purchase more machines, a market input. If the farmer purchased new machines embodying
improved technology, his level of technical efficiency
would rise. Further, to the extent that credit access is
correlated with the provision of technical assistance
(agricultural extension services) by credit organisations, farmers' technical efficiency will increase. Note
that it is not necessary for a farmer to actually borrow
to benefit from credit access. For example, the mere
option of borrowing may lead a farmer to avoid such
risk reducing but unprofitable strategies as precautionary saving and the production of hardier but lower
value crops. Hence, a farmer with the option to borrow
may become willing to put the proverbial roll of bills
in his mattress to a more productive use on the farm.
Access to credit has generally been measured in two
ways in the literature, namely, dichotomous membership in credit programs, and actual loan uptake. Both
these measures may be unsuitable for estimating the
true causal effect of credit access on economic outcomes (e.g. David and Meyer, 1980; Feder et al., 1990;
Zeller et al., 1996). First, since credit program participation and loan uptake are voluntary, the measures
are potentially endogenous with outcomes such as

102

G. Hazarika, J. Alwang!Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

productivity and income. A farmer who avails of loans
from a credit agency may be found to be more productive, but it may not be concluded that loans lead
to higher productivity since it is plausible that farmers
with more ambition and ability are likelier to seek out
loans. Such traits, being unobserved, are unlikely to
be controlled for in a regression relating agricultural
productivity to farmer loan uptake, with the result that
the regression's error term, consisting partially of unobserved farmer traits, will be correlated with loan uptake. Bias in the OLS estimate of the effect of farmer
loan uptake on agricultural productivity is, therefore,
likely.
Even if the potential endogeneity of actual loan uptake were dealt with, difficulties with this measure of
credit access would persist. For example, inherent in
it is the erroneous assumption that individuals with
no loan uptake are without access to credit. However,
this would only be true if they were denied loans.
More generally, actual loan uptake would be an accurate measure of credit access only if credit limits
were universally binding, i.e. if everyone's loan uptake
were equivalent to her credit limit. In reality, individuals often do not fully exercise their option to borrow.
Indeed, as discussed earlier, an individual who does
not at all exercise the option to borrow may yet benefit from that option, for example, by feeling secure
enough to adopt potentially more profitable but riskier
strategies.
Next, membership in a credit program often confers benefits unrelated to credit access such as literacy classes and business training. For example, members of the Malawi Rural Finance Company's (MRFC)
credit program are provided with agricultural extension services. These secondary benefits of credit program participation arguably confound the true causal
effect of access to credit. Finally, mere membership
in a credit program may not guarantee ready access
to credit. Indeed, many group-based credit programs
stipulate that only half of a group's members may receive credit at any time. Even credit programs disavowing this rule rarely provide their members with
certain access to credit.
Hence, Diagne ( 1998) and Diagne and Zeller (200 I)
argue that the credit limit, the maximum amount that
may be borrowed as self-reported by survey participants, is a better measure of credit access. The authors reason that unlike credit program participation

or actual loan uptake, which are related to demand for
credit, the credit limit, reflecting mainly supply-side
factors such as the availability of credit programs and
the financial resources of lenders, is a truer measure of
an exogenous credit constraint. Thus, this paper measures a tobacco producing household's access to credit
by the sum of the credit limits of its members at credit
organisations.
To be sure, this relatively novel measure of credit
access is not unambiguously exogenous (uncorrelated
with unobserved borrower characteristics). For example, Diagne (1998) accedes that the maximum amount
that lenders are willing to lend will mirror their assessment of the likelihood of default and other borrower
characteristics. Hence, an efficient tobacco farmer may
have a higher self-assessed credit limit than an inefficient one. The OLS estimated effect of credit access
on cost inefficiency might, thus, be biased downward.
On the other hand, since an objective of non-profit
agro-financial institutions in LDCs may be the reduction of economic inefficiency, more inefficient farmers may be rendered greater assistance. The OLS estimated effect of credit access on cost inefficiency
might, as a result, even be biased upward. Nevertheless, it is plausible that the credit limit measure of
access to credit is relatively more exogenous than actual loan uptake or dichotomous membership in credit
programs, which are deliberate acts on the part of borrowers and, therefore, almost certainly correlated with
their unobserved attributes.

3. The econometric model
Consider the stochastic cost function based on the
composed error model (e.g. Aigner et al., 1977);
n

InC

= a+ ,8 In Qi + L) i

In

Pu + £;

(1)

J=l

where C; represents household i' s cost per acre of tobacco production, Qi denotes the value in monetary
units of the household's tobacco output per acre,2 Pu
signifies the household-specific price of variable input
2 The existence of multiple tobacco types necessitates measurement of tobacco output per acre in monetary rather than physical
units.

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

i, and c; is a disturbance term consisting of two independent elements as follows:
c;

=

V;

+ U;

(2)

V;, assumed to be independently and identically distributed as N(O, cr~ ), represents random variation in
cost per acre due to extraneous factors such as the
weather and crop diseases. The term U; is taken to
represent cost inefficiency relative to the stochastic
cost frontier, a+ ,BIn Q; + LJ=l oj In Pij + V;. It is,
therefore, one-sided as opposed to being symmetrically distributed about the origin. In other words, U; =
0 if costs are, ceteris paribus, as low as can be, and
U; > 0 if cost efficiency is imperfect. U; is assumed
to be identically and independently distributed as truncations (at 0) of the normal distribution N(f.-L, cr~).
The stochastic cost function ( 1), may be estimated by
maximum-likelihood. Given the above distributional
assumptions,
E(U;/c;)

=

(1

erA
+
"A 2)

[

*]

¢(f.-L7)
l _ <P(~-L7) - 1-L;

(3)

where ¢ and <P denote, respectively, the standard normal p.d.f. and the standard normal c.d.f., A = cru / crv,

J

cr = CT~ + cr~, and f-L7 = (c;A/cr) + (f.-L/CTA). Replacing c; in the above expression by the regression
residual and the other parameters by their ML estimates yields an estimate, [h of farm-specific cost inefficiency (Jondrow et al., 1982).
Next, the equation,

(4)
is estimated by OLS, where A; denotes household i's
tobacco acreage, L; represents the household's access
to credit from formal sources measured as the sum of
its members' self reported credit limits, variables X;
consist of other farm and household characteristics,
and e; denotes the regression error. In order to examine whether the effect of tobacco plot size on cost inefficiency is influenced by credit access, the equation,

U; =

A;n1

+ A; L;n2 + L;n3 + X;n4 + e;

(5)

is also estimated. Statistical significance of the interaction between tobacco acreage and credit access, A;L;,
will yield the conclusion that access to credit influences the marginal effect of tobacco acreage on cost
inefficiency.

103

The above two-stage method, consisting of ML estimation of a stochastic cost frontier followed by OLS
estimation of an equation relating predicted cost inefficiency to the potential determinants of cost inefficiency, has lately been criticised. For one, a regression
model of predicted inefficiency effects in Stage 2 contradicts the assumption in Stage 1 of identically distributed inefficiency effects (Battese and Coelli, 1995).
Hence, the twin steps are alternatively combined into a
single step according the model by Battese and Coelli
(1995). It is continued to be assumed that V;, random
variation in cost per acre due to extraneous factors
such as the weather, is independently and identically
distributed as N(O, cr~). However, U;, the cost inefficiency component, is now assumed to be independently, but not identically, distributed as truncations
(at 0) of the normal distribution N(Z;B, cru). In other
words, the mean of the cost inefficiency effect is assumed to be a function of variables Z;, taken in the
empirical estimation, to be identical to the regressors
in (5). This specification permits the coefficients e to
be estimated together with the coefficients of the cost
frontier (1).

4. The data and empirical results
Data for the study are drawn from the Malawi Financial Markets and Household Food Security Survey
conducted jointly in 1995 by the International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and the Department
of Rural Development (DRP) of the Bunda College
of Agriculture of the University of Malawi. A total
of 404 rural households in 45 villages in five districts
of Malawi were surveyed. The yearlong survey (from
February to December) consisted of three rounds. The
empirical analyses are conducted upon data from the
second round of the survey, since only it contained
the requisite detailed tobacco production data. While
rarely in household surveys is labour input disaggregated by crop, these data permit the valuation of labour
expended in tobacco cultivation alone towards calculation of the cost per acre of tobacco production.
There are four main credit and savings programs currently operating in Malawi: the Malawi
Rural Finance Company (MRFC), Promotion of
Micro-Enterprises for Rural Women (PMERW), the
Malawi Mudzi Fund (MMF), and the Malawi Union

104

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

of Savings and Credit Co-operatives (MUSCCO).
The first three programs are based on the principles
of group lending, while MUSCCO is an individual membership based union organisation. MRFC
and MUSCCO provide seasonal agricultural credit,
mostly for tobacco and maize, though the former does
not serve households with less than half a hectare of
land. PMERW and MMF, operating in only a few
districts, specialise in credit for off-farm enterprises.
There are, in addition, numerous small credit programs run by NGOs and international government
organisations.
The above 404 rural households do not constitute a
random sample. Since it was necessary to include sufficient numbers of credit program participants in the
survey, the low participation rate in credit programs
in Malawi made random sampling impractical. Hence,
the surveyors resorted to stratified random sampling.
The 4700 rural households enumerated in the 45 villages covered by the Malawi village census were divided into three strata: a stratum consisting of current
participants in the above four credit programs, a stratum consisting of past participants (mostly in a failed
government credit program), and a stratum consisting
of households that had never participated in a credit
program. A random sample was chosen from each
stratum such that about half of the final sample of 404
households consisted of current credit program participants, with past participants and non-participants
making up approximately equal portions of the remainder. Thus, the survey over samples current credit
program participants. The empirical estimation incorporates sampling weights in an attempt to account for
this over sampling.
In each round of the Malawi Financial Markets and
Household Food Security Survey, respondents over 17
years old were queried about the maximum amount
they might conceivably have borrowed during the period of recall. A household's access to credit from formal sources may, thus, be calculated as the sum of the
credit limits of its members at credit organisations.
The cost per acre of tobacco production is measured
as the sum of the costs of seed, fertiliser, pesticide, and
labour input, and the costs of transporting inputs to the
farm and transporting the crop to market. The inputs
whose log prices are included in the specification of
the stochastic cost function (1), are: labour, seed, fertiliser, and pesticide. Farm and household characteris-

tics with plausible bearing upon cost inefficiency, the
variables Xi in (4) and (5), include the value of farm
assets, farm size, household size, the average age of
12-year-old or older family members, the proportion
of family members aged 12 and above able to read and
write Chichewa, the proportion able to read and write
English, and the proportions with the educational credentials: Primary School Leaving Certificate (Grade
8), Junior Certificate (Grade 10), and M.S.C.E. certificate (Grade 12). Relevant data were available for
70 tobacco cultivating households. However, it was
discovered that tobacco acreage erroneously exceeded
farm size in three of these households, no doubt, due
to coding error. The three households were dropped,
yielding a final sample of 67 households. Table 1
presents the (unweighted) sample means and standard
deviations of the variables.
Table 2 presents weighted maximum-likelihood3 estimates of the stochastic cost frontier. The cost per
acre of producing tobacco significantly increases in
the value of output per acre, in the hourly wage, in the
price per kilogram of tobacco seed, and in the price
per kilogram of fertiliser. Cost, however, appears to
decrease in the cost per kilogram of pesticide.
Table 3 presents weighted OLS estimates of (4) and
(5). It is assumed that tobacco acreage is an exogenous regressor, or that farmers first allocate land between tobacco and other crops and only subsequently
make their tobacco inputs application decisions. This
is a plausible assumption in the Malawian context.
The average cropping share of tobacco in Malawian
smallholdings is only about 2% (Diagne and Zeller,
2001). Diagne and Zeller (2001) argue that this
small cropping share is due to smallholders' desire
for self-sufficiency in maize, the Malawian dietary
staple. It is significant in this context that 90% of
Malawian smallholders in a study by Smale and Phiri
(1998) declared that the ability to produce maize for
self-consumption was their most important criterion
of well being. Diagne and Zeller (200 1) argue that
such self-sufficiency may be necessary in the face of
the malfunctioning of rural maize markets, caused by
a lack of marketable surplus of maize in smallholdings
and an inadequate transportation infrastructure. Thus,
3 The weighted log-likelihood function is simply the sum over
all i of w; log(p;), where w; is the sampling weight associated with
the ith tobacco farming household and p; is the ith log probability.

G. Hazarika, J. Alwang I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

105

Table 1
Sample means and standard deviations (unweighted)
Variable

Mean

Standard deviation

In( cost of producing tobacco per acre)
ln(value of tobacco production per acre)
ln(hourly wage)
ln(price of seed/kg)
ln(price of fertiliser/kg)
ln(price of pesticide/kg)
Household credit limit at formal credit institutions
Tobacco acreage
Household credit limit at formal credit institutions x tobacco acreage
Farm acreage
Value of farm assets
Household size
Average age of+ 12-year-old household members
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members literate in Chichewa
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members literate in English
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Primary School Leaving Certificate
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Junior Certificate
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with M.S.C.E. certificate

6.815
7.529
-0.770
7.158
0.678
4.769
278.508
1.612
738.209
4.809
740.731
6.328
30.453
0.282
0.161
0.147
0.030
0.014

0.927
1.278
0.946
0.499
0.184
1.407
540.351
1.314
2770.504
2.617
1232.080
2.338
8.762
0.319
0.225
0.209
0.100
0.059

67

N

Note: All monetary values are in current Malawi Kwacha (MK).

it is credible that smallholders' food security concerns
lead them to first allocate the bulk of their land to
maize, leaving but little for tobacco, and only then to
make their tobacco inputs application decisions.
It is found that cost inefficiency per acre significantly decreases in tobacco acreage. This suggests that
the government's policy of promoting tobacco cultivation in smallholdings as opposed to tobacco estates
has made production of this premier cash crop more
cost inefficient, even if it has promoted equity in the
rural economy. An inverse relation between cost inefficiency and tobacco plot size is consistent with Diagne

Table 2
Weighted ML estimates of the stochastic cost frontier
Variable
Constant
In( value of tobacco production per acre)
ln(hourly wage)
ln(price of seed/kg)
ln(price of fertiliser/kg)
1n(price of pesticide/kg)
log-likelihood
Note: Numbers in parentheses denote t-ratios.

Coefficient
0.434
0.409
0.483
0.353
1.297
-0.113
-43.514

(0.435)
(10.470)
(7.726)
(2.337)
(5.873)
( -1.859)

and Zeller's (2001) finding that Malawian smallholders, particularly those farming plots of a total size of
<0.25 ha (0.62 acres), are prone to applying excessive
quantities of inputs, particularly fertiliser. The authors
argue that farmers may be attempting to compensate
for the scarcity of land by the over-use of inputs, and
that this may be particularly true in tobacco farming
since the crop is allocated only about 2% of the average 0.7 ha (1.73 acres) of land cultivated by a smallholder. Thus, increase in tobacco acreage may reduce
this compensatory over-use of inputs, causing a decline in cost inefficiency per acre. This has the important implication that if the mean cropping share of
tobacco in smallholdings were, by a combination of
incentives, raised from its current low value of 2%,
average cost efficiency in smallholder tobacco production would rise. Since a likely reason for this low cropping share is smallholders' desire for self-sufficiency
in maize, with roots in the poor functioning of rural
maize markets, tobacco's cropping share in smallholdings might increase if the government improved the
functioning of rural maize markets, e.g. by upgrading
the rural transportation infrastructure.
The estimates in Table 3 also indicate that a tobacco
farming household's credit limit at credit organisations

106

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

Table 3
Determinants of cost inefficiency: weighted OLS estimates
Variable

Coefficients Eq. (4)

Coefficients Eq. (5)

Constant
Household credit limit at formal credit institutions
Tobacco acreage
Household credit limit at formal credit institutions x tobacco acreage
Value of farm assets
Farm acreage
Household size
Average age of + 12-year-old household members
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members literate in Chichewa
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members literate in English
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Primary School Leaving Certificate
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Junior Certificate
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with M.S.C.E. certificate

-0.560 ( -1.696)
0.0002 ( 1.025)
-0.283 ( -3.215)

-0.440 (-1.369)
-0.0002 (-0.962)
-0.400 ( -4.085)
0.0001 (2.369)
0.00002 (0.226)
0.078 (2.637)
0.093 (3.289)
0.030 (3.898)
-0.616 ( -2.550)
1.058 (3.151)
-0.208 (-0.555)
0.053 (0.058)
-1.148 ( -1.009)

R2

0.00004 (0.491)
0.074 (2.390)
0.089 (3.035)
0.029 (3.643)
-0.574 ( -2.288)
1.016 (2.911)
-0.073 ( -0.189)
-0.026 ( -0.027)
-1.190 ( -1.006)
0.608

0.645

Note: Numbers in parentheses denote t-ratios; dependent variable = estimated farm-specific cost inefficiency; weighted sample mean of
dependent variable = 0.646.

does not by itself significantly affect cost inefficiency.
However, the sign of the estimated coefficient of the
interaction between tobacco acreage and credit access,
together with the statistical significance of this variable, implies that the beneficial effect of a larger tobacco plot size on cost inefficiency is eroded by access
to credit. Credit in Malawi is often disbursed in the
form of agricultural inputs like fertiliser. The fertiliser
packages are standardised for only a small number of
plot sizes with the result that a farmer may be lent
an excessive quantity of fertiliser (Diagne and Zeller,
2001). To the extent that a household's credit limit is
correlated with its actual loan uptake, 4 this type of loan
disbursement may contribute to the above negative effect of the credit limit upon the gain in cost efficiency
from a larger tobacco plot size. In other words, the
compensatory over-use of inputs may reduce with increased tobacco acreage, but a simultaneous increase
in access to credit may contribute to persistence in
farmers' excessive input application per tobacco acre.
There are a number of other findings of interest. For
example, controlling for tobacco acreage, total farm
acreage and cost inefficiency in tobacco production are
positively related. Holding tobacco acreage constant,
larger farms naturally have more land under crops

other than tobacco, such as maize, the major Malawian
food crop. To the extent that these crops require large
applications of market inputs like fertiliser, 5 that farmers are resource strapped, and that market inputs are in
relatively short supply, the quantities per acre of such
inputs applied to tobacco may be inversely related to
acreage under other crops. Allocative inefficiency in
input application may result. For example, the reduced
use of market inputs in tobacco may be accompanied
by a compensatory over-application of non-market inputs such as household labour. Cost inefficiency per
acre may consequently rise. It is notable in this connection that the estimates in Table 3 are indicative of a
tendency toward the over-use of family labour on tobacco plots, in that cost inefficiency per acre increases
in the number of household members. Similarly, an increase in the average age of household members older
than 11, consistent with a rise in the number of members of working age, raises cost inefficiency per acre
in tobacco cultivation. There is indication that cost
inefficiency is inversely related to household human
capital measured as the proportion of household members older than 11 who are literate in Chichewa, the
local language. It is puzzling, however, that cost inefficiency significantly increases in the proportion literate

4 Sample correlation between the household credit limit and
actual loan uptake is 0.764.

5 Hybrid maize, for instance, requires large and timely fertiliser
applications.

G. Hazarika, J. Alwang I Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

in English. Perhaps non-farm earnings opportunities
increase in English literacy so that households with a
greater proportion of members literate in English are
less reliant upon farm incomes and, therefore, more
prone to inefficiency in tobacco cultivation.
Table 4 presents joint ML estimates of the stochastic cost frontier and the determinants of mean cost inefficiency, pertaining to the stochastic frontier model
by Battese and Coelli (1995). Unfortunately, sampling
weights could not be incorporated in the estimation
given the limitations of the Fortran program (Frontier
Version 4.1) developed by these authors. Hence, the
point estimates in Table 4 are often markedly different
from those in Tables 2 and 3 even if they are indicative of the same broad trends. The cost per acre of tobacco production significantly increases in the value
of tobacco output per acre, in the hourly wage rate,
in the price per kilogram of seed and in the price per
kilogram of fertiliser. As before, cost appears negatively related to the price per kilogram of pesticide
though the variable not statistically significant by these
unweighted estimates. Mean cost inefficiency appears

107

negatively and significantly related to tobacco plot
size, and, as before, there is indication that the gain in
cost efficiency from a larger plot size is reduced by access to credit, though credit access by itself has no statistically discernible effect on mean cost inefficiency.
In sum, the major findings in Table 3 are upheld.
The above findings may be contrasted with the results from two other studies relating efficiency in agricultural production, measured within the framework
of stochastic frontier analysis, to credit availability and
plot size. Parikh et al. (1995) examine the determinants
of cost inefficiency, including credit availability and
farm size, in Pakistani agriculture. Credit availability
is defined as actual loan uptake per farm acre. The
authors find that farmers with greater loan uptake are
less cost inefficient. However, since this measure of
credit access is potentially endogenous as discussed,
the above finding may not be relied upon. The authors
also find that cost inefficiency increases in farm size.
Note, though, that the authors aggregate across at least
four crops, namely, wheat, maize, sugarcane, and vegetables. This study, on the other hand, focuses upon a

Table 4
The stochastic cost frontier and determinants of mean cost inefficiency estimated jointly: unweighted ML estimates
Variable

Coefficient

Estimates of the stochastic cost frontier
Constant
ln(value of tobacco production Per acre)
ln(hourly wage)
ln(price of seed/kg)
ln(price of fertiliser/kg)
ln(price of pesticide/kg)

1.216
0.328
0.518
0.257
1.327
-0.032

Determinants of mean cost inefficiency
Constant
Household credit limit at formal credit institutions
Tobacco acreage
Household credit limit at formal credit institutions x tobacco acreage
Value of farm assets
Farm acreage
Household size
Average age of+ 12-year-old household members
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members literate in Chichewa
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members literate in English
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Primary School Leaving Certificate
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Junior Certificate
Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with M.S.C.E. certificate

0.610 (0.726)
0.00007 (0.194)
-0.722 ( -2.073)
0.0002 (1.684)
-0.00005 ( -0.286)
0.058 (0.972)
0.038 (0.708)
0.019 (1.220)
-0.346 ( -0.673)
0.752 (1.264)
-0.391 ( -0.563)
-0.227 ( -0.189)
-0.092 ( -0.037)

log-likelihood
Note: Numbers in parentheses denote !-ratios.

49.247

(1.636)
(6.058)
(5.137)
(2.342)
(3.581)
( -0.466)

108

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

single crop. Therefore, the finding that Malawian tobacco cultivation is less cost inefficient in larger plots
may not be directly compared with the above finding
that cost inefficiency in Pakistani agriculture increases
in holding size.
Ali and Flinn (1989) examine profit, not cost,
efficiency among basmati rice producers in the Punjab province of Pakistan. Still, there are similarities
between the notions of cost efficiency and profit
efficiency in that both arise from technical as well
as allocative efficiency. Farmers, in this study, were
asked if a lack of credit hampered their purchase of
fertiliser. Hence, a dichotomous indicator of credit
non-availability measures access to credit. Credit
non-availability was positively and significantly related to profit inefficiency. Since a farmer citing credit
non-availability is one who has attempted to borrow,
this measure of credit access is, like actual loan uptake, potentially endogenous. The authors also find
that profit inefficiency increases in farm size, though
not significantly so.

5. Conclusion
The promotion of tobacco cultivation is a key component of the Malawian strategy of smallholder-led
growth. Given the substantial capital requirements of
tobacco farming, improving farmers' access to credit
may be necessary toward achieving more widespread
burley tobacco production. Indeed, there is evidence
of positive correlation between access to credit and
the cropping share of tobacco in smallholdings (Zeller
et al., 1997). However, this paper finds no evidence of
a positive relation between access to credit from formal sources and efficiency in tobacco farming. Thus,
improving farmers' access to credit in Malawi will
likely promote tobacco cultivation only along the extensive margin.
Unlike most analyses of the effects of credit, this
paper measures household access to credit from formal sources as the sum of members' self-reported
credit limits at credit organisations. It has previously
been argued that the credit limit is a truer measure
of an exogenous credit constraint since it reflects
mostly supply-side factors such as the availability of
credit programs and the financial resources of lenders
(Diagne, 1998; Diagne and Zeller, 2001).

The paper also finds that tobacco cultivation is less
cost inefficient on larger plots. This may be taken
as indicative of an equity-efficiency trade-off in the
Malawian tobacco sector. The finding suggests that
the Government of Malawi's policy of encouraging tobacco production by smallholders as opposed to supporting the erstwhile monopoly of the tobacco estates,
has led to declining cost efficiency in the production of
this premier cash crop, even if it has promoted equity
in the rural economy. It also suggests that increasing
the cropping share of tobacco in smallholdings from
its current low levels will tend to raise the economic
efficiency of tobacco production.
The paper also uncovers evidence that access to
credit retards the gain in cost efficiency from an increase in tobacco acreage. This suggests that the methods of credit disbursement in rural Malawi are faulty.
Indeed, faulty credit disbursement mechanisms may
partially explain why access to credit by itself, despite
its potential benefits, has no statistically discernible
effect on cost inefficiency.
Our findings have two broad policy implications.
As argued, an increase in the cropping share of tobacco in smallholdings may reduce cost inefficiency
in the production of this crop. Therefore, policies that
rid farmers of their tendency to allocate the bulk of
their landholdings to maize may raise efficiency in tobacco production. Such policies may include efforts to
improve the functioning of rural maize markets so as
to reduce the need for self-sufficiency in maize. Next,
credit disbursement mechanisms in Malawi may require a degree of reform. It ought to be ensured that
farmers are not lent excessive quantities of costly inputs. Tobacco is an extremely important cash crop to
the Malawian economy and it is advisable that the
Government of Malawi vigorously pursue policies to
raise economic efficiency in its production.

Uncited references
Diagne et al. (1995), CIMMYT (1998).

Acknowledgements
Helpful comments from Winford Masanjala are
gratefully acknowledged.

G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Economics 29 (2003) 99-109

References
Aigner, D., Knox Lovell, C.A., Schmidt, P., 1977. Formulation and
estimation of stochastic frontier production function models. J.
Econometrics 6, 21-37.
Ali, M., Flinn, J.C., 1989. Profit efficiency among basmati rice
producers in Pakistan Punjab. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 71, 303310.
Battese, G.E., Coelli, T.J., 1995. A model for technical inefficiency
effects in a stochastic frontier production function for panel
data. Empirical Econ. 20, 325-332.
CIMMYT Economics Working Paper 1998-2001, Centro
Internacional de Mejormiento de Maiz y Trigo (CIMMYT),
Mexico city.
David, C., Meyer, W., 1980. Measuring the farm level impact of
agricultural loans in low income countries: a review article.
In: Howell, J. (Ed.), Borrowers and Lenders: Rural Financial
Markets and Institutions in Developing Countries. Overseas
Development Institute, London.
Diagne, A., 1998. Impact of Access to Credit on Income and
Food Security in Malawi. IFPRI FCND Discussion Paper
No. 46, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
Washington, DC.
Diagne, A., Zeller, M., 2001. Access to Credit and its
Impact on Welfare in Malawi. IFPRI Research Report No.
116, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
Washington, DC.
Diagne, A., Zeller, M., Mataya, C., 1995. Rural Financial Markets
and Household Food Security: Impacts of Access to Credit
on the Socio-Economic Situation of Rural Households in
Malawi. Interim Report Submitted to the Ministry of Women,

109

Children Affairs, Community Services and Social Welfare
(MOWCACSSW) and Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische
Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) in Malawi.
Feder, G., Lau, L.J., Lin, J.Y., Luo, X., 1990. The relationship
between credit and productivity in Chinese agriculture: a
microeconomic model of disequilibrium. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
72, 1151-1157.
Jondrow, J., Knox Lovell, C.A., Materov, I.S., Schmidt, P., 1982.
On the estimation of technical efficiency in the stochastic
frontier production function. J. Econometrics 19, 233-238.
Parikh, A., Ali, F., Shah, M.K., 1995. Measurement of economic
efficiency in Pakistani agriculture. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77,
675-685.
Smale, M., Phiri, A., 1998. Institutional Change and Discontinuities
in Farmers' Use of Hybrid Maize in Malawi: Findings From
the 1996-1997 CIMMYT/MoALD.
Zeller, M., Ahmed, A., Babu, S., Broca, S., Diagne, A., Sharma,
M., 1996. Rural Financial Policies for Food Security of the
Poor: Methodologies for a Multi-Country Research Project.
IFPRI FCND Discussion Paper No. 11, International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC.
Zeller, M., Diagne, A., Mataya, C., 1997. Market Access by
Smallholder Farmers in Malawi: Implications for Technology
Adoption, Agricultural Productivity, and Crop Income. IFPRI
FCND Discussion Paper No. 35, International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC.
World Bank, 1995. Malawi's Human Resources and Poverty:
Profiles and Priorities for Action. Southern Africa Department,
The World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank, 2000. World Development Report. The World Bank,
Washington, DC.

