AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Attribution and other problems in assessing the
returns to agricultural R&D
Julian M. Alston a,*, Philip G. Pardey b
a

Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
b International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC 20006, USA

Abstract
Estimated rates of return to research are distorted by problems of attributing the credit for particular research results, or for
particular research-induced productivity increases, among research expenditures undertaken at different times, in different
places, and by different agencies. A comprehensive assessment of the evidence from past economic evaluations of the returns
to agricultural R&D indicates that studies generally report high rates of return, with enormous variation among studies, but
that much of this evidence has been tainted by inadequate attention to attribution problems. This paper raises these concerns
in a general way and illustrates their importance with reference to two particular types of attribution problem. First, we
consider the problem of accounting for locational spillovers in attributing varietal-improvement technology among research
performers, using US wheat varieties as an example. Second, we consider the temporal aspects of the attribution problem
using the specification of research lags in econometric models to illustrate the problem of attributing aggregate productivity
gains to research expenditures made at different times. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Rates of return; Attribution; Agricultural R&D; Research spillovers

1. Introduction
It is widely believed that public-sector agricultural
R&D has paid handsome dividends for society as a
whole; contrary views are the exception, e.g. Pasour
and Johnson (1982), and Kealey (1996). But even
those who believe that agricultural R&D is (or has
been) a good investment for society may be sceptical about some of the very high reported estimates of
rates of return to research. An interest in the outcome
might lead to biased estimates in some cases - rate
of return estimates are often intended to be used to
justify past investments and shore up support for future investments, and both implausibly high and unfavourable results are less likely to be acceptable for

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: julian@primal.ucdavis.edu (J.M. Alston).

this purpose. Rates of return are also likely to involve
errors even when the analyst is disinterested because
it is inherently difficult to identify which research investment was responsible for a particular productivity
improvement (or, conversely, which parts of the productivity benefits are attributable to a particular research investment).
Consider an ex post analysis of the contribution of
agricultural R&D by the California Agricultural Experiment Station (CAES) to current productivity in
California. For such an analysis we want to be able to
meaningfully measure productivity growth and then
attribute it among those investments by the CAES,
other public R&D investments by the California state
government and by other states and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), international R&D, and
private R&D investments. Moreover, we have to attribute the productivity growth not just between the

0169-5150/01/$- see front matter© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: SO 169-5150(0 1 )00072-X

142

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

CAES research and the other elements at a point in
time, but among these elements over time, including
the distant as well as the recent past. We want to be
able to say which research, conducted (or paid for) by
whom, and, in particular, when, was responsible for a
particular productivity improvement.
This attribution problem is difficult; it relates
to the appropriability problem that underpins the
in-principle argument for government involvement in
research. Spillover effects of research, where research
conducted by one firm (or state or country) yields
benefits for free-riders, account for private-sector
under-investment and the possibility of high social
rates of return. If it were easy to attribute benefits
to particular investments, it should be possible to
devise institutions to make the benefits appropriable.
Thus, the characteristics of research that give rise to
the potential for high rates of return also give rise to
measurement problems.
Griliches (1979) laid out an agenda for work on
understanding the link between R&D and productivity change, which he reiterated in Griliches (2001).
Taking inspiration from these and other contributions
from Griliches, in this article we reassess the evidence
on rates of return to agricultural research with an emphasis on the nature of the attribution problem and the
likely implications of conventional evaluation methods. We suggest that the effects of attribution problems
have not been neutral; on the whole, rate of return estimates are likely to have been biased up.

2. Overview of the literature
The literature on returns to agricultural research
itself has been the subject of several studies. For
instance, partial periodic tabulations and narrative
reviews can be found in Evenson et al. (1979),
Echeverria (1990), Alston and Pardey (1996), and
Fuglie et al. (1996). Alston et al. (2000a,b) provide
a comprehensive compilation, synthesis, and quantitative meta-analysis of rate of return estimates that
reveals interesting and useful patterns. A total of 292
benefit-cost studies of agricultural R&D (including
extension) were compiled, and these studies provide
1886 separate estimates of rates of return to agricultural R&D that range from small negative numbers
to more than 700,000% per annum. This large range

reflects variation within groups (such as applied versus basic research, or research on natural resources
versus commodities) more than among groups, and
such large within-group variation makes it difficult
to discern differences among groups. The estimated
annual rates of return averaged 99.6% for research
only, 47.6% for research and extension combined, and
84.6% for extension only. Moreover, the distributions
are generally positively skewed, with a significant
number of exceptionally high rates of return. Table 1
shows the ranges of rates of return and the mean,
standard deviation, mode, and median rates of return
for a sub-sample of the data, according to the nature
and commodity orientation of the research and the
geographic location of the research performer. The
preponderance of studies reported the returns to all
research (mainly returns to aggregate investments in
agricultural R&D), while just over half the observations pertained to field crops research and research
performed in developed countries.
The estimates in Table 1 predominantly refer to real
(i.e. inflation adjusted), marginal (i.e. for incremental
research expenditures), ex post (i.e. for past investments), internal rates of return (IRRs). The implication
when reporting an IRR is that the benefits from the research are being evaluated as though they can be reinvested, along with the original investment, at the same
rate of return. Since the benefits often accrue to farmers and consumers who typically do not have opportunities to invest at such high rates, it is worth dwelling
briefly on what is implied by high IRRs. If the investment of US$ 1.21 billion (bUS$) in 1980 in US public
agricultural R&D had earned an IRR of 48% per annum, the mean for the studies of US agriculture in
aggregate, the accumulated stream of benefits would
have been worth 3000 bUS$ (1980 dollars) by the year
2000, 4.5 months worth of total US GDP, and more
than 20 years worth of US agricultural GDP. This is
the implied benefit from the investment in 1980 alone.
Such calculations might give rise to doubts about
whether the estimated rates of return really represent
IRRs, or for that matter the true returns to research.
Of course, even though there is a unique true rate of
return to any particular set of past investments, there
is no such thing as the rate of return to agricultural
research. In a typical agricultural research portfolio,
some (perhaps most) investments yield no benefits
whatsoever, while others yield very high returns,

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

143

Table 1
Rates of return to agricultural R&D"
Number of
estimates (count)

Rates of return (% per year)
Mean

Standard deviation

Mode

Median

Minimum

Maximum

Nature of research
Basic
Applied
All research
Research & extension

30
192
904
643

79.2
163.5
88.4
46.8

88.7
557.0
148.6
43.4

75.0
38.0
46.0
28.0

61.3
46.0
49.0
36.0

-1.3
6.0
-7.4
-100

457
5645
1720
430

Commodity orientation
Multicommodity
Field crops
Livestock
Tree crops
Natural resources

436
916
233
108
78

80.3
74.3
120.7
87.6
37.6

110.7
139.4
481.1
216.4
65.0

58.0
40.0
14.0
20.0
7.0

47.1
43.6
53.0
33.3
16.5

-1.0
-100.0
2.5
1.4
0.0

1219
1720
5645
1736
457

Geographic location
Developed countries
Developing countries
Multiregional
IARC

990
683
74
62

98.2
60.1
58.8
77.8

278.1
84.1
98.3
188.6

19.0
46.0
32.0
26.0

46.0
43.0
34.0
40.0

-14.9
-100.0
-47.5
9.9

5645
1490
677
1490

1772

81.2

216.1

46.0

44.0

-100.0

5645

All studies

a Source: Adapted from Alston et a!. (2000a; Tables 15 and 17). Sample excludes two extreme outliers and includes only returns to
research and combined research and extension, so that the overall sample size is 1772.

sufficient to make the portfolio as a whole profitable.
Even though very high rates of return are not implausible in every context, they are much less plausible
for the more aggregated investments represented by
extensive portfolios.

3. Measurement issues and problems
Problems with data, measurement error or misconceptions can result in an estimated rate of return that
is higher or lower than the true value. One important
problem is to define the relevant counterfactual alternative. In particular, to define what the world might
be like in the absence of the particular research investment being evaluated, we have to take account of
other things that might also be caused to change. Holding the right things constant is necessary to derive a
stream of benefits that properly matches the stream of
expenditures being evaluated.
Alston and Pardey (1996, Chapter 6) suggest that
the estimated rates of return to R&D in the literature
have tended to be over-optimistic, relative to the corresponding true values, because the commonly used

procedures understate the costs, overstate the benefits,
and often predetermine the research lag structure (that
relates changes in productivity to past investments in
research) in ways that lead to higher estimated rates
of return. Some other common practices might lead
to understatement of benefits, so that a particular estimated rate of return may be too high or too low.
In particular, the conventional estimates may exclude
benefits from 'maintenance' research, benefits from
disease prevention, food safety R&D, or social science research related to agriculture (some of which
may not show up clearly in commodity markets and
some of which are not captured in conventional productivity measures), and the spillover benefits from
agricultural R&D into non-agricultural applications.
On balance, however, we suspect that the tendency to
overestimate has predominated.

3.1. Productivity measurement
The ex post evaluation of public agricultural R&D
investments often begins with a consideration of
agricultural productivity. At a minimum, we want to
avoid measurement problems associated with inappro-

144

J.M. Alston, PG. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

priate aggregation or indexing procedures. Index
number problems can account for some errors in the
measurement of productivity growth attributable to
research, and aggregate productivity measures can be
statistically sensitive to aggregation procedures (e.g.
Acquaye et al., 2000).
As pointed out by Schultz (1956), growth in the
use of conventional inputs does not account for much
of the growth in agricultural output. A part of the attribution problem is to remove the effects of various
other (non-research) factors before attempting to attribute residual productivity growth to particular research investments. Understanding the sources of the
growth not attributable to conventional inputs is the
first step in measuring the benefits from public R&D
investments. Other factors, beyond conventional inputs, include changes in input quality, output quality, improvements in infrastructure, economies of size
and scale, and improvements in technology. In addition, conventional productivity measures do not account for the consumption of unpriced or underpriced
natural resource stocks, such as irrigation water, in the
process of production. Rate of return studies that use
conventional productivity indexes will tend to overstate the social value of technological changes that involve a faster rate of consumption of natural resource
stocks, and will understate the benefits from technologies that involve greater environmental amenities or
resource stock savings (e.g. Alston et al., 1995; Perrin
and Fulginiti, 1996).
Schultz (1956) and Griliches (1963) demonstrated
the important role of changes in input quality in
accounting for measured productivity growth in agriculture. Yet many subsequent studies of returns to
public-sector R&D have measured aggregate input
quantities using index numbers that were not adjusted
appropriately to account for changes in input quality.
Such analysis overstates the productivity growth attributable to public-sector R&D by giving it credit for
effects attributable either to schooling (from private or
public investments in education unrelated to R&D) or
to private R&D (in the case of embodied technological
change). It is tricky to isolate the effects of schooling
from the benefits of training in the context of research
programs, a benefit that should be attributed to R&D.
Following Griliches (1964 ), some studies have included additional explanatory variables to represent
the effects of factors such as education, infrastructure,

or private R&D in models of productivity. Clearly,
the appropriate adjustments of the dependent variable
can be different, depending upon the explanatory variables other than public R&D that are to be included in
the model to account for the effects of input and output quality, and so on. Craig and Pardey (1996, 2001)
and Acquaye et al. (2000), among others, have shown
that correcting for changes in input quality can have
major implications for understanding changes in input
use and productivity in US agriculture. Making adjustments for input quality change is likely to lead to
a lower estimated rate of return to public-sector R&D
and a better appreciation of the different roles played
by private- and public-sector R&D (in agriculture and
elsewhere), and education. Less is known about the
quantitative effects of accounting for research-induced
changes in output quality.
3.2. Matching benefits and costs:
attribution among groups
Multifactor productivity is the measurable stream of
output not accounted for by measured inputs. We can
translate the productivity measures into measures of
streams of research benefits using conventional procedures. The attribution of these benefits to particular
inputs can be thought of as a two-step process. Having accounted for the contribution of factors other than
R&D in the first step, a second step involves discerning the share of these residual benefits most appropriately attributed to research by a particular individual,
program, state, nation, or other aggregate. This attribution problem can be thought of as matching streams
of research benefits to corresponding streams of costs.
Understatement of public research costs arises in
a number of ways. As pointed out by Fox (1985), a
common source of understatement is not allowing for
the full social cost of using government revenues for
R&D. General taxation involves a social cost of more
than one dollar per dollar raised, an excess burden
(Ballard and Fullerton, 1992). Most studies have not
adjusted for the effects of the excess burden of taxation
on costs, an omission that will lead to a systematic understatement of the social costs and an overstatement
of the social rate of return.
Occasionally studies of particular research programs fail to attribute an appropriate portion of R&D
overhead (including the costs of associated basic

J.M. Alston, PG. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

research and institutional overheads) to the particular
projects being evaluated, or they omit components of
the effort involved in the development and extension
phases of a project. It is not easy to estimate costs
attributable to total research (let alone research on
a particular set of issues), but there seems to be a
tendency to understate the cost of individual research
programs, and research overall, through the tendency
to omit or underestimate overhead costs.
Agricultural research consists of a continuum of activities, from basic science through to field extension
work, that interact with and complement one another.
To properly measure the contribution of one element
of the whole, it is important to control for the effects of
all of the others. Many previous studies have failed to
take proper account of other elements and, as a result,
they have tended to overestimate the gains in productivity attributable to a particular element of total expenditures on R&D. Equivalently, many studies have
underestimated the total expenditure (that includes foreign and domestic, private and public, and basic and
applied work and extension) required to achieve a particular productivity gain.
Overstatement of benefits sometimes arises from
not counting the effects of private-sector R&D or
spillovers of technology from elsewhere (states, countries, competing institutions, or other industries) and,
instead, attributing all of the gains in productivity
to only a part of the total relevant R&D spending.
Griliches (1992) discussed the problems of accounting for R&D spillovers, and Griliches ( 197 4) explored
the role of private-sector R&D.
Private-sector research is often omitted from the
analysis, or its effects are considered but not properly
taken into account. This is a problem in econometric
studies, in particular, where the omission of relevant
explanatory variables can lead to biased estimates of
the effects of variables included in the analysis. Private R&D expenditures (RP) are likely to be positively
correlated with public R&D expenditures (R 0 ), and,
as a result, the omission of RP from a productivity
model can be expected to lead to an upwards bias in
estimates of the coefficient on R 0 . The confounding
of effects extends beyond overstating the rate of return to R 0 when we go beyond the consequences of
statistical correlation and consider causal connections
between the two types of expenditure and, perhaps,
complementary or substitution interactions between

145

RP and R0 in affecting productivity. The omission

of private-sector R&D may also give rise to biased
estimates in synthetic (benefit-cost) approaches (i.e.
where productivity gains are deduced or assumed
rather than statistically estimated), depending on how
the growth in productivity attributable to public-sector
R&D is estimated. Similar concerns arise in relation
to the treatment of extension, spillovers from privateor public-sector research conducted elsewhere (e.g.
overseas or in sectors other than agriculture), basic
(or pretechnology) research that may underpin the applied research being assessed, and development work
without which the commercial adoption of research
results would not be possible.
R&D spillovers appear pervasive and confound
the attribution of research benefits. Using firm-level
data from the chemical industry, Mansfield ( 1977)
reported that the returns to innovators (private rates
of return) were significantly smaller than 'social'
rates of return. More recently, Jaffe (1986) developed
a patent-based metric of R&D 'spillover pools' to
investigate firm-to-firm spillover effects. He found
indirect but convincing econometric evidence of the
existence of R&D spillovers, demonstrating that, on
average, firms had higher returns to their own R&D
(in terms of accounting profits or market value) if this
R&D was conducted in areas where other firms do
much research. Analogous firm-to-firm spillover effects are no doubt a feature of private research related
to agriculture.
Agricultural economists also have been giving
attention to economies of size, scale, and scope
in agricultural R&D, and the related questions of
the spatial spillovers of public agricultural research
benefits (and costs), especially in recent years (e.g.
Johnson and Evenson, 1999; Byerlee and Traxler,
2001). Econometric efforts to measure the spatial
spillovers of agricultural research have used knowledge stocks computed as spatial aggregations of R&D
based on geopolitical boundaries and geographic
proximity rather than agroecological similarity (e.g.
Huffman and Evenson, 1993). However, the pattern
of geographical spillovers is largely conditioned by
agroecological factors, although economic and policy
factors also play important roles. For example, Binenbaum et al. (2000) analyse the jurisdictional pattern
of intellectual property rights that affect international
flows of germplasm and related biotechnologies.

146

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

In our own work, still in progress, in which we
have used measures of agroecological similarity to parameterise technological spillover potential, we found
very substantial spillover effects among US states. An
implication is that typical studies that do not allow
for interstate or international spillovers will overstate
own-state research responsibility for state-level productivity growth, and, thus, state-specific rates of return to research will be overstated. At the same time,
the global returns to a state's research will be understated in studies that consider only within-state effects. Some pre-aggregation of state-specific research
investments into knowledge stocks is unavoidable in
any attempt to capture interstate spillover effects in
econometric models. Enors in this pre-aggregation
could distort the evidence, just as ignoring spillovers
altogether does, even when the pre-aggregation has
been done with care and attention to the likely underlying detelTllinants of spillover effects.
Some other choices in an analysis may have important implications for the estimated rate of return, but
often we cannot generalise about the size and direction
of the resulting biases. For instance, most studies have
not attempted to conect for the effects of commodity programs or other distortions, an omission which
Alston et al. (1988) showed might lead to over- or
under-statement of the benefits and the rate of return;
exceptions include Oehrnke (1988), Zachariah et al.
(1989), and Huang and Sexton (1996). Similarly, selection bias can be a problem - projects may have
been selected for analysis because they are known to
be winners, without regard for the high proportion
of unsuccessful projects, which could be regarded as
contributing to overhead costs to be borne by the successful projects. On the other hand, this should not be
a problem with studies based on the analysis of aggregate data, and such studies do report lower rates of
return (Alston et al., 2000a,b).

3.3. Research and adoption lags: attribution
over time
In some respects, investing in research is like investing in physical capital: cunent productivity does
not simply depend on the cunent rate of investment,
but rather on the flow from the stock of usable knowledge derived from the history of past investments.
Hence, investment decisions taken in one period have

consequences that last into the future. Indeed, lags and
dynamics in agricultural R&D are of greater duration
and importance than for most other types of capital
investment. There are lags of several years, typically,
between when an expenditure is made on research and
when the resulting innovation or increment to knowledge begins to be adopted and to affect production and
productivity.
The effects of a particular investment today can
persist over many future production periods, perhaps forever. The effects of other R&D investments
may be short-lived or non-existent. Estimating the
parameters that characterise this overall dynamic
research-development-adoption-disadoption process
is the most challenging empirical problem in evaluating R&D. In the evaluation of individual process
innovations (e.g. Griliches, 1957; Schmitz and Seckler, 1970) it is sometimes possible to obtain good
information on the timing of events. More often (and
inevitably in the case of aggregative analysis across
programs and commodities), however, the information
is not directly accessible and must be either estimated
as a part of the analysis, or imposed on it.
Even the more data-rich studies of aggregate
national research systems typically use only 40-50
years of annual observations on research (and, perhaps, extension) expenditures to attempt to explain
20-30 years of variation in production or productivity.
Such data are not sufficient to estimate the research
lag profile accurately. Indeed, to obtain estimates at
all, it has been found necessary to impose a great
deal of structure on the lag relationship - including
assumptions about its length, smoothness, and general shape. These generally untested (or inadequately
tested) restrictions have an impact on the resulting
answers. These assumptions are often devised arbitrarily, with a view to convenience of estimation as
much as anything, rather than empirically. For example, studies have typically imposed a finite lag structure linking R&D spending to changes in productivity
over less than 20 years. But some types of research
have effects that persist indefinitely (e.g. we still use
electricity), while others have effects that are finite,
as the innovation loses effect (e.g. pest resistance
is eroded) or is replaced by other innovations and
becomes obsolete (e.g. new and better agricultural
chemicals), and yet others are very short-lived (e.g.
specific computer chips). Hence, a flexible, infinite lag

J.M. Alston, PG. Pardey/Agricu/tural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

with some allowance for research obsolescence may
be appropriate for econometric work; especially work
that aims to estimate the returns to aggregate R&D.
In principle, given sufficient data, a flexible infinite lag model could be implemented using modern
time-series econometric approaches. In practice, given
data (and other) constraints, an infinite lag structure
might be better approximated by the use of a longer
finite lag structure than most studies have used (although the potential for bias remains). The few studies that have attempted to estimate lag lengths for
aggregate agricultural R&D in the US and the UK
econometrically have found that lag lengths of at least
30 years may be necessary (e.g. Pardey and Craig,
1989; Chavas and Cox, 1992; Huffman and Evenson, 1992, 1993; Schimmelpfennig and Thirtle, 1994;
Alston et al., 1998). This suggests that the typical study
has used a truncated lag structure that is too short.
In a synthetic study, where the research-induced
shifts are given, the truncation of the lag amounts
to leaving out benefits, which would, ceteris paribus,
bias the rate of return down. In an econometric study,
however, truncation of the lag amounts to omitting
relevant explanatory variables. This will lead to biased parameter estimates, with too much econometric
weight (yielding larger values for the parameters) on
the more recent lags. By itself, the omission of long
lags here, as with the synthetic approach, amounts
to understating total benefits: but unlike the synthetic
studies the present value of the benefits associated
with the shorter lags is now greater. In a discounting
context, given typically high rates of return, the latter effect is likely to dominate (since the benefits associated with the long-past research expenditures are
heavily discounted), so that truncation of the lag will
tend to bias rates of return up. This view is supported
by the meta-analysis of Alston et al. (2000a,b) and by
the econometric analysis of Alston et al. (1998).
Various other specification issues arise in econometric studies of research returns. As well as getting
the lags right, in some settings it might be necessary
to allow for leads. The typical study assumes unidirectional causation from research to productivity, but
Pardey and Craig (1989) provide some evidence, albeit weak, in support of bidirectional causality (see
also Schimmelpfennig and Thirtle, 1994). Simultaneous equations bias has an indeterminate effect on
single-equation estimates of the impact of research on

147

productivity. Difficulties in uncovering the lead-lag relationships may be confounded with other problems if
these relationships have undergone structural change,
as is likely over the relatively long estimation periods
that are increasingly being used in conjunction with
very long lags.

4. Illustrative examples of attribution problems
To illustrate the nature and the importance of the
attribution problems underlying the estimates of rates
of return to research, we consider two examples. First
is an assessment of the US benefits from wheat variety improvement R&D conducted by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
(CGIAR). Second, we consider evidence on the effects
of different treatments of the research lag structure on
the evaluation of rates of return to agricultural R&D.

4.1. Attribution among investors: US benefits
from the CGIAR
Pardey et al. ( 1996) investigated the impacts in the
US of varietal-improvement research performed at the
international agricultural research centres funded by
the CGIAR. This investigation focused on two cases:
the wheat-breeding work carried out at the International Wheat and Maize Improvement Center (CIMMYT) in Mexico (and its antecedent agencies), and
the rice-breeding program of the International Rice
Research Institute (IRRI) in the Philippines. Both of
these programs are very well known: they have been
at the centre of efforts to develop the high-yielding
grain varieties whose use in developing countries has
contributed to large increases in world-wide food supplies - increases commonly referred to as the Green
Revolution.
A review of these cases by Pardey et al. ( 1996)
shows that substantial attribution problems can arise
even when the details of the technology and the timing of events are well documented and understood.
Consider the case of wheat. Pardey et al. (1996) obtained detailed data on experimental yields of the
many wheat varieties at multiple locations in each of
the different US wheat-growing states. Comparison of
experimental-plot yields of new varieties with those
in production in 1970 indicates that in the absence

148

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

of the new varieties, overall wheat yields would have
been 33% lower in 1993. The authors estimated that
over 1970-1993, such yield gains generated economic
benefits with a present value in 1993 of about 43
bUS$ (1993 dollars). In other words, approximately
l/9th of the total value of wheat production over the
period is attributed to increases in yields resulting
from the introduction of new varieties. These are the
gross benefits to producers and consumers as a result
of the US adoption of the new varieties.
One important aspect of the attribution problem involves determining who deserves the credit for these
gains. In particular, what is the fraction of the total benefit that can be attributed to the work done at
CIMMYT? Pardey et al. (1996) had complete information on the genetic (and breeding) history of each
important wheat variety grown in the US, for each
wheat-growing state, along with an extensive dataset
on experimental yields by variety for multiple experimental sites (within states). Unfortunately, even such
uncommonly detailed information is not enough to
solve the attribution problem; genotype does not translate simply into yield gains or other phenotypic characteristics (such as seed size, colour and protein and fibre
content) that translate into tangible economic value.
How much of the credit for the improvement in US
wheat yields associated with semi-dwarfing should go
to Norman Borlaug (who led the effort at CIMMYT,
and earlier at the Rockefeller Foundation-sponsored
research program in Mexico that began in 1943), compared with the breeders at Washington State University (who previously made the first US cross with the
Norin 10 variety from Japan)? How much credit for the
excellence oftoday's variety should go to the breeder
who bred it, and how much should go to the breeders
and farmers who bred or selected its parents, grandparents and so on? It is not easy to identify the separate marginal product of any particular breeder in the
chain. Consequently, economists studying this type of
issue have ended up using mechanistic rules to apportion the total benefits across steps in the history of the
development of a new variety.
To compute and attribute the benefits from
wheat-breeding, Pardey et al. (1996) examined the
effects of using a variety of rules to accommodate
differing perceptions of the relative importance of
earlier and later breeding steps. In general they found
that US benefits from the CIMMYT wheat-breeding

program were very large. Even using their most conservative attribution rule (giving the greatest credit
to more recent, US-based innovations, and the least
credit to the earlier CIMMYT-based innovations),
the additional wheat produced in the US as a consequence of the CIMMYT program was worth 3.6
bUS$ from 1970 to 1993. US government support of
the wheat-breeding program at CIMMYT since 1960
was about US$ 68 million (in present value terms as
of the end of 1993). Counting only the benefits from
the yield gains in the US, the benefit-cost ratio of US
support was greater than 49: 1. This is the most conservative estimate. Using alternative attribution rules,
the benefit-cost ratio is as high as 199:1.
Recall, this is the benefit from US adoption of varieties containing CIMMYT-derived germplasm, which
is a gross rather than net measure of the benefits to
US from CIMMYT' s wheat variety improvement program. It does not account for the costs to the US as
a net exporter, which arise when the rest of the world
adopts new CIMMYT-based wheat varieties and this
leads to a reduction in the demand for and price of US
wheat. Evaluating this effect is a much larger undertaking; it involves measuring the effect ofCIMMYT's
wheat-breeding program on the entire world. This is
yet another form of attribution problem, one which
generally has not been recognised in previous studies of the country-specific benefits from international
agricultural research (one exception is Brennan and
Bantilan, 1999).
4.2. Attribution over time: specifying and
estimating lag relationships
In empirical work on models of the effects of
research on aggregate agricultural productivity, the
number of lags and the shape of the lag structure
are usually chosen arbitrarily; rarely is either the lag
length or structure tested formally. Common types of
lag structures include de Leeuw or inverted-V (e.g.
Evenson, 1967), polynomial (e.g. Davis, 1980; Leiby
and Adams, 1991; Thirtle and Bottomley, 1988), and
trapezoidal (e.g. Huffman and Evenson, 1989, 1992,
1993). A small number of studies have used free-form
lags (e.g. Ravenscraft and Scherer, 1982; Pardey and
Craig, 1989; Chavas and Cox, 1992), but most have
restricted the lag distribution to be represented by a
small number of parameters because the time span

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

of the dataset is usually not much longer than the
assumed maximum lag length.
Until quite recently, it was common to restrict the
lag length to less than 20 years. In the first studies, available time-series were short and lag lengths
were very short. More recent studies have tended to
use more flexible, and longer lags. Pardey and Craig
(1989) used a free-form lag structure to model the
relationship between agricultural productivity and
public-sector agricultural research, and found "strong
evidence that the impact of research expenditures
on agricultural output may persist for as long as 30
years" (p. 9) and that "long lags - at least 30 years
- may be necessary to capture all of the impact
of research on agricultural output" (p. 18). Using
a non-parametric approach, Chavas and Cox (1992,
p. 590) confirmed Pardey and Craig's result, finding
that "at least 30 years of lags are necessary to capture
the effects of public research". Several subsequent
studies have followed this advice. However, none of
these studies, including the two just cited, tested how
much longer than 30 years the lag length should be.
In contrast, Alston et al. (1998) argued for representing an infinite lag between research investments

149

and productivity with a finite lag between research
investments and changes in the stock of knowledge.
Alston et al. (1998) laid out a model in which current aggregate production depends on the utilisation
of the stock of useful knowledge, which is itself a
function of the entire history of relevant investments
in R&D. What results is potentially an infinite lag between past investments in research on the one hand
and production on the other. While a short, finite lag
may reasonably depict the link between investments in
research and increments to the stock of useful knowledge, it would be a significant conceptual error to
use the same lag to represent the relation between investments in research and production, since production depends on flows from the entire stock of useful
knowledge, and not just on the latest increment to this
stock. Other recent studies, based on an examination
of the time-series nature of the data, rather than reflection about structural relationships, have been tending in a similar direction (e.g. Akgiingor et al., 1996;
Makki et al., 1996). Using time-series methods involving data transformations such as first differences,
they have found that smaller estimated rates of return
result.

Table 2
Lag structure and estimated rates of return to research from econometric models•
Mean lag
(years)

Number of
estimates (count)

Rate of return (% per year)
Mean

Mode

Median

Form
Polynomial
Trapezoidal
Free-form
Inverted-V
Other
No structure
No lag
All forms

13.2
32.7
28.0b
12.0
13.3b
26.6
0
16.3b

285
55
6
33
304
79
36
762

79.9
97.7
26.5
134.5
75.6
45.8
48.0
77.9

58.0
95.0
6.0
30.0
46.0
54.0
46.0
58.0

58.0
67.0
30.0
72.0
48.0
51.0
44.4
53.0

4.5
11.0
6.0
23.0
-1.0
0.3
20.9
-1.0

729.7
384.4
45.0
562.0
1219.0
185.0
111.0
1219.0

Length (years)
0
1-4
0-15
>30
Unspecified

0
9.9
22.3
38.0b
Unspecified

36
408
174
144
100

48.0
95.2
58.1
60.1
60.0

46.0
58.0
46.0
40.0
27.0

44.4
60.7
49.9
41.6
41.2

20.9
0.0
4.5
-1.0
8.9

111.0
1219.0
260.0
384.4
337.0

Lag structure

Minimum

Maximum

a The figures in this table encompass studies reporting econometrically estimated rates of return to agricultural research only, and to
research & extension, reported in Alston et al. (2000a; Table 16).
b Represents the mean length of the R&D lags for rate of return estimates based on finite lag structures. One of the 6 free-fonn
estimates is based on an infinite lag structure, as are 43 of the 304 other estimates, 44 of the 762 all forms estimates, and 44 of the 144
>30 years estimates.

150

J.M. Alston, P. G. Pardey I Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

Table 2 summarises the results from past econometric studies of returns to agricultural research across
countries, classified according to the length and form
of the research lag. It can be seen that the results are
consistent with expectations; most studies have used
short lags (and other restrictions on the form of the
lag), and shorter lags tend to coincide with larger estimated rates of return.
To illustrate their ideas and implement the
arguments, Alston et al. (1998) developed a model
of agricultural productivity that can be used to evaluate typical assumptions about the shape of the research lag, as well as the implicit assumptions about
knowledge depreciation associated with explicit assumptions about the research lag length. They applied this model to data on US aggregate agricultural
productivity for the period 1949-1991, making use
of annual data on total agricultural R&D (including
extension) expenditures by the federal government
and 48 state governments, for the period 1890-1991.
The agricultural input data were adjusted for quality change over time, which will account for certain
types of private R&D expenditures and human capital improvements, and so on, but omitted-variables
bias may still result from the exclusion of private
R&D and spillover effects (the details of the data
and estimation procedures can be found in Alston
et al. (1998)). The primary conclusion reinforces the
view that agricultural research affects productivity
for much longer than most previous studies have
allowed, possibly forever. A model consistent with
infinite lags was statistically preferred over a more
conventional model with finite lags. The implications
for reported rates of return were quite dramatic. The
statistically preferred model indicated a much lower
real, marginal IRR to public agricultural research in
the US than was implied by a model using shorter
lags.

5. Conclusion
Taken at face value, studies of returns to agricultural research indicate that the investment has been
enormously socially profitable. Some research investments no doubt have yielded extraordinarily high returns and to some extent the overall picture has been
distorted by sampling bias. As well, however, many

of the estimates are likely to have been biased up as a
result of attribution problems. We have presented arguments and evidence concerning the nature of these
attribution problems and the resulting bias in reported
rates of return to research.
For a start, many of the estimates at the upper end of
the range are simply implausible. In particular, some
very large estimates of IRRs to aggregate R&D investments, if taken literally as IRRs over lengthy time
periods, imply unbelievable impacts of agricultural research. Part of the problem here is that the internal
rate of return measure may not reasonably represent
the relationship between research and returns. In particular, it is questionable whether the primary beneficiaries - the farmers and consumers to whom the
benefits accrue - could reinvest research returns at a
rate anything like the typical estimated rate of return
to research. Hence, even if the rate of return as calculated corresponds arithmetically to the stream of benefits and costs, other summary measures may be more
meaningful.
In addition, however, there are issues surrounding
the measures of benefits and costs and their interpretation. Significant problems arise in attempting to determine what the pattern of productivity growth would
have been in the absence of a particular research investment. Some of these problems concern the use
of appropriate index number theory and making appropriate corrections for changes in quality and other
characteristics of inputs and outputs. Others arise in
defining the relevant counterfactual alternative in order to meaningfully match streams of research benefits
and costs.
Further problems can arise in the specification of
the research-returns relationship, especially in econometric applications. The typical approaches understate
the period over which research affects productivity
and, in econometric studies using time-series data,
this means they overstate the shorter-term impacts,
leading to overstated rates of return. Most studies also
fail to fully account for the effects of work done by
others in the research-development-extension continuum, and this gives too much credit to the particular
investor being evaluated. Work remains to be done
to establish the empirical importance of bias due to
incomplete correction for the locational spillovers
of research results in estimated rates of return to
research.

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey!Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

Acknowledgements

Partial support for this work was provided by USAID, Global Bureau, the Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics, and a grant from the UC Pacific
Rim research project. The authors thank Albert Acquaye and Connie Chan-Kang for valuable research
assistance, and John Brennan, David Colman, Ruben
Echeverria, Will Masters and Michel Petit for comments on an earlier version of the work.
References
Acquaye, A.K.A., Alston, J.M., Pardey P.G., 2000. A disaggregated
perspective on post-war productivity growth in US agriculture:
isn't that spatial? In: Proceedings of the NC-208 Conference on
Agricultural Productivity: Data, Methods, and Measures, Waugh
Auditorium, USDA-ERS, Washington, DC, 9-10 March 2000.
Akgiingor, S., Makanda, D.W., Oehmke, J.F., Myers, R.J., Choe,
Y.C., 1996. Dynamic analysis of Kenyan wheat research and
rate of return. In: Contributed Paper Proceedings from the
Conference on Global Agricultural Science Policy for the 21st
Century, Melbourne, Australia, 26-28 August 1996, pp. 1-32.
Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G., 1996. Making Science Pay: the
Economics of Agricultural R&D Policy. Washington, DC.
Alston, J.M., Edwards, G.W., Freebaim, J.W., 1988. Market
distortions and the benefits from research. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
70, 281-288.
Alston, J.M., Anderson, J.R., Pardey, P.G., 1995. Perceived
productivity, foregone future farm fruitfulness, and rural
research resource rationalization. In: Peters, G.H., Hedley,
D.D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
of Agricultural Economists on Agricultural Competitiveness:
Market Forces and Policy Choice, Aldershot, Dartmouth,
pp. 639-651.
Alston, J.M., Craig, B.J., Pardey, P.G., 1998. Dynamics in
the creation and depreciation of know ledge, and the returns
to research. EPTD Discussion Paper no. 35, August 1998,
International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Alston, J.M., Chan-Kang, C., Marra, M.C., Pardey, P.G., Wyatt,
T.J., 2000a. A meta-analysis of rates of return to agricultural
R&D: ex pede herculem? Research Report no. 113. International
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington DC.
Alston, J.M., Marra, M.C., Pardey, P.G., Wyatt, T.J., 200Gb.
Research returns redux: a meta-analysis of the returns to
agricultural R&D. Aust. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 44 (2), 185215.
Ballard, C.L., Fullerton, D., 1992. Distortionary taxes and the
provision of public goods. J. Econ. Perspect. 6, 117-131.
Binenbaum, E., Nottenburg, C., Pardey, P.G., Wright, B.D.,
Zambrano, P., 2000. South-North trade, intellectual property
jurisdictions, and freedom to operate in agricultural research on
staple crops. EPTD Discussion Paper no. 70, December 2000,
International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

151

Brennan, J.P., Bantilan, M.C.S., 1999. Impact of ICRISAT research
on Australian agriculture. Report prepared for Australian Centre
for International Agricultural Research, Economic Research
Report no. I. NSW Agriculture, Wagga Wagga.
Byerlee, D., Traxler, G., 200 I. The role of technology spillovers
and economies of size in the efficient design of agricultural
research systems. In: Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G., Taylor, M.J.
(Eds.), Agricultural Science Policy: Changing Global Agendas.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD (Chap. 9).
Chavas, J.-P., Cox, T.L., 1992. A nonparametric analysis of the
effects of research on agricultural productivity. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 74, 583-591.
Craig, B.J., Pardey, P.G., 1996. Productivity in the presence of
quality change. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78 (5), 1349-1354.
Craig, B.J., Pardey, P.G., 2001. Input, output, and productivity
developments in US agriculture. In: Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G.,
Taylor, M.J. (Eds.), Agricultural Science Policy: Changing
Global Agendas. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
MD.
Davis, J.S., 1980. A note on the use of alternative lag structures for
research expenditure in aggregate production function models.
Can. J. Agric. Econ. 28, 72-76.
Echeverria, R.G., 1990. Assessing the impact of agricultural
research. In: Echeverria, R.G. (Ed.), Methods for Diagnosing
Research System Constraints and Assessing the Impact of
Agricultural Research: Assessing the Impact of Agricultural
Research, Vol. II. International Service for National Agricultural
Research, The Hague.
Evenson, R.E., 1967. The contribution of agricultural research to
production. J. Farm Econ. 49, 1415-1425.
Evenson, R.E., Waggoner, P.E., Ruttan, V.W., 1979. Economic
benefits from research: an example from agriculture. Science
205, 1101-1107.
Fox, G., 1985. Is the United States really underinvesting in
agricultural research? Am. J. Agric. Econ. 67, 806-812.
Fuglie, K., Ballenger, N., Day, K., Klotz, C., Ollinger, M.,
Reilly, J., Vasavada, U., Yee, J., Fisher, J., Payson, S.,
1996. Agricultural research and development: public and
private investments under alternative markets and institutions.
USDA-ERS-NRED Agricultural Economic Report 735. US
Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC.
Griliches, Z., 1957. Hybrid corn: an exploration in the economics
of technological change. Econometrica 25 (4), 501-522.
Griliches, Z., 1963. The sources of measured productivity growth:
agriculture, 1940-1960. J. Political Econ. 71, 331-346.
Griliches, Z., 1964. Research expenditures, education, and the
aggregate agricultural production function. Am. Econ. Rev.
54 (6), 961-974.
Griliches, Z., 1974. Errors in variables and other unobservables.
Econometrica 42, 971-978.
Griliches, Z., 1979. Issues in assessing the contribution of research
and development to productivity growth. Bell J. Econ. 10, 92116.
Griliches, Z., 1992. The search for R&D spillovers. Scand. J.
Econ. 94, 29--47.
Griliches, Z., 2001. R&D and productivity: the unfinished business.
In: Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G., Taylor, M.J. (Eds.), Agricultural

152

J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Economics 25 (2001) 141-152

Science Policy: Changing Global Agendas. Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Huang, S.-Y., Sexton, R.J., 1996. Measuring returns to an
innovation in an imperfectly competitive market: application to
mechanical harvesting of processing tomatoes in Taiwan. Am.
J. Agric. Econ. 78, 558-571.
Huffman, W.E., Evenson, R.E., 1989. Supply and demand functions
for multiproduct US cash grain farms: biases caused by research
and other policies. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 71, 761-773.
Huffman, W.E., Evenson, R.E., 1992. Contributions of public and
private science and technology to US agricultural productivity.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 74, 752-756.
Huffman, W.E., Evenson, R.E., 1993. Science for Agriculture:
A Long-term Perspective. Iowa State University Press,
Ames.
Jaffe, A.B., 1986. Technological opportunity and spillovers of
R&D: evidence from firm's patents, profits, and market value.
Am. Econ. Rev. 76 (5), 984-1001.
Johnson, D.K.N., Evenson, R.E., 1999. R&D spillovers to
agriculture: measurement and application. Contemp. Econ.
Policy 14 (4), 432-456.
Kealey, T., 1996. The Economic Laws of Scientific Research. St.
Martin's Press, New York, 382 pp.
Leiby, J.D., Adams, G.D., 1991. The returns to agricultural research
in Maine: the case of a small northeastern experiment station.
Northeastern J. Ag1ic. Resour. Econ. 20, 1-14.
Makki, S.S., Tweeten, L.G., Thraen, C.S., 1996. Returns to
agricultural research: are we assessing right? In: Contributed
Paper Proceedings from the Conference on Global Agricultural
Science Policy for the 21st Century, Melbourne, Australia, 2-28
August 1996, pp. 89-114.

Mansfield, E., 1977. The Production and Application of New
Industrial Technology, Norton, New York.
Oehmke, J.F., 1988. The calculation of returns to research in
distorted markets. Agric. Econ. 2, 291-302.
Pardey, P.G., Craig, B., 1989. Causal relationships between public
sector agricultural research expenditures and output. Am. J.
Agric. Econ. 71, 9-19.
Pardey, P.G., Alston, J.M., Christian, J.E., Fan, S., 1996. Hidden
harvest: US benefits from international research aid, IFPRI Food
Policy Report, International Food Policy Research Institute,
Washington D.C.
Pasour Jr., E.C., Johnson, M.A., 1982. Bureaucratic productivity:
the case of agricultural research revisited. Public Choice 39 (2),
301-317.
Perrin, R., Fulginiti, L., 1996. Productivity in the presence of
"poorly priced" goods. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78 (5), 1355-1359.
Ravenscraft, D., Scherer, F.M., 1982. The lag structure of returns
to research and development. Appl. Econ. 14, 603-620.
Schimmelpfennig, D., Thirtle, C., 1994. Cointegration, and
causality: exploring the relationship between agricultural R&D
and productivity. J. Agric. Econ. 45, 220-231.
Schmitz, A., Seckler, D., 1970. Mechanized agriculture and social
welfare: the case of the tomato harvester. Am. J. Agric. Econ.
52, 569-577.
Schultz, T.W., 1956. Reflections on agricultural production, output
and supply. J. Farm Econ. 38, 748-762.
Thirtle, C.G., Bottomley, P., 1988. Is publicly funded agricultural
research excessive? J. Agric. Econ. 31, 99-111.
Zachariah, O.E.R., Fox, G., Brinkman, G.L., 1989. Product market
distortions and the returns to broiler chicken research in Canada.
J. Agric. Econ. 40, 41-51.

