WP 2003-20
June 2003

Working Paper
Department of Applied Economics and Management
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853-7801 USA

The Complex Dynamics of Smallholder
Technology Adoption:
The Case of SRI in Madagascar
Christine M. Moser and
Christopher B. Barrett

It is the Policy of Cornell University actively to support equality of educational
and employment opportunity. No person shall be denied admission to any
educational program or activity or be denied employment on the basis of any
legally prohibited discrimination involving, but not limited to, such factors as
race, color, creed, religion, national or ethnic origin, sex, age or handicap.
The University is committed to the maintenance of affirmative action
programs which will assure the continuation of such equality of opportunity.

The Complex Dynamics of Smallholder Technology Adoption:
The Case of SRI in Madagascar†

Christine M. Moser1
and
Christopher B. Barrett

June 2003
Abstract
This paper explores the dynamics of smallholder technology adoption, with particular
reference to a high-yielding, low-external input rice production method in Madagascar. We present a
simple model of technology adoption by farm households in an environment of incomplete financial
and land markets. We then use a probit model and a symmetrically trimmed least squares estimation
of a dynamic Tobit model to analyze the decisions to adopt, expand and disadopt the method. We
find that seasonal liquidity constraints discourage adoption by poorer farmers. Learning effects –
both from extension agents and from other farmers– exert significant influence over adoption
decisions.
JEL codes: O0 , Q0
Keywords: Technology adoption, learning, the System of Rice Intensification, conformity effects
† We thank the Association Tefy Saina, the Cornell Institute for International Food and Agricultural Development (CIIFAD), Landscape
Development Interventions in Madagascar, Laetitia Razafimamonjy, Manampy Rakotoarisoa, Elisoa Razafitiana, Samy Randrianarisoa, Bart
Minten, J.S. Butler, David Lee, Norman Uphoff, Mattia Romani, Alex Winter-Nelson and Doug Brown for their help and input. Write up
of this work was partly supported by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) under grant number LAG-A-0096-90016-00 through the BASIS CRSP. Any remaining errors are solely our responsibility.
1
Corresponding author, Dept. of Applied Economics and Management
115 Warren Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853-7801 USA
Campus phone: (607) 255-4489
Fax: (607) 255-9984
Email: cmm42@cornell.edu

1

1. Introduction
Questions of technology adoption lie at the heart of economists’ longstanding concerns over
economic growth and poverty reduction because advances in human welfare depend on increasing
the productivity of existing stocks of land, labor and capital. Yet although significant innovations
occur routinely, new technologies diffuse only gradually and incompletely. The dynamics of
technology diffusion confound most cross-sectional analyses of adoption patterns, at a minimum
rendering coefficient estimates difficult to interpret and usually causing them to be biased and
inconsistent (Besley and Case 1993). With the emergence of panel data sets in many countries, there
has been a resurgence of empirical work on technology adoption, with a particular focus on the
means by which agents learn about new technologies (Besley and Case 1993, Foster and Rosenzweig
1995, Cameron 1999, Conley and Udry 2000).
This paper builds on that literature by studying the adoption of a high yielding, low external
input technology, called the System of Rice Intensification (SRI), that has received considerable
attention both within and outside of Madagascar, where the method originated (Madeley 2001).
Merely by changing a few interrelated agronomic practices – no new seeds or chemical or mechanical
inputs are needed – SRI has repeatedly generated stunning increases in crop yields in farmers’ fields
(Stoop, Uphoff and Kassam 2002). SRI therefore seems ideally suited to the needs of small farmers
in a country where rice productivity is extremely low and most farmers are unable to grow enough
rice to feed their families (Barrett and Dorosh 1996).
But like many promising agricultural technologies in the developing world, SRI adoption has
been disappointing in Madagascar. Adoption rates have been low, disadoption rates among adopters
have been high, and the method has largely failed to spread spontaneously beyond the communities
into which it has been introduced by outside extension agents. This paper explores the roles of
seasonal liquidity and family labor constraints and learning in explaining the puzzle of poor uptake of
such a promising new technology.

2
Recent models of technology adoption provide a useful starting point for making sense of
the SRI experience, but fail to capture all of the relevant factors in the case of SRI. Both Besley and
Case (1993) and Cameron (1999) focused on farmers’ learning by doing, but do not allow for
learning from others or for short-run losses incurred while farmers experiment. Yet in conversation,
Malagasy SRI farmers repeatedly emphasize the importance of instruction in or observation of the
new method as practiced by others and their view of initial SRI trials as a potentially costly
experiment. Foster and Rosenzweig (1995) allow for both learning by doing and learning from
others and for costly experimentation. But the target input model approach they follow implicitly
assumes that adoption is inevitable and optimal and therefore that disadoption will never occur after
the new, intrinsically superior technology has been adopted. Yet, as we document below,
disadoption of SRI has been widespread. Conley and Udry (2000) focus on the social context of
learning and emphasize the extreme imprecision of farmers’ knowledge of the operational details of
others’ experience with a new technology. They do not allow for learning by doing, however, which
is clearly relevant for the case of SRI as Malagasy farmers frequently mention the importance of time
and experience in learning the method. Furthermore, none of the aforementioned studies allow for
family labor or seasonal liquidity constraints that can be crucial, not only to Malagasy farmers, but to
many farmers throughout the developing world.2 Nor do previous studies allow for the possibility of
nonmaterial preferences, such as those related to the prestige or stigma associated with particular
practices irrespective of their pecuniary returns. We introduce an approach to analyzing and
estimating such effects.
A major obstacle to a better understanding of the dynamics of technological change in
developing country agriculture has been the lack of household-level longitudinal data. In the absence
of such panel data, Besley and Case (1993) propose using recall data to create a quasi-panel. This is
the approach used here. By carefully constructing a quasi-panel data set using recall data, we are able
2 An earlier literature on smallholder technology adoption placed considerable emphasis on labor and liquidity
constraints and risk aversion. Feder et al. (1985) offer a good survey of the literature to that point in time.

3
to explore the adoption dynamics of SRI in Madagascar and demonstrate the effectiveness of a
relatively simple, cost-effective method of data collection. Furthermore, by using the Tobit-type
model developed by Powell (1986), we can both control for household fixed effects and allow for
heteroskedasticity, two concerns difficult to control for in traditional Tobit models.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: First we describe the relevant features of SRI
and rural Madagascar and provide a brief description of the data. Next we present a simple, multiperiod model of farmer decision-making that allows for binding seasonal liquidity and labor
constraints, learning, and social conformity effects. We then discuss the estimation strategy, test the
model econometrically and present our estimation results. A brief concluding section draws out
implications for technology promotion in environments such as rural Madagascar.

2. Rural Madagascar and the System of Rice Intensification
Madagascar is a smallholder rice economy par excellence. Rice accounts for a majority of the
nation’s cultivated area and of per capita calorie consumption, yet most Malagasy rice farmers do not
produce enough rice to feed their families (Barrett and Dorosh 1996, Minten and Zeller 2000).
Forced to sell some rice for cash at harvest time, the poorer farmers struggle to find the means to
buy rice at higher prices in the months leading up to the harvest, after their rice stocks run out.
Seasonal credit is largely unavailable (Zeller 1994), so casual labor for day wages in the rice fields of
other farmers is an important coping strategy during the hungry period that corresponds to the main
rice growing season (Minten and Zeller 2000). This implies that households facing seasonal liquidity
constraints also likely face a shortage of family labor because members must work off-farm to earn
the wages necessary to meet immediate subsistence requirements.
Land holdings and income are closely and monotonically related in Madagascar beyond the
smallest farm sizes, which are typically home plots cultivated by salaried professional workers (Barrett
and Dorosh 1996). Malagasy smallholders cultivate rice on valley bottoms and terraced hillsides as

4
well as in freshly cleared uplands using methods and seed varieties that have remained largely
unchanged for generations. Because of the importance of rice to rural incomes and employment and
to national food security, and because of the significant role upland rice cultivation plays in
deforestation in Madagascar, intensification of lowland rice production has been a major focus of
development interventions in Madagascar for many years.
The System of Rice Intensification (SRI), first synthesized by a French missionary priest to
Madagascar, Fr. Henri de Laulanie, during the mid-1980s drought, seems almost miraculous and
ideally suited to poor smallholder rice farmers. An indigenous nongovernmental organization
(NGO), Association Tefy Saina (ATS), emerged in the early 1990s to promote SRI in rural Madagascar.
Through a combination of practices – chiefly early transplanting and wide spacing of single seedlings,
early and regular weeding, and careful water management to dry fields periodically so as to aerate
roots during the plants’ growth phase – SRI commonly doubles or triples rice yields. Individual
farmer SRI yields of over ten tons/hectare have regularly (and credibly) been reported. In addition,
SRI requires no chemical fertilizers, pesticides, or new seed varieties, and the high yields seem to be
sustainable thus far and have been replicated since 2000 on test plots and in farmers’ fields in
Bangladesh, Cambodia, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka (Stoop et al.
2002, Uphoff 2000a, Uphoff 2000b, Rakotomalala 1997, Association Tefy Saina 1995).
The agronomic practices that comprise SRI are both nontraditional and relatively labor
intensive.3 SRI requires an estimated 19 to 54 percent more labor than traditional methods, and
hired workers need to be trained and supervised (and sometimes paid more) to follow these new
methods correctly (Barrett and Moser 2003, Joelibarison 2001, Assoiciation Tefy Saina 1995;
Rakotomalala 1997). According to Rakotomalala, 62 percent of the extra labor needed for SRI is for
weeding and 17 percent for transplanting. Field preparation, especially leveling to facilitate proper
water drainage, also takes time, and fields need to be visited daily to check the water level.
3 SRI is nontraditional both in the sense of breaking from customary practice in Malagasy rice systems – an
issue we confront in this paper – and in the sense of challenging conventional wisdom within the world’s rice
production scientific community. Stoop et al. (2002) address this latter issue in detail.

5
Even with the additional labor costs, on the surface, the returns to labor still seem to far
outweigh those of traditional methods. Joelibarison (2001) estimated a 113 percent increase in net
revenue with SRI over traditional methods.4 Several studies have simultaneously recorded yields for
both SRI and non-SRI fields. Three different studies (two of them on-farm) in different regions of
Madagascar found average SRI yields between 6.19 and 6.83 tons/hectare while average yields for
traditional methods were between 1.95 and 3.37 (Joelibarison 2001, Rajaonarison 1999,
Rakotomalala 1997). In a study of 111 SRI farmers, Barrett and Moser (2003) show that labor
productivity increased 52% for the median SRI farmer.
Despite SRI’s obvious, considerable benefits and intensive ATS extension efforts in certain
areas, the casual perception of many observers in the late 1990s was that SRI adoption rates were
generally low, that some Malagasy farmers who tried SRI had subsequently disadopted (i.e., stopped
using the new technique), and that those who successfully adopted and stayed with the method rarely
put more than half of their rice land in SRI. We therefore set out to document and explain SRI
adoption patterns among Malagasy rice farmers.

3. The Data
While the role of learning and the dynamic nature of technology adoption have been long
recognized, only recently have panel studies begun to shed light on these issues. However, the time
and cost involved in collecting panel data sets that follow farmers before and after adoption are
prohibitively high. Thus existing relevant panel data sets are either old, have few observations or
both. However, traditional cross-sectional studies fail to provide insights into how farmers learn and
how technologies spread over time; they may even yield biased estimates of adoption behaviors

4 This study compared the labor usage and yields for SRI and traditional methods among farmers practicing
both methods simultaneously. The net revenue estimate only includes labor costs, but due to the cost and
availability of fertilizers and pesticides, these inputs are rarely used and seed is the only other major cost. The
difference in net revenue may actually be underestimated because SRI requires only about 1/5 of the seed used
in traditional methods (Joelibarision 2001, Rakotomalala 1997)

6
(Lindner 1987, Besley and Case 1993, Cameron 1999). We used farmer recall data and extension
records to reconstruct a retrospective panel data set, an approach first suggested by Besley and Case
(1993) as a feasible and lower-cost method to glean information on the dynamics of adoption not
obtainable from traditional cross-sectional studies.
While the data collected for this survey were collected in a single visit to each respondent
household, the farmers were asked to recall total land area, area in SRI and area in off-season crops
each year going back to 1993. Given the importance of lowland rice plots to rural Malagasy
households, the infrequency of land transactions, and the availability of supporting extension records,
these recall data are considered quite reliable.5 From ATS, we were able to obtain additional
information on the availability of extension and the number of SRI adopters in the population for
each site, by year.
The survey was conducted over several months in 2000 in five villages purposively chosen
based on past ATS extension presence.6 Manandona and Anjazafotsy are villages in the central
plateau near the city of Antsirabe in the Province of Antananarivo. The other three villages,
Ambatovaky, Iambara and Torotosy, are near the Ranomafana National Park in the Province of
Fianarantsoa. The former sites are in one of the more fertile and diversified agricultural zones in the
country, where agricultural intensification efforts have aimed at income growth and the generation of
food surpluses for the cities. The latter three sites are more remote and reflect efforts to promote
agricultural intensification as a means to stem unsustainable deforestation associated with traditional,
slash-and-burn rice cultivation (tavy).
We first used qualitative research methods at the village level, constructing seasonal
calendars and enumerating prevailing livelihood strategies so as to get a solid, if only qualitative,
command of local wealth, income, labor and liquidity patterns. We then performed a census of all
5 In the early 1990s, Madagascar’s national agricultural research institute, FOFIFA, compared farmers’ reported
land area against actual measurements of the same plots in the area of our study and found farmer recall to be
extraordinarily accurate on lowland rice areas – albeit not on tavy land or upland plots sown in tubers or
vegetables.
6 Details on the survey methodology and copies of the instruments used are available in Moser (2001).

7
households in each village to assess the evolution of SRI adoption and disadoption over time. The
household census provided the sampling frame within which we stratified households at each site
into three categories: “adopters” who were currently practicing SRI, “disadopters” who had
previously tried SRI but discontinued the practice, and “non-adopters” who had yet to try SRI.
Households were randomly drawn from each stratum at each site, and adopters and disadopters were
oversampled in order to assure sufficient observations. 7 Since we know the true population
proportion in each stratum, we correct for choice-based sampling in all the econometric results
presented here using a weighting variable following the method developed by Manski and Lehrman
(1980).
Despite the potential yield and profit gains from SRI, we found the percentage of farmers
trying SRI to be surprisingly low, just 25 percent (Table 1). Moreover, only 15 percent of farmers
were still practicing SRI at the time of the survey, implying an astonishingly high average disadoption
rate of 40 percent, although that masks considerable dispersion, from 19 to 100 percent, across the
five survey villages. The dynamics of adoption across all five sites from 1993-1999 are presented in
Figure 1. When one compares the dynamics of initial SRI adoption (Figure 1) to the adoption of
modern, high yielding rice varieties in Asia, as documented by David and Otsuka (1994), one is
struck by both the relatively slow rate of adoption over the initial seven years of technology
availability and by the high rate of disadoption.
The major source of data used in this paper was a survey of 317 households that included
questions on household and farm characteristics, land holdings (1993-1999), SRI use (1993-1999),

Oversampling (adopters in the population, for example) is a common practice in adoption studies, although
few published studies correct for it in subsequent statistical analysis due to lack of knowledge about the true
population. However, since we censused all households and were able to reconstruct the rosters of all SRI
adopters at each site from ATS records, we can and do make such corrections. The implication of weighted
sampling for a linear regression model is that parameter estimates will be inconsistent if the true parameters in
the population differ by category. To correct for this, the data needs to be weighted by the true proportion of
the population each category represents at each site (Deaton 1997).
7

8
and problems with and perceptions of SRI8. Because types of income sources and their relative
importance to the household, rather than precise, continuous measures of income or food stocks, are
used in this study, we can only make rather loose, qualitative inferences with regard to liquidity
effects. Nonetheless, this method of evaluating and categorizing income sources in each village
based on their seasonality and significance using extensive interviews and participatory research
provides reliable indicators of household wealth and liquidity. Selected descriptive statistics are
presented in Table 2.

4. A Model of Farmer Technology Choice
In order to model the decision-making process of Malagasy households realistically, we add
three main features to a standard model of intertemporal utility maximization. The first is the
dominant role of rice in income and consumption patterns. The second is that we allow for farmer
experimentation, expansion or contraction (in the limit, disadoption) of the technology and include a
seasonal component to capture the trade-off between current planting-season consumption and rice
production. Lastly, we add a social dimension so as to allow for decisions driven by non-material
motives other than profit or consumption, such as prestige or stigma.
Each household has an endowment of land (A),9 family labor (LT), wealth (W) and education
(E) that it deploys to maximize the stream of utility derived from material consumption (C) and the
nonmaterial welfare effects of social standing (N).10 There exist two distinct rice production
technologies, SRI and traditional methods (SRT). A farmer must choose the proportion of land to

8 Yield and production data were not collected in this study. However, a separate study conducted in 2001
shows that SRI does indeed generate large productivity increases relative to traditional methods (Barrett and
Moser 2003).
9 We focus only on lowlands suitable for rice cultivation. In practice, households often have other types of
land available on which they cultivate other crops. But land suitable for rice is basically only planted in rice in
Madagascar. So we simplify the model by considering only rice here, dropping other crops into the residual
labor use category.
10 We assume that composite consumption is the numéraire good. Rice prices and wage rates are thus relative
to this good.

9
devote to SRI (a) and to SRT (1-a), as well as the amount of labor to devote to each method, the
amount of labor hired in and out, and current period borrowing and savings. Households face a
subsistence constraint that in each season k in year t household i must consume at least the minimum
amount needed for survival (Cmin). There are two seasons, a planting season (k=0) and a harvest
season (k=1). The usual budget constraint bounds the value of consumption and savings (S) by
household total income (YT) and borrowing (B) each season. The household faces a borrowing
constraint, however, that is increasing in its land holdings and wealth. The usual labor constraint
requires that labor time allocated to rice (Lr) and other activities (Lw) not exceed the total family labor
available (LT). The final pieces of the stylized model involve a standard wealth law of motion and
non-negativity constraints on W, B, and L. Formally, the utility maximization problem described
above can be written as:

Max

LSRI ,LSRT ,Lh ,Lw ,S,B,a

∞ 1 2t+k
U(Cikt,N
,N
ikt)
∑ ∑ dδ2t+k U(C
ikt )
ikt
t=0k=0

(1)

subject to
C ikt + S ikt + (1 + δ )B i(1-k )(t+k-1) ≤ YikT (i) Budget Constraint

Budget Constraint

(2)

SRT
w
T
LSRI
ikt + L ikt + L ikt ≤ L ikt

Constraint
(ii) SeasonalSeasonal
Family Familiy
Labor Labor
Constraint

(3)

C ikt ≥ C min

(iii) Seasonal Subsistence
Constraint
Seasonal Subsistence
Constraint

(4)

Wikt = Wi(1-k )(t+k-1) + S ikt ≥ 0

(iv) Wealth Law of Motion

0 ≤ B ikt ≤ B(A ikt , Wikt )

(v) Borrowing Constraint

Wealth Law of Motion (5)

10
with the following variable definitions :

N it ≡ g( ait , aj(t-1) , X jt )

Nonmaterial Returns (6)
(1) Social Returns

r
YiktT ≡ Yikt
+ w ikt (E i , w jt , O ikt )Lwikt + B ikt

Income (7)

(2) Income

]

r
h
SRI
h
SRT
h
SRT
h
Yikt
≡ kpr [ F SRI ( ait , LSRI
( ait , LSRT
ikt , L ikt A it ,K it , L i(1-k)t , L i(1-k)t )+ F
ikt , L ikt A it , L i(1-k)t , L i(1-k)t )

- w jkt Lhikt
∞

∞

∞

m=1

m=1

m=0

Kit ≡ h( ∑ ai(t-m) , ∑ aj(t-m) , ∑ X j(t-m) , E i )

(3) Rice Income

Rice Income (8)

(4) Knowledge Knowledge
of SRI of SRI (9)

Household income originates from two sources: rice farming and other activities. Rice
income equals the value of the amount produced (price times the production from both
technologies) minus the labor costs. In order to simplify the model, labor is assumed to be the only
cost in rice production, and land and labor are the only inputs.11 Because the overwhelming majority
of land in the survey areas was acquired by inheritance and not purchased, land is assumed to be a
costless quasi-fixed input into rice production, and is thus treated as a part of the household’s
endowment.
Revenue from rice production accrues only in the harvest season (k=1), although labor is
needed in both seasons. Consequently, farmers incur a planting season loss which must be offset by
savings, borrowing, or other earnings—determined at an individual wage rate w that depends on

11 Rice seed, chemical fertilizer, animal manure and animal traction are other inputs used in production in the
survey areas, but in such minimal amounts that land and labor are clearly the ones that matter most for SRI
adoption.

11
education, prevailing local labor market conditions (summarized by the unskilled agricultural day
wage in village j, wjt), and any off-season crop harvest (Oikt) by the household.12 Binding subsistence
and borrowing constraints can therefore prove a crucial determinant of planting season labor
allocation for households with low beginning period wealth (and therefore limited savings to draw
down or to use as collateral against which they can borrow).
SRI output depends not just on the land and labor applied to this method, but also on the
farmer’s knowledge of how to implement SRI’s nontraditional agronomic methods correctly.13
Knowledge (K) of SRI can be gleaned through multiple sources: the farmer’s own previous
experience with the method (learning by doing), his exposure to extension educators or the
experience of other farmers in the community (learning from others), and his education, which may
affect the rate at which he learns from these other sources and may have independent effects on
learning as well. The recent literature on the economics of technology adoption has focused heavily
on these sorts of learning effects.
An important complicating factor is that the social context within which a farmer makes his
adoption choice may have behavioral effects beyond those related to learning about the technology.
Within rural villages, there often exist significant pressures to conform to behavioral norms
established within the community and to the expressed wishes of persons in positions of authority
(Platteau 2000). The former effect can serve as a powerful brake on innovative activity (Akerlof
1980), while the latter may foster innovation when authorities push new methods, creating an
opening for charismatic leadership to exert influence on the process of development at the micro
level. In particular, concerns over social status and nonpecuniary penalties associated with deviation
from community norms may affect individuals’ decisions as much as or more than profit motives
In some areas, households plant rice fields in potatoes, barley or other crops in the dry winter season when
rice will not grow. This has the effect of smoothing income over the year and potentially raising the
opportunity cost of household labor above prevailing local wage rates.
13 Knowledge does not appear in the SRT production function because we assume all farmers possess complete
knowledge of this method. We do not claim that SRI is necessarily more knowledge intensive, only that the
transition to SRI from the technology practiced in the villages for generations does require the accumulation of
knowledge of hitherto unfamiliar agronomic practices.
12

12
(Akerlof 1980, Rogers 1995, Akerlof 1997, Kreps 1997, Platteau 2000, Kevane and Wydick 2001).
Especially in traditional societies, the maintenance of community ties is crucial for the survival of
both the household and the community. As a result, many cultures exhibit a strong tendency toward
conformity to a community norm, to the will of authority figures, or both. In the present case, we
allow for either sort of social conformity effect. Like Kevane and Wydick’s (2001) model of the
effect of social norms on the allocation of women’s labor by farmers in Burkina Faso, we take the
most recently observed mean level use of SRI in village j, ājt, as the prevailing time-and-locationspecific community norm. We then assume utility is declining in deviation from the norm
(equivalently, welfare is increasing in conformity to the community standard). Conformity to
established local behavioral norms might thereby affect patterns of innovation.
Conformity to authority may be equally important. In rural Madagascar, outside experts,
such as the ATS extension agents, are viewed as authority figures and treated with appropriate
respect. Of particular relevance here, households may feel obliged to follow the extension agent’s
advice, at least at a symbolic level of modest experimentation with the technology being promoted.14
Of course, if extension agents’ only effect was to stimulate “deferential conformity,” then once the
extension agent left the community, farmers would be expected to revert back to their old practices.
By contrast, if the primary effect of extension agents was to transfer valuable knowledge that remains
behind even after the agent leaves, reversion would be less common. This difference suggests an
identification strategy for conformity effects that we introduce later.
Let K represent a stock of useful knowledge to which one can add but from which one
cannot subtract.15 Assume that K is strictly increasing and weakly concave in both cumulative

Anecdotal evidence and interviews with farmers support the claim that some farmers did indeed try SRI to
appease the extension agent. Furthermore, this might explain why some farmers kept only a very small portion
of their land in SRI for years without expanding.
15 This differs from the target input model employed by Foster and Rosenzweig (1996), who model learning
about an optimal input level, which can vary either up or down. Here we more generally model the
accumulation of a stock of potentially useful knowledge.
14

13
extension presence in the village and in cumulative past SRI experience in the community. 16,17 We
can now specify the farmer’s constrained value function as:

Max LSRI ,LSRT ,Lh ,S,B,a U(Ci00, Ni00)+ δ V(A i00 , Wi00 )

(10)

s. t .
min
r
SRT
+ w i00 (E i , w j00 , O i00 )(LTi00 − LSRI
Yi00
i00 − L i00 ) − S i00 − (1 + δ )B i (1 )(-1) ≥ C

(iii) Seasonal Subsistence Constraint
S i00 ≥ − Wi(1)(-1)

(iv) Wealth Law of Motion

0 ≤ B i00 ≤ B(A i00 , Wi00 )

(v) Borrowing Constraint

The labor and budget constraints bind with equality under the assumption of local
nonsatiation of preferences, and can therefore be incorporated within the modified seasonal
subsistence constraint. The simplified problem now has six choice variables (LSRI, LSRT, Lh, B, S, a)
and three constraints. Taking the household’s choice at the beginning of some rice planting season
(k=0), arbitrarily setting the year t=0, we can specify the Lagrangian and derive the first-order
necessary conditions (FONCs) to the household’s constrained intertemporal welfare maximization
problem:

16 There is no unambiguously preferable measure of past use of SRI in the community for the purpose of
establishing either learning or conformity effects. Is it the mere fact of households trying the technique that
matters, or the extent of their use? Are the absolute numbers of adopters the important thing or is it the
relative size of the group of SRI adopters as a proportion of the broader village population? One could
credibly argue for any of these formulations. As a result, in addition to using the area planted (in the preceding
year, t-1, or cumulatively through t-2), we also estimated the model using instead (a) the number of households
using SRI the previous year (t-1) and the total number of farmer years of SRI experience in the community
through year t-2, (b) the number of households using SRI in year t-1 and the total number adopting through
year t-2, (c) the proportion of households practicing SRI the previous year and the proportional community
experience with SRI (total number of farmer years of experience divided by the number of households)
through year t-2, and (d) the proportion of households practicing SRI in year t-1 and the proportion of
households adopting through year t-2. The qualitative results are very similar across all of the specifications.
This gives us some confidence that the findings are robust in these data to inherently arbitrary specification
choices of this community adoption variable.
17 The past history of use in the community variable likely captures not only learning from others effects in the
classic sense of farm managers’ observations of others’ experience, but also the benefits that accrue from the
accumulation of experience with the new methods among the population of casual day laborers who get hired
to work the SRI fields. If we had data on hired labor and the laborers’ past experience (or lack thereof) with
SRI, one could in principle distinguish between these two effects. We lack such data.

14

L =L = U(C i00 , N i00 ) + δV(C i10 , N i10 ) +

(

)

(

r
SRT
(
)
λ1 -C +Yi00
+ w i00 (⋅ )(LTi0 − LSRI
i0 − L i0 ) − S i0 − 1 + δ B i1-1 + B i00
min

)

(9)(11)

+ λ2 Wi1(-1) + S i00 + λ3 (B( A i1-1 , Wi1-1 ) − B i00 )

LLSRILL:SRI :

−

SRI
∂U(Ci00, Ni00)
∂V(C i10 , N i10 ) r ∂Fi10
SRI
>0
w i00 (⋅ ) + δ
p
SRI - λ1 w i00 ≤ 0, (= 0 if L
∂C i00
∂C i10
∂L i00

−

LLSRT :
LLSRT
:

)

SRT
∂U(Ci00, Ni00)
∂V(C i10 , N i10 ) r ∂Fi10
SRT
w i00 (⋅ ) + δ
p
>0
SRT − λ1 w i00 (⋅ ) ≤ 0, (= 0 if L
T
∂C i00
∂Yi10
∂L i00

(12)

( b)

(13)

)

LLh :LL : −

SRI
SRT

∂U(Ci00, Ni00)
∂V(C i10 , N i10 ) r  ∂Fi10
∂Fi10
− λ1w j00 ≤ 0, (= 0 if Lh > 0
w j00 + δ
p
+

h
h
T
∂C i00
∂Yi10
∂L i00 
 ∂L i00

Ls : LS : −

∂V(C i10 , N i10 )
∂U(Ci00, Ni00)
+δ
− λ1 + λ2 = 0
∂C i10
∂C i00

h

(a)

)

( c) (14)
( d)

LB : L : ∂U(Ci00, Ni00) − δ (1 + δ ) ∂V(C i10 , N i10 ) + λ − λ ≤ 0, (= 0 if Lh > 0 )
B
1
3
∂C i00

LA :

Lλ1 :
Lλ2 :
Lλ3 :

(

)

r
SRT
(
)
Lλ1 : λ1 -Cmin+Yi00
+ w i00 (⋅ )(LTi0 − LSRI
i0 − L i0 ) − S i0 − 1 + δ B i1-1 + B i00 = 0

(

(16)

∂C i10

SRI
∂U(Ci0, Ni0) ∂N i00
∂V(C i10 , N i10 ) r  ∂Fi10
∂F SRT ∂F SRI ∂K i10  <
p 
0,
La :
+δ
− i10 + i10
∂a i0
∂C i10
∂a i0
∂K i10 ∂a i00  >
N i00
 ∂a i0

)

Lλ2 : Wi1(-1) + S i00 = 0
Lλ3 : λ3 (B( A i1-1 , Wi1-1 ) − B i00 ) = 0

(15)

 < 0 if a = 0 


 = 0 if 0 < a < 1


 > 0 if a = 1


(17)

(18)
(19)
(20)

15
The non-negativity constraints imply that the associated FONCs, LLh, LLSRI, LLSRT and LB, hold with
equality when Lh, LSRI, LSRT, and B are greater than zero, respectively. La holds with equality when a
∈(0,1). If the subsistence constraint binds, the expression in the parentheses in Lλ1 equals zero,
otherwise λ1=0; the immediate subsistence constraint does not affect the household’s decisions. The
Lagrangian multipliers can be interpreted as follows: λ1 is the value of reducing the subsistence
constraint by a unit; λ2 reflects the per unit value of increasing initial wealth (which increases the
amount of dissaving that can occur to finance planting season experimentation); and λ3 represents
the value of increasing the household’s borrowing capacity.
The interpretations of the first three FONCs (equations 12, 13 and 14) are essentially the
same. In the current planting season, no immediate benefits are realized from devoting labor to rice.
The opportunity cost of forgone current income, and thereby consumption, must be offset by the
discounted gains from the extra increment of future harvest. More precisely, the marginal cost of
labor must equal the discounted future marginal revenue product from the rice harvest. The farmer
will not put more labor into rice if its opportunity cost exceeds the additional revenue he will get
from that labor. When the subsistence constraint binds (i.e., λ1>0), the cost of putting labor into rice
during the planting season effectively increases. The marginal costs of LSRT and LSRI are evaluated at
the individual wage rate, wi, but for the marginal cost of Lh (equation 14) the village wage rate, wj, is
used. Also for (14), the marginal revenue product is the sum of the marginal products of the two
technologies with respect to hired labor times the price of rice.
FONC Ls (equation 15) signals that current savings cannot be used for consumption today
and thus the first term of the derivative represents the marginal utility of foregone consumption.
Because greater initial wealth reduces the need to save current income for the future, the shadow
value of initial wealth (λ2) reduces the marginal value of saving current income. This means that the

16
marginal utility of consumption less the shadow value of initial wealth must be equal to the
discounted value of future consumption.
The derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to a (equation 17) reflects the welfare effects
of a change in the proportion of a farmer’s area in SRI. The only effect of a on planting season
utility comes through the social benefits function, and the sign can be either positive or negative. If a
∈(0,1), the first expression must equal the discounted future utility derived from a change in a. This
has two different components: first, the direct change in the marginal productivity of land associated
with shifting to SRI, and, second, the indirect marginal productivity effect associated with
accumulating knowledge. This difference captures the idea that it can be worthwhile for a farmer to
undertake costly experimentation with the new technique on a portion of his land even when it is not
expected to increase current returns.
The FONCs can be combined to yield an estimable, reduced form expression for the
farmer’s optimal choice of area planted in SRI (a*) as a function of household level variables – past
use of SRI, educational attainment (E), initial wealth (W), other income (O), total land area (A), and
discount rate – and community level variables – past and present extension presence (X), past use of
SRI in the village, the unskilled agricultural wage rate and rice prices:

a

∞
∞
 ∞
* = a  ∑ a
, ∑ X
, ∑ a
, E ,W ,O ,A ,w ,pr ,d
i00
 m=1 j( t-m ) m=0 j( t-m ) m=1 i( t-m ) i i0 i00 i00 j


 (21)


The core hypotheses of interest can thus be estimated directly using equation (21): (i) when
does SRI adoption occur (i.e., when does a become positive)? (ii) what determines the share of land
put into SRI (i.e., what affects variation of a in the (0,1) interval)? and (iii) when is the farmer likely to
disadopt SRI (i.e., return to a=0 after having chosen a>0 in a previous period)? The next section
maps out our estimation strategy for exploring these three questions.

17
5. Estimation Strategies in Adoption Models
As mentioned in the previous section, technology adoption is a dynamic process, but most
studies of adoption are still based on static models using cross-sectional data. The most commonly
used approaches to estimating models of adoption are briefly reviewed below. We then offer a
novel way to explore both initial adoption and adoption extent decisions using retrospective panel
data.
Static models simply look at who has adopted and who has not at a particular point in time.
While they can provide important insights into the adoption process, this method can also be
misleading, producing biased coefficient estimates if the adoption process is not yet complete
(Lindner 1987, Besley and Case 1993, and Cameron 1999). The bias results from ignoring the
dynamic effects of learning and the inability to control for unobserved household heterogeneity. A
cross-sectional sample of non-adopters would include both potential future adopters and those who
will never adopt, yet these two populations would be treated the same in a static study. Likewise,
recent adopters who may not yet be sure of the technology’s benefits are treated the same as longtime adopters who have much experience and may be more likely to continue with the method.
While the lack of adequate panel data is probably a major reason for the persistence of the
cross-sectional study, for some cases, a static view may be sufficient for understanding the factors
affecting adoption. If the technology has had sufficient time to diffuse and the adoption process can
be considered “complete,” a static study would be fairly accurate and informative. Unfortunately, for
most policy-makers and development practitioners wishing to gain insights into the adoption
process, ex-post conclusions are probably not very useful. At the very least, when the adoption
process is incomplete, cross-sectional studies may help identify those groups having difficulty
adopting and may facilitate the design of appropriate interventions.
The limitations of cross-sectional data could potentially be overcome through the use of
panel data. The lack of appropriate panel data sets has been a major limitation, and only a few

18
studies have been able to model individual choice in adoption as a dynamic problem. Besley and
Case (1993), Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), Cameron (1999), and Conley and Udry (2000) have all
used panel data in recent studies of learning and technology adoption.
To correct for some of the problems arising from the use of cross-sectional surveys when
cost and/or time prohibit multiple visits needed for panel data collection, Besley and Case propose
the use of recall data on each farmer’s adoption history. They present a probit model using time
varying dummies and interaction terms to capture the changing influence of the explanatory variables
over time. In general, the use of recall data would seem to be an improvement over traditional crosssectional studies, although this requires the fairly strong assumption that the farm and farmer
variables have not changed over the adoption process and that these variables are not the
endogenous consequence of earlier adoption decisions.
Even when a panel data set is available (or can be constructed from recall), controlling for
household fixed effects is often still problematic in adoption models. Data on technology adoption
is almost always censored or truncated. Binary choice models (probit or logit) have frequently been
used to analyze discrete choice to use or not to use a particular technique. Controlling for
household fixed effects is impossible in these models, unless all farmers in the data set are observed
both as non-adopters (zero) and adopters (one). In a Tobit model setting, the estimation can still be
difficult because the fixed effects cannot be eliminated by differencing and cannot be estimated
consistently for short panels. Furthermore, traditional Tobit estimation is sensitive to specification
error, produces inconsistent estimates in the presence of heteroskedastic errors, and easily breaks
down with the inclusion of many dummy variables.
We therefore use Powell’s (1986) method for estimating censored regression models.
Although rarely employed in applied work and never (to the authors’ knowledge) used in the context
of technology adoption, Powell’s method for symmetrically trimmed least squares estimation allows
us to control for both household fixed effects and for heteroskedastic errors. This method is based

19
on the assumption that the error term is symmetrically (but not necessarily normally) distributed.
When the data are left-censored, censoring on the right to restore symmetry will yield consistent
estimates in least squares estimation. (Powell 1986). The method does not work well when a large
proportion of the observations are censored, since roughly an equal number will be censored on the
right, leaving little variation in the dependent variable.
The standard definition of Tobit is:
yt=max(0, yt*) , where y* is a latent variable observed only above zero.
This is altered for Powell’s method such that:
yt=min(2xt’β, max(0, yt*))
Thus yt is censored at 2xt’β. In other words, yt is regressed on the x variables, then right
censored at twice the predicted value of yt, or 2xt’β, when yt*>2xt’β. The process is repeated on the
newly censored yt until the coefficients values converge.
We use Powell’s method in analyzing farmers’ decisions of how much land to put in SRI,
answering question (ii) posed at the end of section 5. To shed light on the questions (i) and (iii), as to
who adopts and who disadopts, we employ separate dynamic probit models.18 Although we cannot
control for household fixed effects in the probit adoption and disadoption models, the dynamic
models allow us to explore the roles of extension and learning from other farmers, and thus have
advantages over traditional cross-sectional studies.
A few final econometric issues require explanation before we present our estimation results.
Since the extension presence variable is common to all farmers within a given village in a given year,
it would be perfectly collinear with other time-varying village-level variables – such as wages, prices,

Another approach is to use a Heckman’s selection model to control for the differences that characterize
those who choose to adopt in the Tobit model (see Abdulai et. al (2003) for such an approach). However,
controlling for household-specific fixed effects in the Tobit model serves the same purpose while also
controlling more broadly for household-specific unobservables that may be uncorrelated with adoption but
correlated with other farmer attributes of interest, such as experience with the technology. An earlier working
paper version of this paper took the selection model approach before J.S. Butler recommended this better
approach to us. We are very grateful for his perceptive idea.
18

20
rainfall, pest or disease incidence – that might affect technology choice. We therefore omit timevarying covariates common to all households in a village in the estimation reported in the next
section. This necessarily complicates inference with respect to the extension variable somewhat, but
is unavoidable.
A dummy variable for the farmer’s membership in a farmers’ organization is included in the
regression specifications. In practice, this variable is capturing learning effects because extension
agents largely worked through local farmers’ organizations once they were in a village. In theory it
could also capture liquidity effects if the farmers’ organizations doubled as micro-credit groups,
which they generally do not in rural Madagascar (Zeller 1994). The extension presence variable is not
specific to the household, so the farmer organization variable is probably capturing both better
access to the extension agent in the village and better flow of information from other farmers.
We include year-specific dummy variables to capture intertemporal changes in market and
agroecological conditions that are common to all the survey villages. Several variables are used to
represent family labor availability: the number of adults and children in the household and the
distance to and between rice fields. Because detailed income or consumption data were not collected
in this survey, we must rely on dummy variables that are indicators of wealth or poverty. Finally,
assuming households’ unobservable discount rate, δ, is strongly correlated with wealth, our data
permit direct estimation of the reduced form optimal adoption function. Table 3 defines the
independent variables used in the econometric estimation on which we now report.

6. Estimation Results
As described in the conceptual model, we are interested in analyzing the factors affecting a,
the amount of land a farmer chooses to put in SRI. However, it is useful, and perhaps more realistic,
to assume that farmers actually make several sequential decisions. First, the farmer must decide
whether to try SRI, i.e., to make an initial decision to set a>0. If he does not adopt in the current

21
year, he faces the same decision the following year. Then, once the farmer makes the initial decision
to adopt SRI, he must decide how much land to put in the method, i.e., where to set a in the interval
(0,1]. For subsequent years, he must again choose how much land to put into SRI, now allowing for
the possibility that he can disadopt, i.e., set a=0 again.

a) The Initial Adoption Decision: Table 4 presents the results from a dynamic probit model of
the decision to adopt. We first consider the farmer’s initial, discrete decision to try SRI. Several
factors are plainly at play. Farmer liquidity seems to matter a great deal to the initial adoption
decision, as reflected by both the positive and statistically significant coefficients on wealth (total
lowland rice area) and stable income source (e.g., salaried employment), and by the large, negative
and highly significant coefficient estimate on the agricultural day labor dummy variable. Reliance on
agricultural day wages as a major source of income is a leading indicator of poverty in rural
Madagascar.19 Those who have little lowland to sow in rice wind up being net rice buyers and unless
they have an education and skills to secure salaried employment, they must then undertake low
paying, unskilled farm work to meet immediate cash needs for food in the planting season (Barrett
and Dorosh 1996, Minten and Zeller 2000). In the absence of seasonal credit access, labor becomes
their means of financing current consumption needs, precluding them from investing added time in
more labor-intensive cultivation on their own plots, even if this brings significant yield gains next
season.20 Although our initial research design hypothesized that off-season cropping might facilitate
adoption by smoothing incomes within the year, the coefficient on the off-season cropping dummy
variable was both small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. 21 A χ2 test overwhelmingly rejects
19 The results here should be treated with caution, however, because of the potential endogeneity of this
variable in the quasi-panel. The inclusion or omission of this variable in the regressions does not significantly
alter the effects of the other variables.
20 Part of this effect could be due to timing, not just liquidity. If workers have to supply labor at prime
planting times and realize they would consequently not enjoy equivalent yield gains from SRI were they to try
the method once they were free from their off-farm work responsibilities, mistiming could discourage adoption
independent of liquidity concerns.
21 However, when the model is re-estimated using only the two villages in which off-season cropping has
become increasingly important in recent years (Ambatovaky and Iambara), the coefficient becomes positive and

22
the joint null hypothesis that liquidity – as proxied by agricultural day labor, stable income and offseason crop income – has no effect on adoption (Table 5).22 Despite the “low-external input” nature
of the technology, the investment needed in labor alone is more than poorer Malagasy farmers with
limited or no access to interseasonal credit can afford, since labor markets are used to obviate the
problem of a missing rural financial market.
Liquidity is far from the whole story, however. Learning effects clearly matter as well to the
initial SRI adoption decision. Learning from others is captured jointly by the extension variables,
community level adoption of SRI, and interactions with other (SRI) farmers through membership in
a farmer’s organization. The probability of adoption is significantly increasing in the farmer’s
educational attainment level, and when he belongs to a farmers’ organization, which improves access
to extension information. Extension presence also proves important for the initial adoption
decision, probably because SRI is a relatively complex set of practices that must be learned and
applied simultaneously. Thus it is not surprising that farmers need to work directly with extension
agents the year they adopt. The χ2 test statistic of 216.48 (Table 5) overwhelmingly rejects the joint
null hypothesis that there is no learning from others. Interestingly, once one controls for current
extension presence and community use patterns, past extension presence and community adoption
patterns have a negative and statistically significant effect on the probability of adoption. This
suggests that people may learn as well from others’ disadoption, since the higher the percent of
farmers ever trying, holding percent of farmers using constant, the greater the local disadoption rate.
statistically significant. In this area, off-season cropping consists of planting crops, such as potatoes, on the
rice field in the winter so as to generate output and thus income at the start of the rice-planting season. The
evidence from the more restricted regression hints at a “practices ladder” effect—the adoption of off-season
cropping may boost productivity only slightly yet provide liquidity at a crucial time of year which may
subsequently enable farmers to adopt improved rice methods such as SRI that significantly increase total factor
productivity. The adoption of off-season cropping stands in sharp contrast with that of SRI. Although
farmers must purchase seed and fertilizer for off-season cropping, unlike low-external-input SRI, the timing of
these purchases (right after the rice harvest) is such that it does not seem to impede adoption for most farmers.
Eighty percent of households in Ambatovaky were practicing the method in 1999 and none had disadopted
(Moser and Barrett 2003).
22 Given off-farm labor markets’ crucial role in providing financial liquidity in the absence of formal financial
markets, it is difficult to distinguish between liquidity effects and those of labor allocation incentives. Based on
extensive conversations with Malagasy farmers, however, we are convinced that off-farm labor allocation
reflects liquidity concerns to a significant degree and thus are reasonably classified in Table 5.

23
This also raises the possibility of conformity effects, particularly conformity-to-authority effects,
which we discuss further in subsection d) below.

b) The Extent of Adoption Decision: We estimate the share of rice land put into SRI using
Powell’s method for Tobit-type models, as described in the previous section. Only those farmers
who have tried SRI are included in the model. Zero values therefore indicate disadoption
Household dummy variables were included in the regression to control for unobserved, time
invariant household fixed effects. This necessarily precludes inclusion of time-invariant household
characteristics such as educational attainment or gender, as well as time-varying household attributes
for which we had only one observation, such as the presence of stable alternative income sources or
employment in agricultural day labor. As a consequence, we cannot directly test for liquidity effects
on the extent of adoption in the same way we can for the adoption or disadoption choices.
Furthermore, due to modest within-farm intertemporal variability in total rice area – another sign
that land markets are largely absent in these villages – the total lowland rice area variable likewise had
to be dropped due to near-perfect collinearity with the vector of household fixed effect dummy
variables. The estimation results are presented in Table 6.
The coefficient on the number of ares in off-season crops is positive and significant. This
finding has potentially important implications for agricultural policy if adoption of one method
indeed facilitates the adoption of another, creating a technology adoption ladder. Because off-season
crops are planted after the rice harvest, when households tend to have both more money and more
time to devote to labor, and because rice land otherwise goes unused, most farmers in this region
have proved able and willing to adopt off-season crops. The income and food off-season cropping
provides at the beginning of the rice planting season appear to enable Malagasy farmers to continue
to practice SRI and to expand their use of this high-yielding method if they manage to adopt it
initially.

24
Surprisingly, experience with SRI has a negative and convex effect on share of area in SRI.
This seems to reflect the high rates of disadoption reported earlier. Interestingly, when we drop the
control for farmer fixed effects, experience has a positive and strongly statistically significant effect
on share of rice area planted in SRI. This implies that unobserved farmer characteristics, such as
motivation and skill, likely account for much of respondents’ success with and expansion of SRI, a
finding supported by a different, recent data set on SRI productivity (Barrett and Moser 2003), and
that failure to control adequately for such effects can lead to a sharp overstatement of the importance
of “learning by doing” effects. Because the cumulative effect of experience – accounting for the
linear and quadratic effects jointly – is negative for all households in the sample, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis of no positive learning by doing effects with respect to the extent of SRI adoption
decision.
The year-specific dummy variables are all statistically significantly different from zero and
from one another, exhibiting a steady increase in expected share of area planted in SRI. The fact that
this is entirely independent of farmer-specific characteristics, such as experience with the method,
suggests that this is less learning by doing than broader systemic factors, such as general
dissemination of information on SRI throughout the villages, changes in extension practices within
ATS, and general improvement in the macroeconomy over this period.
The percent of farmers practicing SRI the previous year also has a positive and significant
effect on adoption extent, while the percent of farmers having ever tried SRI in the community has
no statistically significant effect. The pattern is similar with respect to contemporaneous presence of
ATS extension agents, which positively affects area in SRI, while past extension presence has no
significant effect. These factors suggest significant learning from others effects, although these
findings might also be explained by conformity effects for which we test directly later.

25
c) The Disadoption Decision: Disadopters were included in the preceding Tobit-type model, but
because the limiting case of complete disadoption of SRI merits special attention, we estimate a
separate probit model to isolate the factors affecting disadoption. Because the farmer’s discrete
decision whether to continue to practice SRI after having tried it is inherently conditional on having
initially adopted, only observations after the farmer’s first year of use are included in the disadoption
probit model. This leaves 418 observations from the 510 in the second stage of the sample selection
model, covering the 163 farmers who had tried the method.23 Following an approach introduced in
Neill and Lee (2001), the dependent variable “Continue” is a dummy variable that equals one if the
farmer continued to use SRI in year t following adoption and zero if he did not continue (in other
words, if he disadopted). Observations on disadopters beyond the first year for which “Continue”=0
are included in the regression because the farmer could subsequently renew his use of SRI.24

Neither education nor total lowland rice area are statistically significant in the disadoption
model (Table 7), although both play a significant role in farmers’ initial adoption choice. Labor
availability, as proxied by the number of adults and children in the household, positively affects the
probability of continuing with SRI.25 Agricultural day labor has no significant effect on probability of
disadoption, presumably because it has a sharp negative effect on the initial adoption decision, so
there are few farmers in the sample who practice SRI and work on others’ farms for wages. Nor do
extension presence (past or present) or off-season cropping have any significant effect on farmers’
disadoption decisions.
The biggest effects on the likelihood of disadoption arise from the farmer’s own past
experience with SRI and from the existence salaried employment. The role of experience must be
treated with caution here, since we are unable to control for farmer fixed effects in this probit model.
We also include in the model the area planted in SRI the first year the farmer tried the method.

17 farmers started prior to 1995, so 564 minus 146 first year observations gives us the 418 observations.
Adopting a second time (after disadoption) seems to be quite rare. There was no re-adoption is this sample.
25 Children may play an important role since they are frequently given the tasks of weeding and chasing birds
from the fields.
23
24

26
Many local observers have remarked to us that those farmers who experiment with SRI initially on
too small a plot are more likely to disadopt subsequently and their casual observations seem
supported by these data. Most likely because SRI sharply increases marginal land productivity
without increasing marginal labor productivity (Barrett and Moser 2003), the area farmers plant in
SRI in their first year significantly increases their average productivity and thus their likelihood of
continuing the practice.
Although stable income from salaried employment improves household liquidity and thereby
increases the likelihood of initial adoption, it also significantly decreases the likelihood that a farmer
continues to use SRI. Based on our own observations of the system, this result seems to reflect
experimentation by those with the means to try SRI, within which there is a subset of salaried
workers whose off-farm activities generate a high opportunity cost to the time spent in SRI
cultivation – especially the demands of daily water inspection and management – and in supervising
and training hired workers in one’s SRI plots. As a consequence, these households disadopt SRI.
Finally, farmers were more likely to continue if more farmers were practicing SRI the
previous year. Likewise, they are more likely to disadopt when larger numbers of farmers disadopted
the previous year. These results, like those of the preceding two regressions, suggest the possibility
of social conformity effects in Malagasy farmers’ SRI-related choices.

d) On The Prospect of Conformity. The model of section 4 allowed for individuals’ nonmaterial
preferences for social acceptance to affect farmers’ choice of cultivation methods in the direction of
conformity to either a community norm, as reflected by mean local practice in the most recent
season, or to the desires of authority figures, here represented by ATS extension agents promoting
SRI. However, since the people to whose practices farmers might wish to conform are also sources
of potentially valuable information about farming technologies, a serious identification problem
arises in trying to disentangle conformity and learning effects empirically. For example, the strategic

27
incentive to delay adoption so as to costlessly observe one’s neighbors’ costly experiments with the
new technology (Foster and Rosenzweig 1995) has qualitatively similar effects to conformity to
observed local norms. It may likewise be difficult in practice to separate the marginal adoption
effects of learning from extension agents from deferential adoption incentives, especially if the
technology requires the physical presence of extension agents to offer advice or hands-on assistance.
This subsection outlines a method for identifying conformity effects distinct from learning
effects and presents estimates derived from these data on SRI. While these phenomena fit the
anecdotal evidence we hear from Malagasy farmers and from some expert observers of SRI, these
concepts are novel and somewhat unorthodox in contemporary economics. We therefore view this
subsection more as intriguing conjecture intended to stimulate further investigation than as findings
in which one should place great weight just yet.
Our identification strategy for conformity effects runs as follows. Recall our earlier
assumption that knowledge is cumulative, strictly increasing and weakly concave in both cumulative
extension presence in the village and in cumulative past SRI experience in the community, following
the colloquial understanding of a “learning curve” exhibiting diminishing returns. So learning
represents (net) addition to one’s stock of knowledge. Learning from others results from exposure
to others trying the method or to extension agents promoting the method, while learning by doing
results from one’s own experiments with the method. Each added year of own experience or
exposure to extension agents promoting SRI or neighbors trying it adds to a prospective user’s stock
of knowledge about the technology, but at a decreasing rate. Conformity effects, by contrast, relate
solely to current social conditions, as reflected in contemporaneous presence of an extension agent in
the village, Xjt , and the percent of farmers using SRI in the previous period.26 Where knowledge is

We use the previous period’s community behavior with respect to SRI for both conceptual and practical
reasons. Conceptually, when farmers make the decision to pursue SRI, they cannot observe the behavior of
their neighbors. Under SRI, seedling transplanting typically takes place less than ten days after germination in
nursery beds. At a very busy time of year, there is scant time to observe many others’ contemporaneous
cultivation choices before making the irreversible decision as to whether to cultivate using SRI or SRT
methods. Practically, contemporaneous SRI use in the community is surely endogenous to omitted, time-

26

28
cumulative, conformity is purely contemporaneous. What matters is whether one fits current, not
historical, community practice or the prevailing directives of authority figures who are present. We
can exploit this temporal difference between cumulative, concave learning and contemporaneous
conformity to test for the presence of conformity effects.
The assumption of (weakly) concave learning is pivotal, for it permits us to deduce that any
estimated marginal effect of current extension presence in excess of that of past extension presence
must be due to conformity to authority effects and any positive difference between the effects
associated with current and historical community use must be due to social conformity effects.
Negative differences, by contrast, could be due to declining marginal productivity of knowledge, and
thus declining marginal effect on the probability of adoption, and are inconsistent with the
hypothesis of conformity effects. So a test of the null-hypothesis that cumulative and
contemporaneous effects are identical versus the alternate hypothesis that contemporaneous effects
are larger, serves as a test of the conformity hypothesis under the maintained assumption of weakly
concave learning.
One might legitimately question the crucial concavity assumption. If farmers only learn once
they make the decision to adopt and therefore rely on the availability of others to instruct or be
observed by them as they initially experiment with the new technology, or if the knowledge imparted
by the extension agent or by neighbors is less important their physical presence to assist, then
knowledge may be locally convex in past exposure to extension agents or neighbors’ experiments.
The estimated marginal effect of contemporaneous extension presence or community use would
then exceed that of past presence or use. Therefore, if knowledge is not concave in exposure to
extension or others’ use, it becomes impossible to separate conformity from learning in the data.
Absent any clear evidence as to how farmers really learn about new technologies, it is hard to know

varying, community-specific factors for which we cannot control adequately. Lagged use patterns minimizes
such potential endogeneity bias in estimation.

29
whether our method of identifying conformity effects from learning effects rests on empirically
sound assumptions.
With that significant caution in mind, we turn to the estimation results with respect to
conformity effects reflected in the current extension and past season’s community SRI use variables
(Table 5). As just described, we test the joint null hypothesis that there is no difference between the
coefficients on the current extension presence and cumulative past extension presence variables, nor
between the coefficients on the past year’s adoption rate and the percent of farmers in the
community having ever tried SRI, versus the alternative hypothesis that the marginal effects of the
contemporaneous variables are greater. In the initial, adoption probit, the test statistic of 103.74
shows that the effects of current extension and community adoption indeed exceed those of past
exposure. Under the maintained hypothesis of concave learning, this would signal significant
conformity effects in the initial adoption decision. The effect seems to exist with respect to both
community level of adoption, as reflected by the difference between the point estimates for percent
of use in the previous year and percent ever adoption (7.363 - -9.261), and extension, as reflected in
the difference between the point estimates for current extension presence and cumulative extension
presence to date (1.015 - -0.314). Separate tests for conformity to authority and social conformity,
also provided in Table 5, suggest both factors are at play.
These effects are also important in subsequent decisions by adopters over the share of rice
area to plant in SRI and whether to disadopt the method. The conformity to extension effect
appears present in the choice of extent. There is also a positive and significant difference between
the estimated effects of immediate past and historical community adoption patterns, suggesting social
conformity plays a role in SRI adoption patterns in these villages. Social conformity seems to matter
more than conformity to extension in the disadoption model. Part of the latter effect could be due
to funding difficulties ATS faced in 1999 that caused it to withdraw extension service from many
villages, including some of our sample villages. The sharply negative and statistically significant
coefficient on the 1999 dummy variable may well be picking up year-specific effects that reduce the

30
precision of the estimated effects of extension presence, for which there is a relatively large, positive
coefficient estimate. The signs of the estimated effects of present and past extension presence are
the same in the disadoption probit model as in the other models; they are just imprecisely estimated
relative to the other two models, perhaps due to this 1999 effect. Overall, these results are highly
suggestive of the influence of nonpecuniary conformity effects on small farmers’ technology
adoption patterns.

7. Concluding Remarks
This paper explores the puzzle of disappointingly low rates of adoption and high rates of
disadoption of an extraordinarily promising new technology among rice farmers in Madagascar. By
recreating the history of adoption and land use among 317 households in five villages, we were able
to explore the multifactorial determinants of technology adoption dynamics in such a setting. We
employ a multi-step estimation method, including a rarely exploited technique for estimating Tobittype models that allows us to control for farmer fixed effects that surely matter a great deal to farm
management decisions. Consistent with the longstanding literature, we find strong evidence
supporting the hypothesis that farmer education, liquidity and labor availability matter to farmers’
willingness to try new, labor-intensive technologies.
Like a more recent literature, we also find that learning effects play a major role, not only in
farmers’ initial decisions to try a new technology, but also in the subsequent decisions as to what
proportion of their cultivated area to put into the new method and whether or not to continue with
the method in future years. In sum, liquidity, labor and learning effects all matter, albeit to different
degrees and with regard to slightly different decisions regarding the use of a technology. Unobserved
farmer fixed effects (such as skill and motivation) seem to play a huge role in adoption and continued
use. This implies that models that fail to control for such effects likely overstate the role of such
factors as education and experience, perhaps exaggerating learning-by-doing effects.

31
We also introduce a somewhat speculative but highly suggestive method for trying to
distinguish between learning-from-others effects and small farmers’ nonpecuniary incentives to
conform their behavior to those of their neighbors or to the wishes of people in positions of
influence and power in their community. The results of this identification strategy suggest that
conformity effects may indeed play a significant role in farmers’ technology adoption and use
patterns. This particular point merits additional exploration in other data sets and using other
identification strategies, but we think it promising and highly consistent with the relevant sociological
literature on technology adoption (Rogers 1995).
The case of SRI highlights a common problem in rural development: technology adoption is
key to improving farmer productivity and household income, but the complexity of the adoption
process makes targeting technologies difficult. Even when all the essential elements seem to be
present (a low-external input, high-yielding technology, significant training and extension efforts,
etc.), the end result can disappoint those responsible for developing and promoting the method.
The labor-intensive nature of SRI and many other low-external input technologies have long
been viewed as a positive characteristic in areas where labor is the main resource of the household
(Lee and Ruben 2001). Yet the labor requirement is precisely the obstacle to adoption for many poor
households with highly seasonal labor and income patterns.27 Seasonal family labor and liquidity
constraints prevent poorer Malagasy farmers from taking advantage of SRI. Similar findings
concerning the distributionally regressive nature of rice intensification strategies in Madagascar
suggest that promoting alternative (non-rice) sources of income among the poorer farmers should be
an important part of rural development programs in that country (Minten and Zeller 2000).
Yet, it must also be recognized that although the poorest farmers rarely benefit directly from
new technologies, because they tend to cultivate smaller plots, be more risk averse and less likely to

27 This underscores the inaccuracy of the prevailing wisdom that opportunity costs of labor time are inevitably
lower among the poor than among the wealthy. In the presence of multiple factor market failures – in this
case, for interseasonal finance and land – the poor often face greater shadow wage rates greater than the
wealthy (Barrett and Clay 2003).

32
interact with extension agents (Feder et al. 1985), they may nonetheless enjoy significant net benefits
in their role as hired workers and as net food buyers. If bigger farmers adopt labor-intensive
technologies such as SRI on a sufficiently large extent without turning to mechanization, hired labor
demand (and thus wages) ought to increase, and if widespread adoption on bigger farms increases
aggregate food supply enough, rice prices should fall. This may disappoint those who want to have a
direct impact, but the painful reality is that the poorest rural residents are commonly net food buyers
and rely heavily on unskilled off-farm labor earnings (Weber et al. 1988, Barrett and Dorosh 1996,
Reardon 1997). Higher wages and lower food prices through technological advances on larger farms
could prove more effective than increasing smallholder productivity in reducing rural African poverty
and food insecurity. However, considering the high rates of disadoption among farmers who do not
face liquidity problems but enjoy remunerative off-farm options, and the low extent of adoption
among those who continue to practice the method, such aggregate effects seem unlikely in
Madagascar for the foreseeable future.

33
References
Abdulai, A., Monin, P., Gerber, J., May 2003. Output Uncertainty, Information Acquisition and
the Adoption of New Technologies: Evidence from Tanzania. Working Paper.
Akerlof, G., 1980. Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment May Be One Consequence.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, 749-775.
Akerlof, G., 1997. Economics of Illusion. Econometrica 2, 317-31.
Association-Tefy-Saina, 1995. Coûts de Revient Dans les Systèmes de Riziculture Divers. National
Workshop on SRI. Antananarivo, Association Tefy Saina.
Association-Tefy-Saina, 1999. SRI Hautes-Terres 1998-1999. Antananarivo, Association Tefy Saina.
Association-Tefy-Saina, 1995. Projet Parc National de Ranomafana: Rapport d'Activites 1995.
Association-Tefy-Saina, 1998. Statistiques sur les Exploitants Appliquant le SRI: Campagnes
Rizicoles: 1994-97.
Association-Tefy-Saina-Fianarantsoa, 1999. Fast-track Rapport Compagne Rizicole 1998-1999.
Fianarantsoa, Association Tefy Saina.
Barrett, C.B., Clay, D.C., June 2003. Self-Targeting Accuracy in the Presence of Imperfect Factor
Markets: Evidence from Food-for-Work in Ethiopia. Journal of Development Studies 39,
152-180.
Barrett, C.B., Dorosh, P, 1996. Farmers' Welfare and Changing Food Prices: Nonparametric
Evidence from Rice in Madagascar. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 78, 656669.
Barrett, C.B., Moser, C., May 2003. Better Technology, Better Plots or Better Farmers? Identifying
Productivity Gains Among Malagasy Smallholders From The System of Rice Intensification.
Cornell University Working Paper.

34
Besley, T., Case, A., May 1993. Modeling Technology Adoption in Developing Countries. American
Economic Review 83, 396-402.
Cameron, L. A., 1999. The Importance of Learning in the Adoption of High-Yielding Variety Seeds.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 81, 83-94.
Conley, T., Udry, C., 2001. Social Learning Through Networks: The Adoption of New Agricultural
Technologies in Ghana. American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 82.
David, C., Otsuka, K. (eds.), 1994. Modern Rice Technology and Income Distribution in Asia.
Boulder, CO. Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Feder, G., Just, R., Zilberman, D., 1985. Adoption of Agricultural Innovations in Developing
Countries: A Survey. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 255-298.
Foster, A., Rosenzweig, M., 1995. Learning By Doing and Learning from Others: Human Capital
and Technical Change in Agriculture. Journal of Political Economy 103, 1176-1209.
Frisvold, G. A., 1994. Does Supervision Matter? Some Hypothesis Tests Using Indian Farm-Level
Data. Journal of Development Economics 43, 217-238.
Greene, W., 1997. Econometric Analysis. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Hirsch, R., 2000. La Riziculture Malgache Revisitee: Diagnostic et Perspectives 1993-1999.
Unpublished report to Agence Francaise de Developpement.
Joelibarison, October 2001. Summary Economic Analysis of SRI Methods unpublished Cornell
University memorandum.
Kevane, M., Wydick, B., 2001. Social Norms and the Time Allocation of Women's Labor in Burkina
Faso. Review of Development Economics 5, 119-129.
Kreps, D., 1997. Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives. American Economic Review 87,
359-364.

35
Lee, D., Ruben, R.., 2000. Putting the 'Farmer First': Returns to Labor and Sustainability in
Agroecological Analysis. 24th International Conference of the International Agricultural
Economics Association. Berlin.
Madeley, J., 23 January 2001. Madagascar Rice Trial Lead to Agricultural Revolution: New Methods
Break with Centuries of Tradition. Financial Times, London, pp 44.
Minten, B., Zeller, M. (eds) 2000. Beyond Market Liberalization: Welfare, Income Generation and
Environmental Sustainability in Rural Madagascar. Ashgate, Vermont.
Moser, C.M., 2001. Technology Adoption Decisions of Farmers Facing Seasonal Liquidity
Constraints: A Case Study of the System of Rice Intensification in Madagascar. M.S. thesis,
Department of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University.
Moser, C.M., Barrett, C.B., June 2003. The Disappointing Adoption Dynamics of a Yield-Increasing,
Low External Input Technology: The Case of SRI in Madagascar. Agricultural Systems 76,
1085-1100.
Neill, S., Lee, D., July 2001. Explaining the Adoption and Disadoption of Sustainable Agriculture:
the Case of Cover Crops in Northern Honduras. Economic Development and Cultural
Change 49, 793-820.
Platteau, J.-P., 2000. Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development. Harwood Academic
Publishers.
Powell, J., November 1986. Symmetrically Trimmed Least Squares Estimation for Tobit Models.
Econometrica. 54, 1435-1460.
Rajaonarison, J., 1999. Contribution à l'Amélioration des Rendements de 2ème Saison de la Double
Riziculture par SRI sous Expérimentations Multifactorielles. Thesis. Science Agronomique.
Antananarivo, Université d'Antananarivo.

36
Rakotomalala, H. W., 1997.Comparaison entre la Riziculture Traditionnelle et le Système de
Riziculture Intensive dans La Région de Ranomafana. Thesis. Science Agronomique.
Antananarivo, Université d'Antananarivo.
Reardon, T., 1997. Using Evidence of Household Income Diversification to Inform Study of the
Rural Nonfarm Labor Market in Africa. World Development 25, 735-748.
Rogers, E.M., 1995. Diffusion of innovations. Free Press,New York .
Stoop, W.A., Uphoff, N., Kassam, A., March 2002. A Review of Agricultural Research Issues Raised
By The System of Rice Intensification SRI from Madagascar: Opportunities For Improving
Farming Systems For Resource-Poor Farmers. Agricultural Systems 71, 249-274.
Uphoff, N.T., June 2000a. Update on the System of Rice Intensification SRI unpublished Cornell
University memorandum.
Uphoff, N.T., 2000b. Agroecological implications of the system of rice intensification SRI in
Madagascar. Environment, Development and Sustainability 3
Uphoff, N., Fernandes, E.C.M., Yuan, L.P., Peng, J.M., Rafaralahy, S., Rabenandrasana, J., 2002.
Assessment of the system for rice intensification SRI. Proceedings of an International
Conference, Sanya, China, April 1-4, 2002. http://ciifad.cornell.edu/sri/proccontents.html,
verified 14 May 2003. Cornell International Institute for Food, Agriculture and
Development CIIFAD, Ithaca, NY.
Zeller, M., 1994. Determinants of Credit Rationing: A Study of Informal Lenders and Formal Credit
Groups in Madagascar. World Development 22, 1895-1907.

37

Table 1. Adopters and Disadopters of SRI for the Survey Sites*
Ambatovaky

Percentage of households
trying the method between
1993-99
Percentage of households
using the method in 1999
Percentage of adopters
who disadopted
*Based on a census of households.
of households at each site.

Iambara

Torotosy

Anjazafotsy Manandona

Sample
Average

48

16

27

28

21

25

26

7

0

13

17

15

46

53

100

49

19

40

Sample average is weighted to account for different numbers

Table 2. Farmer and Household Characteristics
(means by strata, unless otherwise indicated)
Adopters
Disadopters
Number surveyed

Non-Adopters

80

83

154

Age of household head (years)

44.6

41.7

44.4

Years of education of household heada

5.5

5.3

4.0

Percent belonging to a farmer associationa

49

52

29

Number of adults in household

3.7

3.4

3.6

Number of children in household

3.3

3.0

3.3

Total lowland rice area 1999 (hectares)a

0.67

0.66

0.54

Total lowland rice area 1993 (hectares)b

0.56

0.61

0.46

Other crop area (hectares)

0.58

0.63

0.53

a (b): non-adopter category statistically significantly different from other categories at 5% (10%) significance
level.

38

Variable
Education

Table 3. Variable Definitions
Definition
Number of years of education of the household head.

Model
Adopt,
Disadoption

Farmers’ organization

Dummy variable indicating whether the farmer belongs to a
farmer’s group.

Adopt

Agricultural day labor

Dummy variable equaling one if agricultural wages were a
major source of income for the household.—considered a
sign of poverty.

Adopt,
Disadoption

Stable income source

Seasonally stable income sources that are widely considered
signs of relative wealth (salary, metalworking, and milk
production) and is a dummy variable indicating one of these
sources available to the household.

Adopt,
Disadoption

Distance to field

Average distance in minutes to the household’s rice field.

Adopt,
Disadoption

Distance between fields

Average distance in minutes between fields.

Disadoption

Number of adults

Number of adults in the household.

Adopt,
Disadoption

Number of children

Number of children in the household.

Adopt,
Disadoption

Female farmer

Dummy variable equaling one if the farmer is woman.

Adopt

Age of the farmer

Age of farmer

Adopt,
Disadoption

Total lowland rice area

Number of ares of rice cultivated by the household.

Adopt,
Disadoption

Off-season cropping

Number of ares planted in winter crops on the rice fields.

All

Extension presence

Dummy variable equaling one if SRI extension services were
available in the community during that year.

All

Past extension

Total number of years prior for which extension was
available.

All

Percent of farmers
using SRI

Percent of farmers in the community practicing SRI the
previous season.

All

Percent of farmers ever
trying

Percent of farmers in the community who have ever tried
SRI.

All

Percent disadopting

Percent of farmers in the community who have disadopted.

Disadoption

Experience

Years of experience with SRI for farmer.

Extent and
Disadoption

1996, 1997, 1998, 1999

Year specific dummy variables.

All

39
Table 4. Adoption Probit Estimates
Explanatory Variable
Constant

Coefficient
Estimate
-2.045

P-value
(0.000)

Education

0.068

(0.000)

Farmers’ organization

0.456

(0.000)

Agricultural day labor

-0.354

(0.001)

Stable income source

0.654

(0.000)

Distance to field

-0.001

(0.712)

Number of adults

-0.046

(0.026)

Number of children

-0.001

(0.948)

Female farmer

-0.195

(0.087)

Age of the farmer

-0.018

(0.280)

Age squared

0.000

(0.428)

Total lowland rice area

0.004

(0.000)

Off-season cropping

0.001

(0.568)

Extension presence

1.015

(0.000)

-0.314

(0.000)

7.363

(0.000)

-9.261

(0.000)

1999

2.441

(0.000)

1998

1.484

(0.000)

1997

0.984

(0.000)

1996

0.506
N
Pseudo R2

(0.000)
1585
0.354

Past extension
Percent of farmers using
Percent of farmers ever trying

40

Table 5. Joint Hypothesis Tests28
Effect
Liquidity
Learning by Doing

Adopt (Probit)
χ2
P-value
51.78
(0.00)

Extent (Tobit)
F
P-value
NA
NA

Disadoption (Probit)
χ2
P-value
11.18
(0.01)

NA

NA

NA

NA

30.04

(0.00)

Learning from others

216.48

(0.00)

6.34

(0.00)

26.81

(0.00)

Conformity
(to authority and to social
norms)

103.74

(0.00)

12.44

(0.00)

9.07

(0.01)

Conformity to Authority
(Extension)

74.27

(0.00)

12.75

(0.00)

1.64

(0.20)

Social conformity
(% of households
adopting)

44.31

(0.00)

15.93

(0.00)

5.27

(0.02)

NA = not applicable

28 The joint hypothesis Wald tests were conducted as follows: The liquidity effects variables are agricultural day
labor, permanent income, and off-season cropping, and to test whether these variables have an effect on the
dependent variables is equivalent to testing whether coefficients on these variable equal zero. Learning from
others is measured by the extension variables, community history of SRI use, and interactions with other (SRI)
farmers through membership in a farmer’s organization or personal knowledge. Learning by doing is measured
by the farmer’s experience with the method and his education. To distinguish the conformity effects from the
learning effects, the joint tests of the former test whether the effects of current extension and the percent of
households practicing exceed those of past extension and percent of households ever adopting. These tests are
not conducted if the coefficient for the most recent observation does not exceed that of the past observations.

41
Table 6. Tobit Estimation Results
(using Powell’s symmetrically trimmed least squares estimator,
with White’s heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors)

Explanatory Variable

Coefficient
Estimate

0.005

(0.011)
(0.098)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.124)

0.438

(0.000)

-0.044

(0.225)

-0.081

(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.033)
(0.000)
510

Off-season cropping

0.001

Extension presence

0.056

Past extension

-0.091

Experience

-0.126

Experience squared
% of farmers practicing
SRI previous year
% of farmers having ever
tried SRI
Age of the farmer

(P-value)

Age squared

0.001

1999

0.511

1998

0.396

1997

0.284

1996

0.096

Constant

2.075
N=

42

Table 7. Disadoption Probit Estimates
Explanatory Variable
Constant

Coefficient
Estimate
1.066

P-value
(0.345)

Education

0.028

(0.317)

Agricultural day labor

0.439

(0.223)

Stable income source

-0.645

(0.002)

Number of adults

0.067

(0.174)

Number of children

0.088

(0.020)

Area in SRI the first year
(ares)

0.015

(0.001)

-0.055

(0.238)

0.001

(0.190)

-0.001

(0.722)

Distance to fields (minutes)

0.003

(0.663)

Distance between fields
(minutes)

0.002

(0.823)

Percent Disadopting

-1.030

(0.096)

Off-season cropping

0.003

(0.391)

Extension presence

0.509

(0.141)

-0.079

(0.623)

Percent of farmers using

2.862

(0.015)

Percent of farmers ever
trying

-1.758

(0.061)

Experience

-1.514

(0.000)

2.484

(0.000)

1999

-2.174

(0.000)

1998

-1.018

(0.011)

1997

0.141

(0.724)

1996

1.376
N=
Pseudo R2

(0.001)
418
0.6464

Age of the farmer
Age squared
Total lowland rice area

Past extension

Experience squared

43

Proportion of households

0.25
0.20
0.15

Adopters
Disadopters

0.10
0.05
0.00
1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Year

Figure 1. Percent of Households Adopting SRI Across Five Sites 1993-1999

