AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

The economic and financial gains from water markets in Chile
Robert R. Hearne
b

a,* ,

K. William Easter

b

• International Institute for Environment and Development, 3 Ends leigh St., London, WCI H ODD, UK
Department of Applied Economics, University of Minnesota, I994 Buford Ave. #3I7, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA

Accepted 19 August 1996

Abstract
Chile is one of the few countries that has encouraged the use of markets in water resource management. In order to assess the impact of
water markets and transactions costs in Chile, four river valleys, the Maipo, Elqui, Limari, and the Azapa were selected as case studies.
Transactions from the Elqui and Limari valleys, during the years 1986 to 1993, were analyzed to determine the gains-from-trade from
market transfers.
In the economic and financial analysis of water markets, crop budgets were used to estimate the value of water in agricultural
production. The value of water-use rights to urban water-supply companies was estimated using the avoided cost of an alternative
investment in a water-storage reservoir. The analysis demonstrated that the market transfer of water-use rights does produce substantial
economic gains-from-trade in both the Elqui and Limari Valleys. These economic gains produce rents for both buyers and sellers. But
buyers, especially farmers growing profitable crops who buy water-use rights and individuals buying water-use rights for potable water
supply, receive higher rents then sellers. Large table-grape producers in the Limari Valley and individuals buying water for human
consumption in the Elqui Valley received the highest rents. In the Elqui Valley net gains-from-trade per share were within the range of
recent transfer prices of US$1000. In the Limari Valley, gains-from-trade per share are 3.4 times the recent prices of US$3000 for a share of
water from the Cogoti Reservoir.
Where trading was active, especially in the Limari Valley, transactions costs have not presented an appreciable barrier to trading.
Nonetheless, in the large canal systems with fixed flow dividers in the Elqui and Maipo Valley there have been very few transactions.
Various factors contribute to the lack of trading, but the absence of trading in these large canal systems highlights the costs of modifying
fixed infrastructure, especially for trades between farmers.

1. Introduction

With the growing concern about the increased
scarcity and inefficient allocation and use of water
resources, much attention has been focused on the
use of markets in water allocation. A market based
allocation could secure water supplies for high-value
uses in urban and rural areas without the need to
develop costly, new sources of supply that may be
environmentally damaging. Also by securing com-

' Corresponding author.

pensation for water transferred from low valued uses,
water markets provide an incentive for more efficient
water use in agricultural, industrial, and municipal
uses. Furthermore, if markets work properly, price
signals can provide the information needed for efficient water allocation more effectively than models
developed by a central water resources management
agency (Rosegrant and Binswanger, 1994).
The effectiveness of water markets is constrained
by the ability of buyers and sellers to measure and
transport water, to legalize and enforce transactions,
and to account for water quality. Thus, the effect of
transactions costs and the infrastructure and institu-

0169-5150/97 j$17.00 Copyright © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PI/ S0\69-5150(96)01205-4

188

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

tions that reduce these transactions costs are critical
to the effectiveness of water markets. In addition, the
unconstrained movement of water via private exchanges can produce negative external effects on
third party users. There is also the fear that the free
exchange of water may disadvantage poor people.
Because of these concerns there is continued doubt
among water resource managers, policy makers, and
analysts of the type and scope of benefits that occur
with the establishment of transferable water-use
rights. There is continued doubt that the establishment of transferable water-use rights is sufficient for
the creation of an active market that will equitably
reallocate water. And there is concern that if trading
does occur that the benefits of these trades will be
captured by only a small group of landowners and
investors.
Consequently, it is important to analyze Chile's
experience with transferable water-use rights since
Chile is one of the few countries that has encouraged
the use of water markets. Market allocation in Chile
is possible, in part, because a system of transferable
water-use rights was reestablished in 1981. These
rights are independent of land use and land ownership, thus trade of water rights is fairly unrestricted.
The codification of these water-use rights coincided
with a series of reforms in the Chilean economy
including privatized land rights and liberalized trade.
This paper presents a description and an analysis
of water allocation and water markets in Chile, with
an emphasis on areas of relatively frequent trades.
The first part of the paper provides a brief introduction. This is followed by an analysis of economic
and financial gains-from-trade as well as a description of the water markets. The paper then concludes
with some observations concerning the water markets in Chile and the institutions that facilitate trading.
1.1. Water markets, transactions costs, and institutions

As an introduction to a discussion of water markets it is useful to distinguish between the exchange
of water and the exchange of water-use rights. This
is appropriate because the distinction highlights the
importance of the institutional arrangements for water resource allocation. The former - sometimes

referred to as a 'spot market' - occurs when the
owner of a legal or prescriptive right to a certain
volume or flow of water sells a portion of that water,
sometimes outside of legal sanction, to a neighbor in
a simple transaction. These exchanges are for a finite
period of time - sometimes for only a few hours of
irrigation. Although the unit of sales may not be
metered volumetrically, both buyer and seller have
good information on the volume involved. A more
permanent transaction involves the exchange of the
water-use right itself. This generally requires legal
sanction to maintain the security of the right after the
transfer. These transfers are generally permanent, but
can be for a finite, but extended period of time - at
least one irrigation season. And the burden of uncertain supply will fall on the purchaser of the right.
Where water is scarce and legally defined transferable water-use rights exist, market trades can be
expected when the difference in the value of water
between two uses is greater than the costs of transferring the water. In the absence of transactions costs
economic incentives would induce water users to
trade water-use rights until the marginal value of
these rights was equal across all users. Of course;
transactions costs do limit the movement of water
and the transfer of water-use rights. Transactions
costs for water market transfers include: (i) the cost
of the physical infrastructure needed to measure and
transport water, including the evaporation and filtration losses during conveyance; (ii) the cost of searching and finding willing buyers and sellers, and nego~
tiating a contract; and (iii) the cost of validating legal
ownership of the water-use right, legalizing the contract, enforcing contract provisions, and acquiring
the necessary permission from regulatory authorities
to transfer water. Because these transactions costs
can be large, the number of potential buyers and
sellers may be limited - which may result in non~
competitive pricing.
The market exchange of water and water-use
rights is a relatively rare phenomenon, and thus the
economic analyses of actual exchanges are scarce. A
few studies have simulated the effects of market and
administrative transfers in the western USA (Vaux
and Howitt, 1984; Whittlesey and Houston, 1984;
Hamilton et al., 1989; Dinar and Letey, 1991; Rosen
and Sexton, 1993; and Weinberg et al., 1993). Other
studies have relied on data from actual trades in

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

order to assess the efficiency of water markets.
Maass and Anderson (1978) evaluated the water
market in Alicante, Spain, and found that the market
system produced greater net increases in regional
income than the rotation systems. Chang and Griffin
(1992) estimated the gains-from-trade for transfers
from agriculture to municipal water supply. Finally,
Colby (1990) estimated the transactions costs required to obtain approval of water transfers and the
litigation costs of third party challenges and suggests
that this is not overly burdensome.

1.2. Water allocation institutions in Chile
Chile has a tradition of private development of
water resources and private rights to shares of river
and canal flows that dates to the colonial era. This
tradition was reestablished in the National Water
Code of 1981 (D.F.L. Number 1122) which allows
private transferable property rights for water use.
The 1981 water law stipulates that water is a national
resource for public use but that permanent and transferable rights to utilize water can be granted to
individuals in accordance with the law. Water-use
rights can be granted by the government upon petition, can be purchased from an individual owner, or
can be retained based on traditional use. Currently,
there is no stipulation that water-use rights must be
utilized in order to be retained.
The law stipulates that rights are to be specified
by volume of flow per unit of time. But in most river
valleys rights are defined as a share of stream flow,
because the high variability of natural river flows
prohibits volumetric specification. Since consumptive use rights are granted for the full use of all the
water stipulated in the right, no downstream user has
any right to return flows generated from upstream
users. Downstream rights holders are not protected
by law from any change in upstream water use that
significantly reduces return flows. There is also no
restriction on the transfer of upstream water to another basin.
The Direcci6n General de Aguas is responsible
for water resources planning and the development
and exploitation of water resources. It collects data
on water resources, maintains cadastres of water use,
and has limited authority to intervene in conflicts
between water users. The Direcci6n General de

189

Aguas also grants, upon petition, water-use rights for
surface and ground water that is not already claimed.
These grants are a matter of public record. During
times of drought the Direcci6n General de Aguas can
impound water, with compensation to holders of
water-use rights.
Although the Direcci6n General de Aguas does
have broad authority in water resources management,
much of the actual control over river flows is exercised by the local river monitoring authorities, the
juntas de vigilancia (JDV). These JDV manage and
maintain storage reservoirs, and are responsible for
reducing the flow of water to canals during times of
water scarcity. The JDV are controlled by the river's
water-use rights holders on a particular section of a
river. Thus in some river basins, irrigators, mining
companies, and water supply companies are part of
the same JDV. Currently, the court system is the
final arbiter of water-use conflicts.
Historically, the development of irrigation in Chile
has been dominated by the private sector. All privately developed irrigation systems and many of
those developed by the state are owned and controlled by independent water user associations
(WUAs). These WUAs are owned and operated by
their members, and charge fees based on the their
capital and operating costs. The WUAs maintain the
canal systems, keep records of rights holders, apportion water to individual rights holders according to
their recorded shares, and enforce water rights. The
1981 Water Code specifies rules for the formation,
governance, and obligations of these WUAs.

2. Calculation of gains-from-trade and economic
rents
In order to assess the impact of water markets and
transactions costs in Chile, four river valleys, the
upper Maipo in Chile's central valley, and the Elqui
and Limarf valleys in north-central Chile, and the
Azapa Valley in the far north of Chile were selected
as case studies (Hearne, 1995; Hearne and Easter,
1995). These valleys were identified based on prior
information that suggested that there was - or should
be - active trading in the area. Attempts were made
to identify all transactions of water-use rights in
these areas for the years 1986-1993. These years

190

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter j Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

were chosen because of reports of more active water
trading in recent years, because they include both
wet and dry years, and because farmers were expected to provide more accurate information on recent transactions. Water transactions in conjunction
with land transactions were generally not considered,
because they usually do not represent a change in
water-use patterns.
A survey instrument was developed to solicit
information from farmers who have participated in
water market transactions. This information included: (i) individual characteristics of buyers and
sellers; (ii) water transactions, including price, quantity, and transactions costs; and (iii) farmer's crop
yields. In order to maintain the confidence of the
respondent in the survey procedure questions on
incomes and tax rates were avoided. 1
Individuals making transactions were identified
from records of WUAs, from local real estate registries, and from other transacting parties.
Agronomists from the Universidad Cat6lica of Santiago were recruited as enumerators. Attempts were
made to contact all individuals who had made transactions in the areas selected for analysis. Managers
of urban water-supply companies and industrial users
of water were also interviewed.
2.1. Crop budget analysis in valuing water rights

The net returns, calculated using farm budget
analyses, is an upper bound to farmer's willingness
to pay for water in irrigation. This is not a marginal
analysis, but an estimate of the average value of
water. The net returns to a farmer are the maximum
that a farmer could pay for water and land, and still
break even. In this study, farm budgets are used for
both an economic and financial analysis of water
markets. Net returns are divided between land and
water according to relative market values (solicited

1 In general, respondents had no incentive to bias responses.
Nevertheless, confidentiality of individual survey responses was
promised and respected. Because fees paid to notary republics are
based on transaction prices, there might be an incentive for buyers
to report low transaction prices at the registration of the title.
However, transaction prices were often public knowledge, and
many buyers wanted transaction prices to be known in order to
attract more sellers.

in this study using a survey of farmers) of land and
water used in crop production. The financial analysis
is performed to determine individual incentives to
participate in water markets. In contrast, the economic analysis provides the net return to society
from market transfers. In an economic analysis,
transfer payments are excluded and prices are adjusted for economic values (explained in more detail
later in this paper). The following paragraphs explain
this procedure and the assumptions used.
Farmer's per hectare yields are based on survey
data. In the case where farmers did not respond to
this question, average yields from other surveyed
farmers were used. 2 Output price and cost of production information were taken from representative
crop budgets used by the Direcci6n de Riego and the
Department of Economics of The Universidad
Cat61ica of Chile in the financial and economic
appraisal of irrigation projects in the Elqui and Limarf valleys, dated 1991 and 1992.
Because a time series of input prices was not
available, relative input and output prices are assumed to remain constant. Farmer's cost in supplying labor to clean common canals and water fees
paid to WUAs are included as production costs,
because they account solely for the cost of water
delivery (WUAs are non-profit organizations, and
they determine their own fees in accordance with
their capital and operating costs). The cost of labor
to clean canals within the farm is included in the
labor cost of the crop budget. To allocate water costs
among crops the farmer's total expenditure for water
is multiplied by the percentage of water used for
each crop as determined in the interview.
The cost of servicing a debt to cover the costs of
initial crop development is included for all permanent crops. These costs are taken from the same crop
budget information. Net revenues are discounted by
7% in order to account for management services. In
order to account for the risk absorbed by a farmer, a
15% commercial loan rate was used for both interseasonal finance and crop development, since the
rate includes a risk premium.

2 For major crops such as table grapes missing observations on
yields were infrequent. Overall, 20% of the respondents did not
report yields.

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter I Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

In Chile agricultural taxes are fairly complex. A
simple option for farmers is to pay a land tax of 10%
of the assessed value. Because land assessments are
generally not up to date, the stated assessed value is
probably much less than the market value reported in
the survey, and for this reason reported market values are discounted by 50%. Land taxes payments
were deducted from net revenues in the financial
analysis of rents to buyers and sellers. These payments were not deducted from net revenues in the
economic analysis because they are transfer payments and do not reflect a net loss to society.
2.2. Value of water for potable water supply in the
Elqui Valley
The value of water-use rights in the Elqui River
for potable water supply can be determined by the
purchaser's ability to forego the need to invest in
more costly alternatives to obtain water supplies.
Since the demand for water in this service area will
continue to rise, the least cost alternative for meeting
this demand - in the absence of effective water
markets - is the appropriate methodology for assessing the value of water. Ground water in this area is
very deep, and of poor quality, and would not be a
cost-effective alternative, except for emergency supplies in summer months.
The primary alternative for potable water supply
would be to construct a reservoir in the Elqui Valley.
In fact, ESSCO, the municipal water-supply company which services the valley's urbanized coastal
area, opted out of a proposed joint venture with the
Ministry of Public Work's Direcci6n de Riego to
construct the Puclaro Dam on the Rfo Elqui. At a
cost of US$23 500 000, ESSCO was offered sufficient capacity in the proposed reservoir to meet its
needs for secure water supplies well into the next
century. 3 ESSCO's refusal of this offer coincided
with its current program to purchase water-use rights
on the Elqui River.
Information for the calculation of the value of

3 Conversation with Direcci6n de Riego, Santiago, June 1992.
The Direcci6n de Riego also offered reservoir water at a lower
price but without tbe security of delivery that ESSCO is required
to have.

191

delaying the construction of this water project is
taken from a 1991 feasibility study of the Puclaro
project (CIAPEP, 1991) and from conversations with
ESSCO's planning department. According to the
CIAPEP study, the demand for water in the urban
coastal area is growing at a rate of 2.1% per annum.
At this rate ESSCO's current supply of water will be
insufficient to meet its needs by the year 2011
(which also is a reasonable date to have expected in 1992 - the full completion of the Puclaro Dam
project). Following a procedure outlined by Moncur
and Pollack (1988), the value of a water-use right is
equal to the costs saved in delaying the need for
introducing a more expensive water supply. The
value, C/>1' is the 1992 value of the 570000 m 3 of
water needed in 2010 to cover the increased demand
for water, as shown in Eq. (1):

cl

C/>=-I
er(T-t)

(1)

where: r = 0.12, T = 2010, t = 1992, C 1 =
Ch$1 006 054 000 = the yearly payment for a loan of
US$23 500 000, at 12% interest for 35 years, at a
1992 exchange rate of Ch$350 = US$1.00. Thus,
C/> 1 = Ch$116 023 303 which is the 1992 value of the
water needed to fulfil ESSCO's unmet water demand
in 2010. One interesting feature of this calculation is
that the volume of water needed in 2011 is not a
factor in the determination of its value. This is
because the Puclaro Reservoir would be large enough
to meet any reasonable increase in demand.
Once the value of the quantity of water needed to
delay the investment in the more expensive technology is determined, it is necessary to convert this
value into a per-share basis. It is assumed that 2.5
shares of the Elqui River are needed to ensure each
liter per second, because in 95 of 100 months, the
lower Elqui River delivers at least 0.41js per wateruse right. 4 Thus, C/> 1 = Ch$116023 303 is divided
by 45.3 shares to reach a value of Ch$2561220 for

4 Municipal water-supply companies are, by law, required to
have 95% security in water delivery. The estimate of 2.5 shares
per literI second, is taken from a review of tbe Junta de Vigilancia
de Rfo Elqui's records of water flow in tbe river, and corresponds
witb ESSCO's stated plan to purchase 1300 additional shares of
the Elqui River by 2020.

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

192

each of the first 45.3 shares purchased in 1992. The
value of all 217.8 net shares of Elqui water purchased by ESSCO in 1992-1993 are listed in Table
1.
Many of the water-use rights transactions in the
Elqui Valley involved the transfer of water from
agriculture to potable water uses outside of ESSCO's
service area. The most likely alternative source of
crude water supplies for all of these residential and
tourist developments is the same source as ESSCO's.
Therefore, the avoided cost of water for ESSCO is
also the value of a water-use right to others needing
potable water supplies downstream of the proposed
Puclaro Dam.
2.3. Economic analysis of gains-from-trade
Financial prices taken from representative crop
budgets were adjusted to present economic values.
Information from the 1991 CIAPEP study of the
Puclaro Dam was used in this adjustment because it
contains both economic and financial prices. Because
Chile has a relatively open economy with low tariffs,
free exchange rates, and open markets, the difference
between economic and financial prices are small. For
exportable goods, such as table grapes, a percentage
of the exporter's commission is added to the farmgate price in order to account for this transfer payment. For imported inputs, financial prices are adjusted for both import tariffs (11 %) and the foreign
exchange premium (10%). An adjustment was not
made to differentiate between the economic and
financial costs of constructing the Puclaro Reservoir,
because the adjustment factor is very close to one

Table I
Value of water rights for ESSCO's purchases
Year of
purchase
1992
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993
a
b

a

Year of
demand
2010
2011
2011
2012
2013
2014

b

Number of
shares

Value of
a share ( Ch$)

45.3
21.9
25.0
47.7
48.5
36.6

2561220
2204690
2475505
2157305
1881 798
1643589

ESSCO purchased 67.2 shares in 1992 and !57 .8 shares in 1993.
Projected demand based on current growth in water use.

(0.991) and the percentage of imported goods is
assumed to be relatively small.
Gross gains-from-trade were calculated by subtracting the value of water to the seller before a sale
from that of the buyer after a purchase, as in Eq. (2):
GFT/' 5 (w) = {v/[w(W1 ~ 1 +w)]

- V/[ w(W/"_ 1 - w)]}- TCb,s( w)
(2)
where: GFI'/' 5 ( w) = the gains-from-trade to society
of a transfer in time t, of a water-use right w, from
seller s, to buyer b; TCb,s( w) = the total transactions
costs of a transfer of w from s to b; V/[ w(W1 ~ 1 +
w )] =the buyer's value of w, as a percentage of the
average value of total post-trade water-use rights
(W1 ~ 1 + w ); and V/[ w(W1 ~ 1 - w )] =the seller's
value of w, as a percentage of the average value of
total post-trade water-use rights (W1 ~ 1 - w ). Efforts
were made to identify and interview both buyer and
seller of each transaction. When only the buyer was
interviewed, the value of water from sellers on the
same canal or area for the same year was used to
substitute for the other party. When only the seller
was interviewed, the value of water to similar buyers
was used.
In cases where the seller of a water-use right was
known not to have used the water prior to the
transaction, the right was valued at the weighted
average value of water to neighboring buyers and
sellers of water. This is because unused water is
generally distributed to other water users, along the
same canal or river. (This would tend to place a high
value on the transferred water-use right - because
the weighted average emphasizes the value of water
to the larger farmers who are buying water because
they own very profitable farms - and consequently
make the estimate of gains-from-trade conservative.)
Because of the interconnections in the Limarf Valley,
average values of water for above and below the
Paloma Reservoir were used. In the Elqui Valley
water was divided among users of the Rfo Claro and
Rfo Cochiguaz, users of the Rfo Elqui, and users of
the Herradura Canal.
All values were adjusted to June 1993 values
using Chile's consumer price index. Transactions
costs were obtained in the survey. These costs in-

193

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

elude: fees for attorneys, notaries, and engineers;
payments for modifications of canals or gates; the
costs of soliciting information; and the value of the
time involved in the process. A summary of total
transactions costs for the Elqui and Limarf Valleys is
presented in Table 2. Net gains-from-trade were
calculated by subtracting the transactions costs to
both buyers and sellers from gross gains-from-trade.
2.4. Financial analysis of economic rents to buyers
and sellers
Financial prices were employed in the crop budgets used in the analysis of individual economic
rents to buyers and sellers. In this analysis, a wateruse right that was not used by the seller prior to the
transaction was valued at zero. The seller's net rent
is the sale price, adjusted to 1993 values using
Chile's consumer price index, less both the value of
the water to the seller and the seller's transactions
cost, as shown in Eq. (3):
NR;(w) =P,W(b,slw- {vs[w(Wi~ 1 - w)]

+ TCS ( w)}

( 3)

where: P,w(b,s) =the transfer price of w negotiated
between seller s, and buyer b; NR:( w) = the net
rent to seller s of a sale of w to the buyer b; and
res( w) =seller s's transactions costs. To the buyer,
the net rent is the difference between the value of
water to the buyer and the sum of the buyer's
purchase price and transactions cost, as shown in Eq.
(4):
NR~( w)

=

V/( w)- [P,w(b,slw

+ TCb( w)].

( 4)

As reported, the sum of rents to buyers and sellers
does not equal the calculated gains-from-trade. This
is because economic gains differ from financial rents.
Also, for some transactions both buyer and seller
were not interviewed, and financial rents are calculated and reported only for interviewed parties.

3. Results
Only the transactions from the Elqui and Limarf
valleys were analyzed to determine the gains-fromtrade from market transfers. In the upper Maipo
valley transactions were rare - except for water-use
rights ceded to municipal water companies from
developers of urbanized land - and were not included in the analysis. Similarly, in the Azapa valley
only a few transactions were identified and gainsfrom-trade were not calculated. In the Elqui valley
transactions were infrequent, but there is significant
intersectoral transfer as well as a slow transfer of
water-use rights within agriculture. In the Limarf
Valley, with its well-developed system of irrigation
infrastructure and well-organized WUAs, transactions are fairly frequent.
3 .1. The Elqui Valley
The Elqui Valley in Chile's Region IV supplies
water for 18 700 ha of farmland as well as potable
water for a medium-sized city (250 000 inhabitants)
with a very large summer population. A small tourist
industry in several small communities in the scenic

Table 2
Transactions costs
Limarf Valley

Elqui Valley

Total transactions costs as a percentage of transaction price
Costs of attorneys, notaries, and obtaining legal inscription of rights as
percentage of total transactions costs
Costs of engineering and modifying canal infrastructure as a percentage of
total transactions costs a
Opportunity cost of time invested as a percentage of total transactions costs
Costs of gathering information on buyers and sellers as a percentage of
total transactions costs

Buyers

Sellers

Buyers

Sellers

0.21
0.59

0.02
0.79

0.05
0.16

0.02
0.34

0.20

0.03

0.64

0.62

0.20
0.00

0.18
0.00

0.18
0.02

0.00
0.04

Estimated expenditures for engineering services, modification of gates and canals, and indemnities for transferring water through canals.
Includes expenditures through I 993 and does not include planned expenditures for modifications needed in the future.

a

194

R.R. Hearne. K.W. Easter j Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

valley complements the large coastal tourism boom.
Major crops include table grapes, pisco grapes, other
fruit crops, potatoes, and pasture. One small mine in
the upper reaches of the basin utilizes water from a
tributary of the Rfo Elqui. Rainfall is scarce in this
region with average yearly precipitation of less than
120 mm. Wet and dry years follow a cyclical pattern,
with two and three-year droughts common. The Rfo
Elqui is divided into 25 000 total shares. Each share
is supposed to deliver 1 ljs in a good year, although
0.5 ljs is generally considered to be the actual
average delivery.
In the Elqui Valley a limited population of 47
permanent transactions for the period of 1986-1993
were identified with the assistance of the JDV and
other WUAs in the Elqui Valley. For 41 of these
transactions representing a total of 712 shares of the
river, either the buyer or seller or both were interviewed. In total, 14 individuals selling 491 shares
and 18 buyers purchasing 467 shares were interviewed. 5 Some individuals were involved in more
than one transaction.
Of the shares sold in this valley, 90% had not
been used by their sellers in recent years. Some of
these sellers had surplus water, others had rights to
water along canals that did not conduct water efficiently, others had quit farming, and sti11 other sellers owned rights to water but did not own land. In
general water that is not used by its owner is used by
neighboring farmers in the same canal or section of
the river.
Purchase prices of shares of the Rfo Elqui are
quite variable, reflecting differences in transactions
costs and in many cases the particular conditions of
buyers and sellers. ESSCO's average purchase price
in 1992-1993 was near US$1100 per share. During
the same period, small plot developers in the lower
E1qui Valley were paying US$2500 per share for
water in a conveniently located canal. Exchange
prices between individual irrigators ranged from
US$250 to US$1 000 per share. Often these disparities in prices reflect the individual circumstance of
the seller. Transactions costs for most transfers were

5 The number of transactions for which both buyer and seller
were interviewed was relatively small and the use of only these
transactions would limit the study results.

Table 3
Economic analysis of gains-from-trade: Elqui Valley
Number of
shares
Total gains-from-trade
Net gains-from-trade
Trades with ESSCO total
gains-from-trade
Trades with ESSCO net
gains-from-trade
Other intersectoral trades total
gains-from-trade
Other intersectoral trades net
gains-from-trade
Intra-agricultural trades total
gains-from -trade
Intra-agricultural trades net
gains-from- trade
a

US$ per
share a

712
712
298

846
790
675

298

658

63

1160

63

1139

351

934

351

839

The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used.

low because this is a narrow valley with many short
canals flowing directly from the Rfo Elqui and its
tributaries (see Table 2).
Results of the economic analysis of gains-fromtrade in the Elqui Valley are shown in Table 3. The
average gross gains from trade for the 712 shares
were US$846 6 per share. With an average transactions cost of US$56 per share, net gains-from-trade
are US$790 per share. ESSCO has purchased 292
shares, which amounts to 28% of its current water-use
rights. The estimated net economic gains from these
transfers (US$658 per share) are relatively modest.
One reason for this is that much of the water sold to
ESSCO was not used by its previous owners, and the
procedure of using the value of water to neighboring
farmers may be biased by more productive farmers.
This bias would result from the fact that a weighted
average of water values is greatly influenced by the
value of water to a few profitable buyers of water-use
rights.
There are some small transfers of water to developers of small residential and tourist housing along
the valley and on the coast north of La Serena. The
gains-from-trade from these transfers are higher than
those for transfers to ESSCO. This reflects the fact

6 The average exchange rate reported by the Central Bank of
Chile for June 1993 was used. This rate is Ch$403 = US$1.00.

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

Table 4
Financial analysis of economic rents to buyers and sellers: Elqui
Valley
Number of
buyers
or sellers
All sellers
All buyers
Individuals selling to
ESSCO
ESSCO
Other sellers of
intersectoral transfers
Other buyers of
intersectoral transfers
Other sellers
Other buyers

Number of
shares

Mean
net rent
per share
(US$) a

14
18
4

491
452
292

1156
3047
1071

I

3

218 b
32

3104
1041

6

40

4890

7

167
194

1327
2603

II

The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used.
Some of ESSCO's shares are reduced upon purchase by the
Junta de Vigilancia de Rio Elqui in order to account for conduction losses.
a

b

that the value of water to the sellers of these shares
is relatively low. The large gains-from-trade in intrasectoral trades reflects the high value of water to a
few profitable farmers buying water-use rights.
Results of the financial analysis of individual
rents in the Elqui Valley are presented in Table 4.
The net rent to 14 individuals selling 491 shares of
Elqui water averaged US$1156 per share. In contrast, net rent to 18 buyers, purchasing 452 shares,
averaged US$3047 per share. In general individuals
and firms buying water-use rights received larger net
rents than water sellers. Intersectoral trades produced
higher net rents than trades between farmers. The
fact that many of the water-use rights sold in this
valley were valued at zero because they were not
employed by their owners at the time of sale is a
large factor in these high economic rents.
3.2. The Limarf Valley

South of the Elqui Valley in Region IV is the
productive Limarf Valley, which contains the Rfo
Limarf and its tributaries the Cogotf, Grande, Guatalame, Hurtado, and Rapel. This valley has 50000 ha
of irrigated farmland producing table grapes, pisco
grapes, horticultural products, basic grains, and pas-

195

ture. A central feature of this valley is the presence
of a large interconnected system of three interseasonal storage reservoirs: Paloma (750 million m 3 ),
Cogotf (150 million m 3 ), and Recoleta (100 million
m 3 ). This storage along with gated canals and wellorganized WUAs allows for volumetric specification
of water-use rights. This is a dry area with mean
annual precipitation of 140 mm. There is one small
city, Ovalle, with a population of 80000 that draws
water from the Rfo Limarf.
In the Limarf Valley, a population of all water
transactions was not developed. Instead, data collection was concentrated on areas with frequent transactions and individuals with many transactions. Attempts were made to balance interviews in these
areas with other areas of less market activity. In the
areas of the Rfo Hurtado and Rfo Grande which
irrigate a total of 5400 ha above the Recoleta and
Paloma Dams respectively, only a handful of transactions were identified. All other identified transactions
were in areas below the reservoirs. Each WUA
assigns a different amount of water to each share. 7
Because of this all water-use rights were converted
to an average volumetric denomination, based on
survey results.
The low transactions costs and frequent trades in
the valley can be attributed to both modem infrastructure and well-developed WUAs. Because of
reservoir storage and gated canals, water is delivered
to farmers on demand and a water transfer is almost
costless. Thus, the frequency of transfer is high and
the market for water-use rights is active. Individuals
easily separate water from land and farmers make
marginal water-use decisions.
In total, 37 farmers selling water-use rights accounting for 2 million m 3 jyear were interviewed
along with 19 buyers purchasing 7.2 million
m3 jyear. 8 Results of the economic analysis of

7 Because of the volumetric denomination, it is dangerous to
directly compare the volume of water rights in the Elqui River to
those of the Limarl Valley. In the former, 15750 m3 are delivered
in an average year, but without regard to the time of delivery. In
the latter, water is delivered to farmers at times that they request
water.
8 The number of transactions for which both buyer and seller
were interviewed was relatively small and the use of only these
transactions would limit the study results.

196

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

Table 5
Economic analysis of gains-from-trade: Limarf Valley, constant
table-grape prices

Table 6
Financial analysis of economic rents to buyers and sellers: Limarf
Valley, constant table-grape prices

Cubic meters US$ a per
per year
cubic meter
per year
Total gains-from-trade
Net gains-from-trade
Total gains-from-trade purchases of
large table-grape producers b
Net gains-from-trade purchases of
large table-grape producers
Total gains-from-trade other purchases
Net gains-from-trade other purchases

9218000
9218000
5834000

2.47
2.40
2.85

5834000

2.84

3384000
3384000

1.81
1.65

• The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used.
b Table grape producers with over 100 ha in production.

gains-from-trade in the Limarf Valley are presented
in Table 5. An average gross gains-from-trade of
US$2.47 for each m 3 jyear transferred was estimated. After subtracting transactions costs the average net gains-from-trade is US$2.40 for each
m 3 jyear. Trades that involved the transfer of water
to large grape producers produced higher net returns
than other trades.
Results of the financial analysis of individual
rents show net rents to 37 individuals selling water
rights, amounting to 1.7 million m 3 jyear averaged
US$0.00 per m3 jyear 9 (Table 6). Net rents to 19
individuals purchasing water-use rights that deliver
7.5 million m3 averaged US$1.78 m 3 jyear. The zero
net rents to individuals selling water reflects the need
of many farmers to sell their water-use rights to help
make debt payments, even though the water was
slightly more valuable to them in crop production
than the price they received.
Rents to buyers are generally higher than those of
sellers. For example, rents to large table-grape producers - purchasing 78% of the water-use rights
included in this analysis - are high relative to all
sellers. This reflects the high value of water to these
profitable farms. Much of this difference in individual rents from market transactions is due to the short
term financial stress of many sellers and the market

9

The actual figure is -0.0023.

Number of Cubic meters Mean
buyers
per year
net rent
or sellers
per m 3 /year
(US$) a
All sellers
37
All buyers
19
Individuals selling to
20
large table-grape producers
Large table-grape
3
producers
Other sellers
17
Other buyers
16
a

1708000
7510000
857000

0.00
1.78
0.08

5834000

2.05

851000
1677000

-0.08
0.84

The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used.

power enjoyed by buyers. 10 Since transaction prices
are generally well known in these valleys, little
advantage is derived from asymmetric information.
Prices range from US$3000 for a right with an
average volume of 4500 m 3 jyear in the table-grape
producing area above the Paloma Reservoir to
US$500 for a share with the same volume below
Paloma. This difference in price reflects both the
premium placed on water in the hot, dry sunny
uplands, and the prohibition on transferring water-use
rights from below Paloma Reservoir to canals above
the dam. 11 Also, the value of reservoir storage is
demonstrated by the fact that a water-use right in the
Limarf Valley is worth more than a water-use right
in the Elqui Valley that in some years delivers five
times as much water.
Many of the permanent transfers of water-use
rights in this area involve large acquisitions of both
land and water by a few large table-grape exporters.
The land and transactions are generally reported
separately because of the mobility of water rights in
this valley. Some of these transactions entail a shift
away from traditional crops to higher valued fruit
crops. Also, in the last few years, many small and
medium sized farmers have forfeited land and water

10 Although there are many potential buyers in the valley, in
each canal one or two large farmers are able to determine the
price.
11 Without this prohibition it would be relatively inexpensive to
pump water directly from the Paloma Reservoir to the adjacent
grape producing areas irrigated by upstream canals.

R.R. Hearne. K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (/997) 187-199

rights to fruit-exporting companies in lieu of debts
owed to the companies.
3.3. The Maipo Valley

The first section of the Maipo River supplies
water to 4.5 million people in the Santiago area as
well as irrigating over 30 000 ha. The river is divided
into 8133 shares, each representing 8ljs, 85% of the
time. In this first section of the river, there have been
very few transactions of water-use rights in the past
eight years. The Metropolitan Sanitation Works
Company (EMOS) has contracted a team of lawyers
to purchase rights but has purchased only 33 shares
of the upper Maipo in the last eight years, with
prices averaging US$1 0 000 per share. The only
industrial concern to purchase water rights was a
paper mill which made two purchases totalling 4.5
shares. There are also very few permanent trades
between farmers. In the large canal systems of five
WUAs, distributing 65% of the irrigation water in
this section of the river, there were only a handful of
trades between farmers. All of the canals serving
these five WUAs have fixed flow dividers regulating
the distribution of water.
3.4. The Azapa Valley

The Azapa Valley, which is located in the downstream section of the San Jose river basin in Chile's
far north Region I, supports 3280 acres of irrigated
farmland and the city of Arica (population 160000).
This valley, bordering the extremely arid Atacama
Desert, is very dry and rainfall in the lower reaches
is negligible. The Water Supply and Sanitation Company of Tarapaca (ESSAT), which supplies water to
Arica, has been able to use rental agreements to meet
the short-term crude water needs of the city of Arica.
ESSAT rents wells from owners of ground-water
rights. Various government agencies, responding to a
presidential mandate to give the Arica water supply a
priority in government action, have assisted in the
process of renting wells. In the negotiations process,
ESSAT was able to invoke both the government's
appeal to farmers to release water for Arica and the
possibility that the state could impound water during
periods of severe water shortage. ESSA T has not
needed to purchase water from users of a surface
canal in the Azapa valley, because the ground-water

197

supplies were made available. Thus the recent additions to the Arica water supply is much more a result
of government action than of market activity.
In these arrangements ESSAT digs or rehabilitates
a well, installs and operates a pump, delivers free of
charge a few hours of water per week to the rights
owner, and pays a rental fee for the use of the well.
ESSAT will then pump water from the well continuously, whereas an irrigator only uses the water a few
hours per week. This rental arrangement is quite
lucrative to the individual irrigator, who does not
absorb the negative externality of a depleted aquifer,
at least in the short run. Since these rental contracts
can be terminated by either party, it is probable that
a few will be terminated after ESSAT receives water
from the wells that are currently being rehabilitated
in the Andean highlands.

4. Observations and conclusions
Chile's heritage of privately developed irrigation,
and its traditional allocation of river water by shares,
has created a favorable climate for the establishment
of transferable water-use rights. These rights have
secured water supply to irrigators and thus provided
an enabling environment for investment in permanent fruit crops and improved irrigation technology.
The overall growth in the value of Chile's agricultural output during the last decade can be attributed
to various reforms in both input and output markets.
The effects of the 1981 Water Code on the agricultural sector cannot be fully separated from the effects
of liberalized trade and secured land rights. But the
agricultural sector that is highly dependent on irrigation has expanded without new investments in irrigation infrastructure.
This research has demonstrated that the market
transfer of water-use rights does produce substantial
economic gains-from-trade in both the Elqui and
Limarf Valleys in north-central Chile. These economic gains occur in intersectoral trades and in
trades between farmers, and they produce rents for
both buyers and sellers. Yet buyers, especially large
table-grape producers in the Limarf Valley and individuals buying water-use rights for potable water
supply in the Elqui Valley, receive higher rents then
sellers. In the Elqui Valley total and net gains-from-

198

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

trade per share were within the range of recent
transfer prices of US$1 000 per share. In the Limarf
Valley, gains-from-trade from shares of water-use
rights are 3.4 times the recent transaction prices of
US$3000 for a share of water from the Cogotf
Reservoir (one share delivers 4250 m 3 in an average
year).
One of the most interesting result of this analysis
is the relatively modest economic gains from intersectoral trade in the Elqui Valley. Although the value
of water in municipal water supply is high, the value
of water to profitable farmers is also high. When
water is transferred from these profitable farmers, the
economic gains from this reallocation are small.
Even if water is not used by its owner, it is generally
used by other farmers. If these farmers are profitable,
then the economic gains of the reallocation are small,
even though the financial gain to the seller is large.
These four case studies demonstrate the diversity
of water allocation and water management in northern and central Chile. In three of the four areas
studied, especially where large canal systems use
fixed flow dividers, market transactions were infrequent. Despite the fact that these valleys were chosen
for analysis because of expectations that they had
relatively active local water markets, only the Limarf
Valley had active trading. In this valley, transactions
costs are low and trade between farmers is facilitated
by the presence of reservoir storage, gated canals
with flow meters, and well-organized WUAs. In the
Elqui Valley, the presence of many short canals
flowing from the river also reduces the costs of
physically changing the flow of water.
In large canal systems with fixed flow dividers,
the cost of changing stream flows might be prohibitive especially for trades among farmers, as suggested by the scarcity of trading in the Canal Bellavista system in the Elqui Valley and the large canal
systems in the upper Maipo Valley. Sales of marginal
amounts of surplus water are far from typical. Many
decisions on investment and crop selection have
been based on the joint landjwater allocation that
resulted from the final stages of land reform. 12
12 In the final stages of land reform, land expropriated prior to
1974 was divided into family farms equivalent in value to 8
irrigated ha. Water rights traditionally assigned to the land were
distributed to the landowners.

Furthermore, WUAs play an important role in
facilitating the market reallocation of water, especially in the Limarf Valley where trading is active
and in the Elqui Valley where intersectoral trading
occurs. Many of these WUAs have been able to
adapt to the needs of their members for services that
facilitate or impede transactions.
The proposed Puclaro Dam project, on the Elqui
River upstream of La Serena, is an example of how
the presence of a market alternative to water allocation may reduce political pressure to invest in large
water-storage projects. This project has been proposed in different forms since 1956. As recently as
1989, potable water was considered to be the most
important benefit of this dam. But when ESSCO did
not agree to collaborate with the Directorate of Irrigation in paying for part of the construction costs,
the political importance of the dam declined.
This research has demonstrated the economic and
financial gains from using markets to reallocate water in the Elqui Valley instead of investing in a large
water-storage project. But it also showed how public
investments in water-storage and delivery systems in
the Limarf Valley have the external benefit of reducing the transactions costs involved in market trading.
In the presence of a system of transferable water-use
rights further analysis of large water-storage projects
should consider the value of storage and adjustable
gates in facilitating the reallocation of water.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Agricultural
Policies Division of the World Bank and the Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station. Much information was obtained during a six-month mission to
Chile during 1993 and 1994 with funding provided
by the World Bank's Agricultural Policies Division.
The authors extend thanks for the collaboration of
colleagues at the World Bank, University of Minnesota, and the Pontificia Universidad Cat6lica de
Chile, especially Gershon Feder, Ariel Dinar, and
Guillermo Donoso. A special thanks to all those in
the Chilean government and private sector that provided information and insight, especially Fernando
Peralta, Samuel del Canto, Gustavo Manriquez,
Humberto Perra, Lufs Jorquera, Pablo Anguita, Juan

R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Agricultural Economics 15 (1997) 187-199

Ignacio Domiguez, and Eduardo Venezian. Also,
gratitude is extended for the dedication and camaraderie of data collectors Pablo Venezian, Carlos
Bonilla, Jose Cancino, Carlos Anis, and Jeronimo
Concha.

References
Chang, C. and Griffin, R., 1992. Water marketing as a reallocative
institution in Texas. Water Res. Res., 28: 879-890.
CJAPEP ( Curso Interamericano en Preparacion y Evaluacion de
Proyectos), 1991. Embalse Puclaro, Instituto de Economia,
Pontificia Universidad Cat6lica de Chile, Santiago.
Colby, B., 1990. Transactions costs and efficiency in Western
water allocation. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 72: 1184-1192.
Dinar, A. and Letey, J., 1991. Agricultural water marketing,
allocative efficiency, and drainage reduction. J. Environ. Econ.
·
Manage., 20: 210-223.
Hamilton, J., Whittlesey N. and Halverson, P., 1989. Interruptible
water markets in the Pacific northwest. Am. J. Agric. Econ.,
71: 63-75.
Hearne, R., 1995. The market allocation of natural resources:
Transactions of water-use rights in Chile, Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Minnesota.

199

Hearne, R.R. and Easter, K.W., 1995. Water allocation and water
markets: An analysis of gains-from-trade in Chile, Agricultural
Policies Division, World Bank. World Bank Technical Paper
No. 315.
Maass, A. and Anderson, R., 1978. And the desert shall rejoice:
Conflict, growth and justice in arid environments. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Moncur, J.E.T. and Pollack, R.L., 1988. Scarcity rents for water:
A valuation and pricing model, Land Econ., 64: 62-72.
Rosegrant M. and Binswanger, H., 1994. Markets in tradable
water rights: Potential for efficiency gains in developing country water resource allocation. World Develop., 22: 1613-1625.
Rosen, M. and Sexton, R., 1993. Irrigation districts and water
markets: An application of cooperative decision-making theory. Land Econ., 69: 39-53.
Vaux, H. and Howitt, R., 1984. Managing water scarcity: An
evaluation of interregional transfers. Water Res. Res., 20:
785-792.
Weinberg, M., Kling, C. and Wilen, J., 1993. Water markets and
water quality. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 72: 278-291.
Whittlesey, N. and Houston, J., 1984. Water markets for stream
flow augmentation. In: J. Cassidy and D. Lettenmair (Editors),
A Critical Assessment of Forecasting in Western Water Management. American Water Resources Association, pp. 139146.

