AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

Agricultural development with rainforest conservation:
methods for seeking best bet alternatives to slash-and-burn,
with applications to Brazil and Indonesia
Thomas P. Tomicha,*, Meine van Noordwijka, Stephen A. Vostib, Julie Witcoverb
"International Centre for Research in Agroforestry, Southeast Asian Regional Research Programme (ICRAF SE Asia),
P.O. Box 161, Bogor 16001, Indonesia
binternational Food Policy Research Institute, /200 Seventeenth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036, USA

Abstract
Forests continue to fall for agricultural purposes throughout the humid tropics, with immediate and potentially large
consequences for climate change and biodiversity loss-issues of key interest to the international community. Some of the
actors directly responsible for forest conversion fell trees to meet food security needs and alleviate poverty-issues of urgent
inte~est to them and also to national policymakers. This multiplicity of groups with differing (often conflicting) interests in the
multifarious goods and services produced by tropical forests complicates the search for alternative agricultural activities for
forest margins since these alternatives must satisfy such divergent objectives. This paper sets out a conceptual framework for
comparing the impacts of different land use systems and agricultural practices at the margins of tropical rainforests in terms of
the concerns and objectives of two key interest groups: small-scale farmers seeking livelihoods at the forest margins and the
'international' interests in the global public goods and services supplied by tropical rainforests. This framework should be
useful to a third key group, the national and regional policymakers who must consider these and other policy objectives and
then decide on courses of action. The paper identifies data needs and analytical methods capable of supplying an empirical
base for this conceptual framework, based on quantifiable indicators. It then presents preliminary results of the application of
this conceptual framework in Indonesia and Brazil in association with a global, collaborative, multidisciplinary research
program. Even using preliminary order-of-magnitude estimates (to be replaced by more precise measurements as they become
available), this conceptual framework presents results in ways that allow researchers and policymakers to select clear 'best
bets' for development, when they exist, and to assess tradeoffs and options for complementary policy action and research
efforts, when they do not. © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Rainforests; Upland farming systems; Agricultural development; Agronomic sustainability; Climate change; Biodiversity;
Amazon; Brazil; Sumatra; Indonesia

1. Introduction-many interest groups, many
forest products, and many policy objectives

*Corresponding author. E-mail: t.tomich@cgnet.com
0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII S0169-5150(98)00032-2

It seems that everybody wants something from
tropical rainforests, and these desires vary consider-

160

T.P. Tomich et al.!Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

ably by interest group. The 'international community'
(concentrated in high-income countries, but including some members of the urban elite of
developing countries) puts priority on public
goods provided by the forest: preserving forest-based
biodiversity, and maintaining its critical role in
global climate regulation (by maintaining or increasing the carbon stored in these forests, plus
reducing emissions of greenhouse gases). At the
other end of the spectrum, local users of these
forests see them via a filter of private interest: as
the means to earn a living either directly by extracting
forest products, or indirectly by clearing forests for
agriculture then burning forest biomass to create an
initial (usually the only) injection of nutrients
into soils that often are fragile and deficient in key
nutrients.
As forests recede or the values of extracted products
decline, the 'direct' method of earning a living from
the forest via extraction becomes less tenable; some
forest-dwelling groups formerly dependent on extractive activities for their livelihoods find themselves
turning towards agriculture for survival. But among
the local users, it is the small-scale farmers at the
margins of these forests, currently deriving their livelihoods from converting forest to agriculture and with
the fewest options for doing otherwise, who stand out
as pivotal for not only those interested in saving the
forests, but also those concerned with alleviating
poverty. 1 Any conceptual framework (and subsequent
empirical work linked to it) that does not give their
perspective a central role will miss the mark, since
small-scale farmers base their decisions-including

10f course, it is inaccurate to equate all forms of 'slash-andburn' with permanent forest conversion and unsustainable land use.
Traditional shifting cultivation of foodcrops, as practiced for
generations by local people in the tropics, was sustainable as long
as population densities were low enough to allow long fallow
rotations. Although traditional shifting cultivation is disappearing
as rural population densities increase, slash-and-bum as a
technique of land clearing is used by virtually all actors (public
and private, large and small-scale) contributing to forest conversion, sometimes in systems that are unsustainable. Nearly all
tropical deforestation uses 'slash-and-bum' techniques for land
clearing. There is considerable confusion in the literature, however,
on how much of this is part of a long-fallow rotational system
('shifting cultivation') and how much is intended forest conversion.

the decision to deforest-on the private costs and
benefits of their alternatives, especially over the
short term (Reardon and Vosti, 1995; Vosti and
Witcover, 1996). For example, even if various groups
in the international community could successfully
pressure (through trade embargoes and arm twisting)
national policymakers to impose a ban intended to
silence chainsaws immediately in tropical forests,
the consequences (if any) would be transient; in
the absence of alternatives, small-scale farmers will
continue to seek forest to clear to plant crops in
order to survive. This paper focuses on these
small-scale farmers and considers the dilemmas associated with their use of slash-and-bum from two
viewpoints: the rural household and the international
community.
The conceptual framework presented in this analysis seeks to juxtapose the concerns of these two groups
(rural household and international community) in the
evaluation of specific land use alternatives in order to
identify important tradeoffs between local private
interest and global public interest in the supply of
forest goods and services. The framework could
accommodate other groups deriving livelihoods from
felled forest-those involved primarily in logging,
treecrop estates, and other large-scale activities involving forest conversion-but such applications lie
beyond the scope of this paper. The paper aims to
show how use of the conceptual framework can inform
another key group--regional and national policymakers.
Regional and national policymakers are important
potential users of this conceptual framework and its
outputs, not only because they are subject to pressures
from both international and local user groups, but also
because they are uniquely positioned to act on information about best bet land uses. These policymakers
increasingly are obliged to consider three (sometimes
competing, sometimes complementary) sets of policy
objectives: environmental sustainability, economic
growth, and poverty alleviation. Furthermore, they
must consider these goals simultaneously when making policy choices (including decisions about agricultural research and development priorities), even
though the links or tradeoffs among the objectives
are often not well understood (Vosti and Reardon,
1997). The output from the conceptual framework
presented here will shed light on how to move towards

T.P. Tomich et al. I Agricultural Economics 19 ( 1998) 159-174

achieving environmental sustainability and poverty
alleviation. 2
Is there hope of slowing deforestation while alleviating poverty among small-scale farmers? To date
no integrated conceptual framework exists to aid in the
search for best bet land uses and agricultural activities
that either meet the needs and objectives of the diverse
interest groups under study here, or minimize tradeoffs in substituting for rainforests' functions as suppliers of private and public goods and services. Nor
has comparable empirical evidence on biophysical and
socioeconomic indicators of these objectives been
collected for these alternatives.
Research to measure and analyze these phenomena
is underway at seven sites in the humid tropics under
the auspices of the global Alternatives to Slash-andBurn (ASB) Programme. ASB is designed to undertake a global search for new ways to address natural
resource management policy issues involving large
global externalities stemming from tropical deforestation. As one basic step in that search process, this
paper presents a conceptual framework for assessing
some of the key private and social costs and benefits of
current and alternative agricultural activities at the
margins of tropical rainforests. Section 2 lays out the
conceptual framework, including the criteria important for judging best bets within this framework, and
describes some 'generic' best bets for tropical forest
margins. Section 3 discusses the measurement issues
associated with this framework. Section 4 presents
illustrative examples of the use of this framework
based on preliminary evidence from ongoing research
at two contrasting sites. This evidence, which has not
yet reached the point of the precise measurements
suggested in Section 3, nevertheless demonstrates that
even assessments based on rough orders of magnitude
and directions of change can shed light on alternatives.
The Indonesian example emphasizes certain land use
alternatives that already predominate in the landscape,
including some developed by smallholders. The smallholder systems are especially promising points of
departure, in terms of both their economic and ecoZrhe framework does not deal systematically with economic
growth, or any other phenomena beyond the household, but below
the global environmental level. These issues do, however, enter the
discussion of how to apply the conceptual framework and interpret
its outputs.

161

logical characteristics. In the example from the western Amazon of Brazil, farmer and 'international'
objectives seem less compatible. As occupation of
the forest margin there is more recent, current land use
patterns are less stable and alternatives are still being
sought on farmer's fields and by agricultural research.
Section 5 raises some additional caveats, underscores
the messages of this work for regional and national
policymakers, and charts priorities for future research.
Ultimately, best bets probably will not refer to a
single land use system or technology, since the most
attractive way to achieve the various objectives is
likely to come from combinations of complementary
land use practices in a given spatial context. This
whole farm and landscape-level analysis is not feasible now. The activity specific analysis presented in
this paper is a necessary precursor to that work.

2. A conceptual framework for identifying
best bet alternatives-in whose eyes, using
what criteria?
The two groups identified above as foci of this paper
(small-scale farmers among local forest users, and the
international community) have objectives regarding
forests that diverge dramatically (though the optimal
end use of the forest as seen from these different
perspectives need not); they can be seen as 'polar'
cases along a spectrum of groups of users of natural
forest goods and services.
On the one hand, small-scale farmers focus on the
private goods and services of rainforest use (which
often involves deforestation). On the other hand, the
international community focuses on global public
goods and services from forests-more biodiversity
conservation and less global climate change. This does
not mean that local users do not have an interest in
global public goods and services of forests, but their
concentrated private interest typically swamps their
more diffuse stake in global public benefits. Furthermore, with existing policy instruments and institutional arrangements, it is difficult (if not impossible) to
compensate them for supplying these global environmental benefits. It also does not mean that some parts
of the international community do not express a strong
interest in local users' welfare, merely that their
primary interests lie elsewhere. The approach taken

162

T.P. Tomich et aUAgricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

here is to lay out the differences inherent in these two
polar cases to clarify what best bet might mean to each
group, and translate these characteristics into descriptions of 'generic' best bets candidates based on land
uses present in the humid tropical forest margins. In
subsequent sections, we move to description and
preliminary assessment of candidate best bet systems
identified for the two case study countries, and derive
implications for the policymakers 'in between'.
What do we mean by best bet? Overall, a best bet is
a way to manage tropical rainforests or a forestderived land use that, when supported by necessary
technological and institutional innovation and policy
reform, somehow takes into consideration the local
private and global public goods and services that
tropical rainforests supply. This implies a significant
contribution to the objectives of both polar groups:
smallholders and the international community. A first
step in establishing a framework for assessing this
'balance' between private and public costs and benefits is a clearer idea of what a best bet might mean to
each of these groups.
For each user group, a list of specific concerns is
identified. The reader should note that the following
are lists, and not rankings, of concerns. Establishing
rankings lies outside the scope of this paper, and
would require more detailed consultations with members of each group, and a mechanism for identifying
and making use of different views. In principle, such a
consultative process could ultimately produce estimates of the relative weights each group applies to
their own concerns. Another set of weights, and
perhaps other consultative processes (also outside this
paper's scope) might ultimately be necessary to rank
concerns across these groups. (For a review of scoring
mechanisms for rating of technologies by farmers,
extension agents, and researchers, see Jaenicke et al.,
1995).

2.1. Local private concerns of the small-scale farmer
Since many of the small-scale farmers practicing
slash-and-bum appear to do so because they lack
feasible livelihood options that do not involve forest
conversion, understanding farmer objectives and the
social, economic, and biophysical constraints they
face is critical. Which land use systems (and technological innovations needed to elevate them to best bet

candidate status) have the best chance of attaining
farmers' multiple economic, agronomic and environmental objectives? What are the tradeoffs from farmers' perspectives?
Fundamentally, for a land use or technological
alternative to be a best bet candidate, it must be
feasible for small-scale farmers to adopt, perhaps
on only a portion of their land. A minimum set of
four issues, consistent with the literature on smallholder decisionmaking and with ASB field research to
date, spans the selection criteria for best bets at the
farm level: a technology that fails to 'score' positively
across all four cannot be expected to be desirable or
feasible for the smallholder. For each of the four, the
resource situation of the household (human capital,
financial and other assets, and natural resource base)
will condition the 'weight' that household places on
that issue as well as the relevant time frame.
First, best bets must be profitable, and more profitable than alternative activities on or off farm. The time
frame within which best bets would need to tum a
profit depends on the financial situation of the household. Among small-scale farmers with few financial
assets and little or no access to credit, this time frame
could be quite short. Second, best bets must improve
the food security situation of the farm household (not
always synonymous with improved prospects for
future profitability), the more so the closer the household lies to, or risks falling below, the threshold for
minimum daily requirements. Third, these alternative
activities must be compatible with labor constraints at
the farm level, limited either by the human resource
endowment of the farm household itself or by the rural
labor market. (In its strictest form, this would require
that the cash needed to hire necessary labor is generated by the best bets). Finally, since farmers are not
myopic, best bets need to be agronomically sustainable; that is to say, alternative production systems
must not degrade the underlying natural resource base
in ways that undermine productivity and, as a result,
destroy the profitability of these systems over time.
Some factors affecting attractiveness of investments
in productive assets and for sustainable resource
management also operate beyond the household level.
These include security of rights of access to and use of
the natural resource base. For example, formal and
informal land and tree tenure institutions, often operating at the community level, appear to be key deter-

T.P. Tomich et al./Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

163

Table 1
Matrix of best bet criteria: indicators of private and public concerns/objectives
Land use systems

Private (farmers') concerns/objectives
Profitability
Food security
Labor use
Agronomic sustainability

Current practice 1

Current practice 2

?
?
?

?
?

Best bet I

Best bet 2
?

Public (international community) concerns/objectives
Climate change
Biodiversity

minants of incentives (and disincentives) for investment in productive assets and for sustainable resource
management, at least in Indonesia. These issues affect
best bet adoption even if the four primary concerns
listed above are successfully addressed. These criteria,
then, must be taken into consideration in the search for
specific best bets. Although it is beyond the scope of
this paper, subsequent analyses will include qualitative assessment of institutional endowments such as
how well markets function for land, labor, capital,
inputs and outputs as well as availability of information on production technology (see Vosti et al., 1997).
2.2. Global public concerns of the international
community
The issue of primary interest to the international
community, on the other hand, is taken to be the
supply of global public forest goods and services,
more specifically preserving biodiversity and limiting

?
?

?
?

?
?

?
?

climate change. Although natural forests dominate all
alternative land uses regarding these global objectives,
alternatives at the forest margins do differ significantly
in their ability to substitute for these global environmental services of forests. Thus, although the international community seems primarily concerned with
preserving natural forest, it should also care about the
resulting land uses if forest is felled.
A matrix of criteria for evaluating land use alternatives (Table 1) emerges from consideration of the
perspectives of the two polar interest groups. The
current land use options and the best bet alternatives
are its columns, and biophysical and socioeconomic
indicators for each concern/objective of both user
groups constitute its rows. The question marks indicate matrix 'cells' to be filled with quantitative data so
that each land use system can be judged regarding
each criterion.
But where should the search for best bet candidates
begin? Table 2 provides some reasonable points of

Table 2
Generic best bet candidates
Land uses

Descriptions

Innovation to create best bet

Production forests
Agroforests
Treecrops
Foodcrops
Grasslands

Extraction of timber and non-timber products
Complex, multistrata agroforestry systems•
Monoculture or simple multistrata agroforestry systems
Monoculture or multiple cropping
Livestock-based systems

Emichment planting
Improved germplasm
Improved germplasm
Integrated soil fertility managementb
Improved pastures

a Agroforests

in Indonesia begin with intercropping of upland foodcrops, but the primary objective is establishment of treecrops like rubber and
various fruit and timber species. Although created by local people, the management system accommodates natural regeneration. As a result,
agroforests replicate certain elements of forest structure and ecology (for example, see Michon and de Foresta, 1995).
bThis includes improved crop management practices involving integration of organic inputs (for example, improved fallows) and inorganic
inputs (fertilizers) along with measures to control weeds, pests and diseases.

164

T.P. Tomich et al.!Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

departure based on descriptions of land use systems
currently present in the tropical forest margins, and
some types of innovations needed to move these land
uses closer to being best bets (here focusing explicitly
on how to increase profitability via improved productivity). These are reasonable points of departure
because, in most cases, some versions of these systems
are already in use by at least some farmers in the study
areas-indicating that variations on these best bet
candidates have a reasonable prospect of passing
the most fundamental 'test', adoption by small-scale
farmers. Thus, wherever possible, existing systems are
the starting point for the process of identifying best
bets for development. This is an easier task, however,
on Sumatra in Indonesia-where smallholders have
centuries of experience in refining their land use
systems-than it is in new settlements in Brazil's
western Amazon.

2.3. Evaluation of best bets
And what are the standards for judging best bets?
Obviously, to be classed a best bet, an alternative
would have to surpass-in virtually every respectunsustainable shifting cultivation, which is one possible point of comparison. Agronomically degraded
systems-such as grasslands and degraded pasturesprovide another set of minimum standards to beat. But
because deforestation is among the primary concerns
of this research, natural forests are the main point of
reference for identifying the environmental and ecological characteristics of best bet alternatives. In the
analysis in Section 4, measurements for each alternative are expressed as a difference from the natural
forest baseline. 3 Systems that make better use of, and
enrich, forests should be considered candidates for
best bets. Likewise, agroforestry and treecrop systems
that improve productivity while conserving some
biodiversity and sequestering carbon also would be
good candidates. Finally, improvements to existing
foodcrop and livestock production systems that boost
productivity and extend the productive life of soils
should also be considered since they may reduce
3 Note

that the framework can handle assessment of any land use
system; since Section 4 presents orders of magnitude estimates
rather than precise measurements, an explicit benchmark is
required.

demand for additional forest conversion under certain
conditions (but see the concluding caveats).
Since changes in land uses will usually affect the
supplies of both private and public goods and services,
all best bet alternatives must be measured against both
sets of criteria: household objectives and global environmental objectives. And, if a land use system cannot
better the benchmark for household concerns or provide a reasonable substitute for the benchmark on
environmental concerns, it probably does not belong
among best bet candidates.
From the foregoing, two points stand out: (a) the
process of identifying best bet candidates for a specific
setting is a complex one; and (b) the evaluation of best
bet land use systems cannot be captured in a single,
summary measure. Even the parsimonious approach
outlined above took as its starting point for candidates
a restricted list of land use alternatives (proposing
several others as interesting points of comparison),
and six concerns to be considered.
The difficulties with coming up with summary
measures for given land uses across concerns have
already been touched upon. While economic valuation
can provide a suitable weighting scheme for some of
the objectives and concerns, it is problematic for
others (for example, biodiversity). A useful point of
departure for assessing tradeoffs among private costs
and benefits is the resource allocation method used by
small-scale farmers, who deal with such tradeoffs on a
daily basis. No similar analytical point of departure,
however, exists for assessing tradeoffs among the
various global public goods and services provided
by forests (although, as will be noted later, some
methods for considering greenhouse gas emissions
in a common measuring framework do exist), or for
assessing wholesale or component-specific tradeoffs
among public and private goods and services. But even
in this more limited framework, where measurements
reveal many tradeoffs, either a multidimensional decision scheme or some system of weighing competing
objectives must then be used to evaluate a best bet
candidate (or combinations of candidates).

3. Measurement issues
Once the evaluation criteria for best bet candidates
are clear, it is necessary to address the difficult tasks of

T.P. Tomich et aUAgricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

finding specific measurable indicators that cover those
criteria well (an iterative process that may involve
refining the criteria), and then collecting and analyzing data needed to assess the various land use alternatives.
Definitions for the general criteria identified
above abound, and each definition carries with it
measurement and sample selection issues that loom
large in and vary substantially across each of the
'cells' of the best bet evaluation matrix. In the
face of this complexity, analytical methods selected
must yield indicators that are: clear, measurable
and, above all, allow for comparisons across alternatives.
This section lays out specific indicators for each of
the farmers' (private) and international community
(public) concerns, in tum. In no case does a single
indicator suffice for assessment; rather, all indicators,
plus a minimum set of qualifying information, are
necessary for evaluation.

3.1. Measuring smallholder (private) concerns
For the smallholder concerns, the indicators are
derived from the literature on household decisionmaking processes. The suitability of this list of indicators,
like the concerns themselves, should be validated with
farmers. For a more in-depth account of research
protocol for each private concern, see Vosti et al.
(1997). The following list summarizes indicators
selected.
• Private profitability: the appropriate measure of
private profitability is the expected net present
value (NPV) of revenues less costs of purchased
inputs and of domestic factors of production, all
valued at market prices. In addition, the time to
reach positive cash flow (at a level sufficient to
make a substantial contribution to sustaining a farm
household), is critical, as is the existence of any
subsequent period of negative cash flow. A common time horizon must be applied to all NPV
calculations, and selected so as to be compatible
with the longest production cycle among candidates. For example, since many of the best bet
candidates involve perennials or livestock, the time
horizon must be approximately twenty years to be
appropriate to these systems. Each land use system

165

will have an explicit, although not necessarily
common, geographic scale for evaluation. To be
comparable, results will be reported on a per hectare basis. Market prices will be adjusted for longterm trends and seasonal fluctuations. Social profitability, calculated at economic (shadow) prices,
will be used to assess the impact of policy distortions on incentives for adoption and investment
(Monke and Pearson, 1989).
• Household food security: the appropriate food
security indicator must incorporate both direct
consumption of home-produced food as well as
trade for food. This is especially important for land
use systems that do not involve foodcrops, but
applies to food-producing systems as well. The
measure used will be based on the concept of risk
of food entitlement failure by Sen (1982), which
encompasses trade-based and production-based
entitlements to food as well as security of property
rights over productive assets (inheritance and transfer entitlements).
• Household labor use: a measure of labor requirements (person-days per year) of particular systems
will be averaged over the land use cycle. This will
be supplemented by a measure of cash flow to meet
hired labor needs should family labor be insufficient, calibrated so as to capture discrete periods of
peak labor demand in the system itself (taking into
consideration labor demand in other household
activities). It also is necessary to measure division
of labor by gender and age for operations where
those distinctions matter.
• Agronomic sustainability: this term as used here
refers to the long-term production capacity of a
land use system; like the 'indicators' above, it is
itself multidimensional. Soil scientists and agronomists working in ASB have identified a minimum
set of seven components of agronomic sustainability, including adequate soil organic matter and
nutrient balances. For the purposes of evaluating
best bet candidates, the overall indicator of agronomic sustainability follows the law of the minimum: it will take a value of 1 (indicating the system
is agronomically sustainable) if all components are
above the minimum threshold for sustainable production, but 0 (unsustainable) if any component is
below its threshold value at any time (note that, in
this case, a scientist's assessment of agronomic

166

T.P. Tomich eta!./Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

sustainability indicators and thresholds
diverge from that of the farmer).

may

3.2. Measuring international community (global
public) concerns
Three indicators of the global environmental consequences of deforestation are available. Two of these
indicators are linked to global climate change: net
absorption/emission of greenhouse gases (carbon
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide) and carbon
stocks. These indicators vary with land use systems
and other factors, and have aboveground and belowground components: growing perennials use carbon
dioxide and thereby (temporarily) sequester a portion
of this carbon as biomass; soils under forest cover and
also under certain other land uses appear to absorb and
oxidize significant amounts of methane (van Noordwijk et al., 1995a); on the other hand, nitrogen fertilizer applied in some land use systems contributes to
nitrous oxide emissions.
Protocols for the measurements briefly described
below can be found in Murdiyarso et al. (1995).
Carbon stocks are measured as tons of carbon per
hectare, averaged over the life cycle of a land use
system. There are net carbon dioxide fluxes from land
use changes, but not for land use types per se. For
methane and nitrous oxide, each land use will have a
net flux. Fluxes of methane and nitrous oxide are
measured directly. Estimates of annual flux per hectare
of the greenhouse gases are aggregated on the basis of
net radiative forcing (IPCC, 1990), with their 'greenhouse effect' in the atmosphere expressed in carbon
dioxide equivalents.
Measurement of biodiversity richness of the alternative land use systems for major groups of organisms
above and belowground is a particularly complex
challenge (Giller et al., 1997). In this research program, aboveground measurements are done for plant
functional groups as well as using the more conventional taxonomic approach (Gillison and Carpenter,
1997). Gillison's 'plant functional attributes' (PFA)
approach provides an overall indicator of biodiversity
richness that is suitable for cross-continent comparisons. Belowground assessments focus on organisms
that influence agronomic sustainability. Two of the
hypotheses to be tested in the ongoing biodiversity

component of this research are: (a) that PFAs are
highly correlated with plant species richness as
well as other aboveground taxa; and (b) that aboveground biodiversity is highly correlated with belowground biodiversity. At this stage, the first hypothesis rests on a firmer body of evidence than the
second.
Still, this research overcomes only some of the
methodological difficulties associated with biodiversity assessment, and cannot alone answer the question
of how much biodiversity will be lost for each hectare
of forest converted to another land use. The main
methodological gaps concern scaling over space and
over time. As one samples biodiversity over larger and
larger areas of a particular ecosystem, the number of
additional species observed will increase, but at· a
decreasing rate. This complementarity across space
means that one cannot simply 'add' indicators of
biodiversity richness across plots. Nor can the number
of species seen on a small study area tell us how much
land is needed to conserve those species. These species' long-term survival prospects depend on the
extent of their habitat, but this is influenced by the
pattern of land cover in the landscape. For example,
although the plots of Sumatran rubber agroforests
studied so far may harbor half to two-thirds of the
biodiversity of an equivalent area of natural forest
(Michon and de Foresta, 1995), it is not known
whether the same is true if one were to compare a
million hectares of rubber agroforests to an equal
amount of natural forest. Even less is known about
what happens if these million hectares occur in a
mosaic with undisturbed forest patches.

3.3. Toward improved lists of indicators
This list of indicators for evaluating land use alternatives across these farmer (private) and international
community (public) objectives is not definitive. In the
absence of any prior effort at comprehensive comparison of specific land use alternatives across these
concerns, dimensionality of this problem-that is,
the minimum number of indicators necessary for
comprehensive assessment-is still an open question.
But an exercise now underway-to replicate measurements so as to fill out best bet evaluation matrices for
particular study areas-should shed light on the

T.P. Tomich eta!. I Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

dimensionality question. Section 4 presents and discusses estimates based on measurements taken thus
far for study sites in the Sumatran peneplains and
Brazil's western Amazon.

4. Preliminary results from Indonesia and
Brazil-information for selecting best bets
Selection criteria discussed in Section 2 were used
to derive locally relevant best bet candidates for the
Sumatran and Brazilian sites corresponding to (but
more specifically defined than) the generic land use
systems described in Table 2. Data available from
ongoing field research fall short of filling in precise
quantitative measurements for the indicators
described in Section 3, but do allow some preliminary
assessment regarding directions of change and their
orders of magnitude vis-a-vis the natural forest benchmark. This exercise has already proven useful in
comparing site-specific best bet candidates, and providing insights as to promising best bet technologies at
each site. A comparison of the framework's application across the two sites provides clues to its flexibility
in dealing with diverse contexts. A look at similarities
and differences in the cells of the matrix points to
areas where comparative cross-site analysis may yield
broadly generalizable findings.
Table 3 presents preliminary best bet matrices for
Sumatra in Indonesia (Part 1 of the table) and Brazil's
western Amazon (Part 2). The column headings for
each matrix reflect major land uses and certain alternatives for each site. The measurements in each
column of both matrices are based on the authors'
estimates of orders of magnitudes of differences,
compared with natural forests. It is the cross-row
comparisons of land use alternatives, however, that
will reveal the most about which of the systems are
best (and worst) bets-with respect to smallholders'
objectives and supply of global public goods. The
ability to make cross-row comparisons with confidence will grow as orders of magnitude estimates
are replaced by more precise measurements in each
matrix.
The Indonesian case is treated in detail; the discussion of the Brazilian case follows, highlighting the
flexibility of the framework, and pointing out differences and similarities across sites.

167

4.1. Balancing profitability and biodiversity in
Indonesia

While conversion of natural forest has a major
effect on the supply of forest functions, the subsequent
land uses also matter a great deal for agronomic
sustainability and the supply of global environmental
benefits. Part 1 of Table 3 presents very preliminary
estimates of the orders of magnitude of these differences for seven systems that represent the major land
uses in Sumatra's peneplains, the low-elevation, undulating areas of poor soils that comprise the island's
largest agroecological zone (see van Noordwijk et al.,
1995a for details).
All the tree-based systems in Part 1 of Table 3
(smallholder agroforests and monoculture, as well
as large-scale plantation monoculture) are agronomically sustainable. On the other hand, shortening of
fallow rotations (from 10-20 years or more to less than
five years) with rising land scarcity is undermining
sustainability of shifting cultivation, which has been
disappearing anyway as population pressure increases
in Sumatra (van Noordwijk et al., 1995a). Continuous
cultivation of cassava does not appear sustainable on
this land because of depletion of nutrients and of soil
organic matter. (On these soils, marginal revenues
from fertilizer applications to cassava do not cover
fertilizer costs at current prices, which are near the
world market price for most nutrients except nitrogen,
which is subsidized in Indonesia). There also do not
appear to be big differences among forest extraction
and the other tree-based systems regarding carbon
stocks and greenhouse gases. Thus, as far as agronomic sustainability and climate change issues are
concerned, tree-based systems dominate among the
alternatives.
There are significant differences among the treebased systems and between these systems and the
natural forest baseline regarding aboveground biodiversity.4 Agroforests are much richer in species than
the other tree-based systems, but it must be emphasized that agroforests are not perfect substitutes for
biodiversity conservation in natural forests. Indeed,
conversion of natural forests to agroforests involves a
4 Work on belowground biodiversity measurements is ongoing at
both sites, but has not progressed sufficiently for inclusion in these
preliminary assessments.

.....

0\

Table 3
Preliminary estimates of the impacts of selected land use systems
Part I - Application to Sumatra, Indonesia - peneplains
Private and global
concerns/objectives
Private (Farmers') concerns
Profitability
Food security
Labor use
Agronomic sustainability

00

Land use system
large-scale forest
extraction

Rubber
agroforest

Rubber
monoculture

Large-scale oil
palm or industrial
timber monoculture

Shifting cultivation
of upland rice
and otber foodcrops

Continuous
cultivation
of cassava

++ (+++?i

++
++
+
1

++ (+++?)
++
+
1

++(+++?)!

+
+
+

+
+

0/1

0

c(-?)
N/A

Public (Global) environmental concerns
Carbon stocks
Greenhouse gas absorption
c
Biodiversity (aboveground)

+

Imperata
cy1inderical
grasslands

+(++?)

N/A
~

:-tl

--/-

C;l
;,;

c

§:

--/-

~

Part 2 - Application to western Amazon of Brazi!'2
Private and global
publicconcerns

:;;:

Land use system
-~-an--a-g-ed---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

forests
Private (Farmers') concerns
Profitability
+
Food security
+
Labor use
+
Agronomic sustainbility
1
Public (Global environmental) concerns 3
Carbon stocks
c
Greenhouse gas absorption
c(?)
Biodiversity (aboveground)
c
1Profitability

~
,.....

Agrotorestry
systems

Treecrops

+(++?)
+(?)
+(++)?
1(?)

++(+++?)
+(?)
+
1

Managed
fallows

Annual crops
witb legumes

Improved pastures

c(?)
c(?)
+(?)
1

+
++
+
1(?)

++(+++?)
++
-(--?)
1(?)

-(--?)

--(-?)
-(--?)

~-

"'fl

~

estimates are from the perspective of the operator, which for this land use system is a large-scale company instead of a smallholder household.
candidates for measurement and evaluation have a considerably narrower definitions than these column headings: for example, improved fallows are annual crop witb
kudzu or annual/tree crop rotation witb nitrogen-fixing tree; and simple agroforestry systems such as coffeelbandarra, coffee/rubber, and/or coffee/peach palm. Current practices are
also to be measured: including degraded pasture, perennial stands, and unimproved fallow areas. Still, the "scores" presented here for broader land use system categories illustrate
the uncertainties surrounding measurement of the diversity of land uses and management practices in the Brazil sites.
3Field data to support this analysis in Brazil are still quite preliminary. Early access to, and a careful interpretation of, tbese data were provided by Divonzil Gon~ves Cordeiro.
(N.B. Estimated changes are all site-specific and expressed in terms of order of magnitude vis-a-vis the natural forest.)
2 orders of magnitude less: - 0-1 order of magnitude less: no significant difference: c
0-1 order of magnitude greater: +
2 orders of magnitude greater: ++
3 orders of magnitude greater: +++
agronomic sustainability: O=unsustainable, !=sustainable.
2 Best-bet

OQ

~

~

~-

.....
\Q
.....

~

~.....

f
~

T.P. Tomich et al./Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

significant reduction in species richness. For assessments of higher plants made along 100 m line transects
in Sumatra, over 350 species were found in primary
forests while the number dropped to about 250 species
for rubber agroforests. However, the richness remaining in agroforests still is much higher than the five or
so species of higher plants found in rubber monoculture (Michon and de Foresta, 1995).
Raising productivity of rubber agroforests, which
span millions of hectares, offers a promising pathway
in Sumatra. There is potential for raising profitability
of these systems through adaptation of existing higheryielding germplasm within existing smallholder systems (Barlow and Jayasuriya, 1984; Tomich, 1991),
which also could contribute to national policy objectives such as enhancing food security and increasing
labor absorption. These potential economic benefits
may be combined with significant aboveground biodiversity conservation-albeit less than natural forest-because the mix of planted species is augmented
by natural regeneration of forest species (Michon and
de Foresta, 1995; van Noordwijk et al., 1995b).
Indeed, these agroforests may approximate a number
of forest functions, thereby providing the technical
foundation for some institutional arrangements such
as sustainable community-based forest and watershed
management.
A key unresolved question is whether the potential
for development of smallholder rubber agroforests
(with most operating units of 1-10 ha) can compete
with the private and social profitability of large-scale
alternatives (10,000-300,000 ha), including logging
concessions, oil palm plantations and industrial timber
estates. The latter schemes are viewed as best bets for
economic development by many policymakers and
donors, in large part because of conventional wisdom
of economies of scale in plantation development. If it
turns out that large-scale development alternatives are
more profitable-as indicated in the parentheses of
Part 1 of Table 3-three important policy tradeoffs
will have to be faced: (a) tradeoffs with food security,
since such projects often involve displacement oflocal
smallholders with little or no compensation; (b) in
the case of large-scale logging, a tradeoff with
labor absorption; and (c) for large-scale plantation
monocultures (for example, oil palm and industrial
timber), an important tradeoff with biodiversity
conservation.

169

Despite the conventional wisdom, the prevailing
faith in economies of scale in production of socalled 'plantation' commodities receives no support
from the agricultural economics literature (Hayami
and Kawagoe, 1993; Tomich et al., 1995). This is,
nevertheless, an empirical question that will be
addressed in the next phase of research. Unlike
production, though, marketing and processing of
primary products often are characterized by increasing returns to scale. This is the case for three
of the most important land use alternatives-rubber,
pulp and oil palm-in Sumatra. The natural rubber
industry in Southeast Asia provides an excellent
example of the efficiency with which markets can
integrate low-cost production by smallholders with
processing in factories that achieve economies of
scale; similar marketing arrangements should work
for pulp. Oil palm conventionally has been viewed
as an estate crop in Southeast Asia (but not in
Africa) because of its perishability. Even in this
case, however, oil palm production on independent
plots as small as one hectare began to emerge in
Sumatra in the 1980s. Outgrower schemes, contract
farming and other institutional arrangements all can
help reduce transactions costs in linking efficient
smallholder producers with efficient large-scale processors.
Even if analysis shows that the large-scale schemes
hold no advantages in terms of private and social
profitability compared to smallholder schemes, a
potential tradeoff between profitability and biodiversity conservation remains to be addressed concerning
smallholder systems (van Noordwijk et al., 1995b).
Farmer management aimed at increasing productivity
of systems often decreases biodiversity. Whether or
not this apparent tradeoff between productivity and
biodiversity is inescapable is the subject of debateand further research. Even modest productivity gains
can cause great loss of biodiversity in some cases. For
other systems and using different production techniques, biodiversity loss may be relatively slow for
initial increases in productivity. In the latter case,
raising productivity to an intermediate level may
involve a modest tradeoff with biodiversity. Thus,
two of the most important research questions regarding the selection of best bets in Sumatra are: what is
the shape of this tradeoff function, and what factors
influence the biodiversity of these complex, multi-

170

T.P. Tomich et al.!Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

strata systems as productivity of their components
increases?
4.2. Seeking a different balance in Brazil

The patterns and pace of occupation of forest
margins areas in the Brazilian Amazon have differed
substantially from those in Indonesia, resulting in part
from different endowments of land, labor, natural
resources and capital between the two countries, their
differences in access to major commercial centers, and
also because of the distinct policy environments that
served to attract migrants and guide their land use
decisions upon arrival (for Brazil, see Mahar, 1989).
Brazil's western Amazon still is a new frontier for
agriculture; most farmers are relatively recent settlers
(bringing with them knowledge of other, non-rainforest ecosystems), and markets still are developing.
'Small-scale' operational holding here refers to an
area of approximately 80 ha, dramatically larger than
the 5 ha holdings characterizing smallholders in
Sumatra. A range of management practices may be
found within any given land use, with fairly rapid
shifts in technique. Land use mixes also exhibit great
variety, and soil types vary in more patchwork fashion
than in Sumatra.
The shifts and variety in Brazil probably reflect
changes in markets and infrastructure that accompany
the transition from frontier to a settled area. Ongoing
adjustment also means that issues of scale, tenure and
the potential role of public institutions are in a state of
flux, particularly as new roads link what have been
isolated local markets to national and international
markets for the first time. Thus, systems that predominate in the landscape now may disappear soon and
systems important in the future may not yet be evident
(Vosti et al., forthcoming).
Not surprisingly, then, land use systems found at the
forest margins of Brazil's western Amazon differ
substantially from the myriad tree-based systems of
land use found at the forest margins of the Sumatran
peneplains. In the western Brazilian Amazon, a large
(and increasing) amount of land is dedicated to extensive livestock production systems (Witcover et al.,
1996), and some farmers are beginning to intensify
livestock production using the improved pastures
identified as a best bet candidate. Trends in land
use also were used to select best bet candidates:

farmers are only now making initial, tentative forays
into agroforestry systems including timber as a component. Promising technologies (at least in environmental terms) identified by agricultural research and
undergoing refinement through interaction with farmers, but not currently important on the landscape, also
made the list as likely candidates. But few current land
use patterns appear among best bet candidates. Thus,
column headings in Part 2 of Table 3 often have no
direct analogue in the matrix for Indonesia.
This discussion suggests that the diversity of land
use mixes and management techniques, the unfamiliarity of many agriculturalists with the natural
resource base, plus the prospect for continued rapid
change that characterize the Brazil site, have implications for the definition and testing of best bet practices.
Because indigenous knowledge is not well established, getting a list of potential best bet candidates-even more than in other areas-must involve
an interplay between agricultural research and farmerbased trial.
The differences between these sites give rise to
several questions. Can the same conceptual framework applied to the Indonesian case allow for the
identification of best bet candidates in Brazil? As in
the Indonesian case, the preliminary results of field
research are summarized for each best bet candidate in
Part 2 of Table 3, using the seven criteria set out above
(four related to farmers' objectives, and three related
to the objectives of the 'international community').
The ambiguities in column headings and some cell
contents in the matrix highlight the adaptations
described above that must be made to make the
conceptual framework flexible in its application, but
the usefulness of its multiple-user, multiple-objective
approach still holds.
If the best bets differ from those in Sumatra, or
similar best bets have extremely different 'cells' as
regards the global and farmer objectives listed, why is
that so? Unlike the Indonesian case, where the framework revealed some land uses that provide an attractive mix of household benefits and global public
goods, the tradeoffs appear starker for Brazil. For
example, the financial profitability of improved pasture systems is superior to all of the more environmentally benign alternatives such as managed forests,
suggesting a wide gap between the private and public
costs and benefits of deforestation. At least for now,

T.P. Tomich et at.!Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

the realizable contribution to household incomes of
managed forests, improved fallows, and complex
agroforestry systems cannot match that of improved
pasture systems, although the situation for treecrops
might be more promising. 5 This situation may change
if increased supplies of beef and milk reduce market
prices, if demand for products from managed forests
and agroforestry systems increases, or if the policy and
other institutional impediments to tapping existing
markets for these products are removed. Local market
development may open at least some niches for profitable land uses that score higher in terms of biodiversity and carbon stocks (for more on this with regard to
agroforestry, see Vosti et al., forthcoming). However,
livestock in Brazil's western Amazon is likely to retain
this advantage as long as demand for alternative
products is weak and/or uncertain, and product supply
links are interrupted by seasonal flooding.
As regards food security, the environmentally
benign options such as managed forests, fallows,
treecrops, and agroforestry systems appear once again
to be inferior to improved pasture or legume-based
annual cropping systems, especially in this context of
seasonally unreliable and imperfect markets.
Future work will quantify these tradeoffs, suggest
mechanisms for dealing with them, and test the
responses of farmers to likely shifts in relative prices
if markets improve.
As in Indonesia, economies of scale in production
systems have yet to be demonstrated, but scale economies in marketing or processing may occur. Empirical
evaluation may suggest organizational changes (for
example, cooperatives) or institutional changes (for
example, farmer contracts with large-scale processors)
that allow smallholders to exploit scale economies in
production, processing or marketing, if they exist.

5 For a discussion of the potential of standing forests, see Braz
and d'Oliveira (1994) on the production potential of small-scale
managed forests in the state of Acre, Witcover and Vosti (1995) on
issues of import for market in emerging non-timber tree products,
and Guimaraes (forthcoming) on the application of these issues as
applied to the study area, with a focus on pimenta longa (a native
source of the oil saffrole) and peach palm. Oliveira (1997) explores
potential profitability of coffee among tree crop systems. See
Oliveira and Vosti (1997) for a discussion of productivity and
financial profitability of selected agroforestry systems in Rondonia;
and Farninow et a!. (forthcoming) for exploration of similar issues
as regards improved pastures within a whole-farm context.

171

5. Next steps in research, conclusions, and
policy messages
This paper identified a conceptual framework for
selecting among alternative land use systems at the
margins of tropical rainforests. The framework incorporates multiple users with different objectives regarding the private and public goods and services supplied
by forests. Based on this framework, the notion of a
best bet candidate was introduced and discussed in
terms of private and global public benefits. Two
'polar' groups with contrasting objectives regarding
private and public aspects of forest goods and services
were chosen as foci: small-scale farmers (who focus
on private benefits, and who are central to any strategy
that targets both poverty and forest loss), and the
international community (who focus on global public
benefits). Concerns of these groups and indicators for
assessing land use systems were specified, and the
methodological and practical difficulties in measurement of indicators and valuations of best bet candidates were discussed. In addition to the difficulties of
assessing these complex private concerns and public
concerns separately, the overriding challenge is to
weigh tradeoffs between the objectives of different
interest groups. The potential (and need) for consultative processes and multi-criteria decisionmaking
tools should be apparent.
Examples drawn from field research in Indonesia
and Brazil suggest that some best bet alternatives may
exist, but these examples also highlight the potential
tradeoffs among local and global concerns. Although
the best bet candidates differed greatly across sites, it
was feasible to adapt the conceptual framework and
measurement techniques to these contrasting cases,
and draw lessons about cross-site comparability from
the exercise.
5.1. Next steps in research
Ongoing research aims to replace the orders-ofmagnitude estimates contained in this paper with more
precise figures. These data will provide a better basis
for assessing the tradeoffs among best bet candidates,
and the types and amounts of technological change
and/or policy reform necessary for their adoption.
Looking across types of constraints to land use alternatives, first within specific sites, then across sites,

172

T.P. Tomich et al. I Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

will provide a starting point for more efficient assessment of best bet candidates or likely constraints to
them, perhaps even prompting some evaluation of
potential for transfer of best bet candidates from
one site to others.

Still some trends and changes are more likely than
others. A promising way to handle uncertainty would
be to re-apply the evaluation under different scenarios.
For a description of such an approach applied to
agroforestry systems for the western Brazilian Amazon, see Oliveira and Vosti (1997).

5.2. Panacea or Pandora's box?

5.3. Messages for policymakers 'in between'
However, several overriding caveats regarding technological change must be faced. First, best bet technologies alone cannot arrest forest conversion. Many
of the forces driving deforestation and natural resource
degradation arise at the regional or national level, and
can overwhelm the mitigating effects of technological
change. For example, an inflow of migrants facilitated
by road construction and driven by lack of economic
opportunity elsewhere can swamp the effects of best
bet alternatives at the field level. Second financial
profitability is a necessary condition for adoption of
best bets by smallholders, but is not sufficient by itself
as a means to slow deforestation. Indeed, because best
bet alternatives are profitable, they can have the
perverse effect of accelerating deforestation, either
by attracting new migrants to the forest margins or
by promoting increased forest conversion by current
inhabitants. Third, the relative profitability of forest
conversion by smallholders is not determined solely
by production technology; it also is tied to institutions
and legal frameworks that establish, monitor and
enforce property rights; to policies regarding public
investment in infrastructure and social services; and to
macroeconomic policy. The institutional and policy
environments sufficient for best bet alternatives to
reduce poverty and deforestation are not well understood yet; and this is top priority on ongoing research.
However, it is a sure bet that deforestation will accelerate in developing countries if profitable innovations
for rainfed land uses are introduced where there is
open access to rainforests and within an economywide context of rapid population growth and declining
economic opportunities.
Hence, best bet candidates examined in this paper
are appropriate from the perspective of existing smallscale producers: if the number of small-scale producers were to increase greatly and quickly, or, if smallscale producers were displaced by other types of
producers, the best bet technology choices coming
out of this framework may not function as intended.

While the paper focused primarily on two sets of
consumers of forest goods and services, small-scale
farmers and the international community, some messages for regional and national policymakers 'in
between' these polar cases emerged.
Policymakers' preferences regarding land use systems have so far not been systematically included in
this framework, but they can and should be. The triad
of policy objectives of environmental sustainability,
economic growth and poverty alleviation would be
one place to start. As part of this effort, the factors
affecting economic growth would be placed more
squarely on the table than they were here. One
approach might be the addition of one or more 'rows'
in the matrix to quantitatively capture these macroeconomic concerns. Policymaker objectives might
inform the feasibility of achieving wide adoption of
best bet alternatives. For instance, realistic assessments of the costs of technology development and
dissemination of information are missing from this
framework, but must be included in future work. More
generally, though, this paper presents the policymaker
with a framework for identifying tradeoffs regarding
objectives of smallholders and the international community. A next step for researchers and policymakers
might be an examination of tools at their disposal for
minimizing these tradeoffs.
Acknowledgements
This research is part of the Alternatives to Slashand-Bum (ASB) project. ASB was established with
assistance from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) with initial funding from the Global
Environmental Facility (GEF) and additional support
from the Danish International Development Agency
(DANIDA), the Government of Japan and other
donors, as well as from core budgets of the collaborating institutions. This research also benefitted from

T.P. Tomich et at. I Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

support from the Inter-American Development Bank
and the Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria
(EMBRAPA). The authors have benefitted from discussions with and research undertaken by scores of
ASB collaborators. Among these, conversations with
Neil Byron, Chantal Line Carpentier, Andrea Cattaneo, Divonzil Gon<;alves Cordeiro, Merle Faminow,
Hubert de Foresta, Andy Gillison, Tamara Gomes,
Angelo Mendes, Daniel Murdiyarso, Samuel Oliveira,
Vanda Gorete S. Rodrigues, Marcelo Rossi, Michael
Swift and Judson Valentim have been particularly
important in the development of the ideas presented
in this paper. We also are grateful for comments
received from Steve Franzel, Frank Place and Meredith Soule. The authors are solely responsible for any
errors in fact or interpretation.

References
Barlow, C., Jayasuriya, S.K., 1984. Problems of investment for
technological advance: the case of Indonesian rubber smallholders. J. Agric. Econ. 35, 85-95.
Braz, E.M., d'Oliveira, M.V.N., 1994. Manejo florestal para areas
com popula<;Oes tradicionais. 3 o Simp6sio Internacional de
Estudos Ambientais sobre Ecossistemas Florestais. Porto
Alegre, Brazil. Volume de resumos, p. 39.
Faminow, M.D., Oliveira, S., Sa, C.P., forthcoming. Development
of an investment model for the smallholder cattle sector in the
western Amazon. Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuana
(EMBRAPA)/Acre Documento, Rio Branco, Brazil.
Giller, K.E., Beare, M.H., Lavelle, P., Izac, A.M.N., Swift, M.J.,
1997. Agricultural intensification, soil biodiversity and agroecosystem function. Appl. Soil Ecol. 6, 3-16.
Gillison, A.N., Carpenter, G., 1997. A generic plant functional
attribute set and grammar for dynamic vegetation description
and analysis. Funct. Ecol., in press.
Guimaraes, V., forthcoming. Pesquisa de mercado de produtos
vegetais nao madeireiros (NTTP): pesquisa de mercado estudos
de caso, pimenta longa (Piper hispidinervium) and pupunha
(Bactris gasipaes H.B.K.). Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa
Agropecuaria (EMBRAPA)/Acre Documento, Rio Branco,
Brazil.
Hayami, Y., Kawagoe, T., 1993. Peasant and plantation in Asia. In:
Hayami, Y., Kawagoe, T. (Eds.), The Agrarian Origins of
Commerce and Industry. St. Martins Press, New York, 202 pp.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990. Climate
change: the IPCC scientific assessment. Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Jaenicke, H., Franzel, S., Boland, D., 1995. Towards a method to
set priorities amongst multipurpose trees for improvement
activities: a case study from West Africa. J. Trop. For. Sci. 7(3),
490-506.

173

Mahar, D.J., 1989. Government policies and deforestation in
Brazil's Amazon region. World Bank, World Wildlife Fund,
and The Conservation Foundation, Washington, DC.
Michon, G., de Foresta, H., 1995. The Indonesian Agroforest
Model. Forest Resource Management and Biodiversity Conservation. In: Halladay, P., Gilmour, D.A. (Eds.), Conserving
Biodiversity outside Protected Areas. The Role of Traditional
Agro-Ecosystems. The World Conservation Union (IUCN),
Gland, Switzerland.
Monke, E., Pearson, S.R., 1989. The Policy Analysis Matrix for
Agricultural Development. Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca, NY, 279
pp.
Murdiyarso, D.M., Hairiah, K., van Noordwijk, M., 1995.
Modeling and measuring soil organic matter dynamics and
greenhouse gas emissions after forest conversion. Proceedings
of Workshop/Training Course, 8-15 August 1994, Bogor/
Muara Tebo, Indonesia in ASB-Indonesia Publication
No. 1.
van Noordwijk, M., Tomich, T.P., Winahyu, R., Murdiyarso, D.,
Partoharjono, S., Fagi, A.M. (Eds.), 1995a. Alternatives to
slash-and-bum in Indonesia: summary report of Phase 1.
Alternatives to Slash-and-Burn Agriculture (ASB)-Indonesia
Report No. 4. ASB-Indonesia Consortium and ICRAF, Bogor,
Indonesia.
van Noordwijk, M., van Schaik, C.P., de Foresta, H., Tomich, T.P.,
1995b. Segregate or integrate for biodiversity conservation?
Paper presented at the Global Biodiversity Forum, 4-5
November, Jakarta, Indonesia.
Oliveira, S., 1997. Custos e lucratividade da cafeicultura em Rolim
de Moura, Rondonia. Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuaria (EMBRAPA), EMBRAPA!Rondonia, Brazil.
Oliveira, S., Vosti, S.A., 1997. Aspectos financeiros de sistemas
agroflorestais em Ouro Preto do Este, Rondonia. In Administra<;iio rural: Instrumento de sucesso Numa economia estavel.
Anais do 2° congresso Brasileiro de administra<;iio rural: Tema
central. Uberaba, MG, Brazil.
Reardon, T., Vosti, S.A., 1995. Links between rural poverty and the
environment in developing countries: asset categories and
investment poverty. World Dev. 23(9), 1495-1506.
Sen, A., 1982. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and
Deprivation. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 257 pp.
Tomich, T.P., 1991. Smallholder Rubber Development in Indonesia. In: Perkins, D.H., Roemer, M. (Eds.), Reforming Economic
Systems in Developing Countries. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 249-270.
Tomich, T.P., Kilby, P., Johnston, B.F., 1995. Transforming
Agrarian Economies: Opportunities Seized, Opportunities
Missed, Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca, NY, 474 pp.
Vosti, S.A., Reardon, T. (Eds.), 1997. Sustainability, Growth, and
Poverty Alleviation: A Policy and Agroecological Perspective.
Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore, MD, 407 pp.
Vosti, S.A., Witcover, J., 1996. Slash-and-bum agriculture: household perspectives. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 58, 23-38.
Vosti, S.A., Witcover, J., Gockowski, J., Tomich, T.P., Carpentier,
C.L., Faminow, M., Oliviera, S., 1997. Socioeconomic issues
linked to best bets. Proceedings of a Modellers' Workshop, 1825 March 1997, Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuana

174

T.P. Tomich et at.!Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 159-174

(EMBRAPA)/Acre Research Station, Rio Branco, Brazil.
Mimeo, EMBRAPA/Acre, Rio Branco, Brazil.
Vosti, S.A., Witcover, J., Oliveira, S., Faminow, M.D., forthcoming.
Policy issues in agroforestry: Technology adoption and regional
integration in the western Brazilian Amazon. Forthcoming in
Agroforestry Systems 38.
Witcover, J., Vosti, S.A., 1995. Workshop on non-timber tree
product (NTTP) market research. Environment and Production
Technology Division (EPTD) Workshop Summary Paper
No. 3, International Food Policy Research Institute. Washington, DC.

Witcover, J., Vosti, S.A., de Almeida Barbosa, P.R., Batista, J.,
Beatriz, V., Boklin, G., de Fran<;a, S.B., Castilla, C., Fujisaka,
S., Figueiredo Gallo, ·s.L., Garcia, J.H., Cabral, W.G., Hurtado,
L. Leite, A., Nogueira Leite, P.M., Souza, D.A., de Souza
Marinho, J.T., Rocha, K., Rosa Neto, C., 1996. Alternatives to
slash-and-bum agriculture (ASB): A characterization of
Brazilian benchmark sites of Pedro Peixoto and Theobroma,
August/September 1994. MP-8 Working Paper No. US 96-003,
Environment and Production Technology Division, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). IFPRI, Washington, DC.

