Economics of Biofortification
Matin Qaim a*, Alexander J. Stein a, J.V. Meenakshi b
a

Department of Agricultural Economics and Social Sciences in the Tropics and Subtropics, University of
Hohenheim (490b), 70593 Stuttgart, Germany. b HarvestPlus, International Food Policy Research Institute, 2033
K Street NW, Washington, DC 2006, USA. * Corresponding author: qaim@uni-hohenheim.de

Plenary paper prepared for the 26th International Association of Agricultural Economists
(IAAE) Conference, Gold Coast, Australia, August 12-18, 2006

Abstract: Micronutrient malnutrition affects billions of people world-wide, causing serious
health problems. Different micronutrient interventions are currently being used, but their
overall coverage is relatively limited. Biofortification – that is, breeding staple food crops for
higher micronutrient contents – has been proposed as a new agriculture-based approach. Yet,
as biofortified crops are still under development, relatively little is known about their
economic impacts and wider ramifications. In this article, the main factors that will influence
their future success are discussed, and a methodology for economic impact assessment is
presented, combining agricultural, nutrition, and health aspects. Ex ante studies from India
and other developing countries suggest that biofortified crops can reduce the problem of
micronutrient malnutrition in a cost-effective way, when they are targeted to specific
situations. Projected social returns on research investments are high and competitive with
productivity-enhancing agricultural technologies. These promising results notwithstanding,
biofortification should be seen as a complement rather than a substitute for existing
micronutrient interventions, since the magnitude and complexity of the problem necessitate a
multiplicity of approaches. Further research is needed to corroborate these findings and to
address certain issues still unresolved at this stage.
JEL classifications: I1, I3, O1, O3, Q1.
Keywords:

micronutrient

malnutrition,

public

health,

biofortification,

agricultural

technology, impact analysis, developing countries.

Copyright © 2006 by M. Qaim, A.J. Stein, and J.V. Meenakshi. All rights reserved. Readers may make verbatim
copies of this document for non-commercial purposes by any means, provided that this copyright notice appears
on all such copies.

1

Introduction

Micronutrient malnutrition is a widespread problem in many developing countries. An
estimated four billion people are iron deficient, 2.7 billion are at risk of zinc deficiency, and
hundreds of millions lack one or more essential vitamins (WHO, 2002; Hotz and Brown,
2004; UN-SCN, 2004). The prevalence is especially high among the poor, whose diets are
usually predominated by relatively cheap staple foods, with insufficient quantities of highervalue nutritious foods. Micronutrient deficiencies are often the cause for increased mortality
and morbidity, so that the resulting health burden can be immense. This health burden also
entails significant economic costs in the developing world (Horton and Ross, 2003; FAO,
2004). Accordingly, controlling micronutrient malnutrition has been ranked as a top
development priority by eminent international economists (Lomborg, 2004). Economic
growth and poverty reduction will help reduce the problem in the long run. Yet there are also
more

targeted

micronutrient

interventions

being

implemented,

including

food

supplementation, industrial fortification, and nutrition education programs (Allen, 2003;
World Bank, 1994). Recently, an agriculture-based approach has been proposed as a
supplementary strategy, namely breeding staple food crops for higher micronutrient contents.
This breeding approach has been termed ‘biofortification’ (Nestel et al., 2006). The potential
positive effects of biofortification are obvious: if micronutrient-dense staple crops are widely
grown and consumed by the poor, their nutritional status would improve, which could lead to
significant health advantages and economic benefits. However, although plant breeders are
working on the development of biofortified crop varieties, hardly any of these varieties has
yet been released, so that the actual impacts are still uncertain.
In this article, we analyze the implications of biofortification from an economic
perspective. In the next section, we provide some more background about the problem of
micronutrient malnutrition, before describing the biofortification approach in greater detail
and discussing important factors that will influence its future success. A methodological
1

framework for assessing the impacts of biofortification is set out in section 4. This
methodology has been used for different empirical studies, results of which are presented in
section 5. The last section concludes and discusses research and policy implications.

2

Micronutrient malnutrition

For a long time, the food security debate had primarily focused on undernutrition in terms of
calories. Calorie undernutrition is usually the result of an insufficient intake of macronutrients
(carbohydrates, protein, and fat) and is associated with a feeling of hunger. Hunger is still a
serious problem in large parts of the developing world. According to the FAO, 852 million
people worldwide were undersupplied with calories in 2002 (FAO, 2004). Micronutrient
malnutrition is often less obvious for the people affected, which is also why the term ‘hidden
hunger’ is sometimes used. For certain micronutrients, deficiencies are even more widespread
than calorie undernutrition (Figure 1). The major reason for the high prevalence of
insufficient micronutrient intakes is the lack of dietary diversity among the poor. Typical diets
in low-income households are dominated by staple foods, which are a cheap source of calories
but only provide little amounts of vitamins and minerals. In addition to income constraints,
lack of awareness and cultural factors also often limit the consumption of more nutritious
foods, even where these are available and accessible. Women and children are the most
vulnerable groups: pregnancies, breast-feeding, and menstruation as well as rapid body
growth in children increase micronutrient requirements and make it even more difficult to
achieve adequate intakes (WHO, 2002).
Here should appear Figure 1.
Even though deficient people are often not aware of their inadequate nutritional status,
micronutrient malnutrition can have severe health consequences, including increased
susceptibility to infectious diseases, physical and mental impairments, and increased mortality

2

rates (Micronutrient Initiative, 2004). Apart from seriously affecting the well-being of the
people directly concerned, micronutrient malnutrition negatively impacts on aggregate
productivity and economic development (World Bank, 1994; Horton and Ross, 2003). Hence,
efforts to control the problem are justified on humanitarian as well as efficiency grounds.
Several interventions are available to control micronutrient malnutrition. Common
interventions include food supplementation, such as distributing vitamin capsules at regular
intervals, and industrial fortification, that is, adding micronutrients to foodstuffs during
processing. While existing micronutrient interventions have their particular strengths, they
also have their weaknesses (Allen, 2003). For instance, large-scale distribution programs are
resource-intensive, as they require continuous funding, infrastructure, trained personnel,
reliable supplies, and monitoring. Moreover, information, education, and communication
programs are necessary to ensure participation by the target groups. For industrial
fortification, the main problem is reaching those in need, because the poor and malnourished
often consume home-produced foods and only little amounts of processed products.
Furthermore, fortified foods are often somewhat more expensive than their non-fortified
counterparts, unless fortification is mandatory, which then, however, requires monitoring
efforts to ensure compliance by food processors. While dietary diversification is considered
the most sustainable approach to control micronutrient malnutrition, necessary behavior
changes and income constraints are limiting factors in the short and medium run. In this
context, the novel approach of biofortification may be a useful intervention to complement the
existing set of strategies.

3
3.1

The biofortification approach
Ongoing research programs

For a long time, no particular role was seen for agricultural technology in the fight against

3

micronutrient malnutrition; grain micronutrient content was simply not an important selection
criterion for plant breeders. This has changed more recently, when nutritional quality started
to receive higher priority and breeders realized that increased micronutrient densities are not
only compatible with superior agronomic traits, but may, in some cases, even enhance yields.
Plant varieties that are more efficient in the uptake of trace minerals like iron and zinc can be
higher yielding in low-quality soils, because these trace minerals are also required for plant
vigor and growth (Welch, 2002; Graham et al., 1999).
A number of research and development (R&D) programs with the objective to increase
micronutrient densities in staple food crops through breeding have been launched in recent
years. The term ‘biofortification’ has been coined by the HarvestPlus Challenge Program of
the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). This program
concentrates on increasing iron, zinc, and beta-carotene (provitamin A) contents in six staple
crop species, namely rice, wheat, maize, cassava, sweetpotato, and beans, and supports
exploratory research in an additional ten crops. At this stage, research under HarvestPlus
builds primarily on conventional breeding techniques, exploiting the variability of
micronutrient contents found in available germplasm.
However, conventional techniques cannot be used when the micronutrient of interest is
absent from a particular crop. A case in point is rice, which produces beta-carotene in leaves
and in tiny amounts also in rice husks, but not in the endosperm. Hence, in the Golden Rice
project, transgenic techniques have been used to introduce the beta-carotene biosynthetic
pathway into the endosperm of grain (Ye et al., 2000; Paine et al., 2005). The Golden Rice
project involves European research organizations, the International Rice Research Institute
(IRRI), and local partners in developing countries. Another crop-specific project (funded as
part of the Global Grand Challenges in Health Initiative) is the Africa Biofortified Sorghum
(ABS) Project, which seeks to develop a more nutritious and easily digestible sorghum that
contains increased levels of beta-carotene, vitamin E, iron, zinc, and several amino acids.
4

Furthermore, research has been conducted to genetically engineer iron-rich rice (Goto et al.,
1999; Lucca et al., 2001; Murray-Kolb et al., 2002), rice that is rich both in iron and zinc
(Vasconcelos et al., 2003), iron-rich maize (Drakakaki et al., 2005), and beta-carotene-rich
potato (Ducreux et al., 2005). While this is not a complete list of all related research
initiatives, the portfolio is indicative of the attention that biofortification is likely to receive in
the future food and nutrition security debate.

3.2

Potential advantages

The major expected and intended impact of biofortification is to increase micronutrient
intakes among the poor, thus improving their nutrition and health status. By focusing breeding
efforts on staple crops, which are consumed by the poor in larger quantities, the approach is
self-targeting. Tying micronutrients to staple crops also reduces people’s nutritional
vulnerability, because, when economic shocks occur, the poor tend to reduce their
consumption of higher-value food commodities that are naturally rich in micronutrients.
Furthermore, biofortification could be more sustainable than alternative micronutrient
interventions. With a one-time R&D investment, biofortified germplasm can be shared
internationally, and the varieties could spread through existing seed distribution systems.
Since biofortified seeds can easily be reproduced, poor farmers in remote rural areas, with
limited access to formal seed markets, could also be reached. Thus, unlike other micronutrient
interventions, which require large funds on an annual basis, biofortification could produce a
continuous stream of benefits with minimal recurrent costs.
Biofortification promises to be a pro-poor and pro-rural approach, which could
complement existing interventions. However, biofortified crops are still at the stage of R&D,
so that these potential advantages have not yet materialized. The only exception are betacarotene-rich, orange-fleshed sweetpotatoes, which have been promoted in different countries
(e.g., Low et al., 1997).
5

3.3

Factors influencing future impacts

Whether biofortified crops will really contribute to an improved nutrition and health situation
in developing countries will primarily depend on their efficacy and coverage in particular
situations (Figure 2). Efficacy will be determined by the amount of the micronutrient in the
crop, micronutrient retention after processing, and its bioavailability. Coverage, in turn, is
mainly a function of farmer adoption and consumer acceptance of biofortified varieties.
Here should appear Figure 2.
Micronutrient content. Many varieties of staple food crops already contain certain
amounts of micronutrients. For instance, high-yielding wheat varieties contain about 38 parts
per million (ppm) of iron and 31 ppm of zinc. Popular rice varieties contain 3 ppm of iron and
13 ppm of zinc in the milled grain. The potential to further increase these micronutrient
contents by conventional breeding exists. Adequate genetic variations in concentrations of
beta-carotene, other carotenoids, iron, zinc, and other minerals has been identified among
cultivars, making selection of nutritionally appropriate breeding materials possible. For
example, available orange-fleshed sweetpotato varieties contain over 100 µg/g of betacarotene. Nevertheless, with conventional breeding, achievable micronutrient contents are
limited by the available genetic variation within each crop species. Transgenic techniques can
help to further increase these levels, or to introduce micronutrients not naturally occurring in
the crop. A case in point is Golden Rice: biotechnologists managed to produce a transgenic
rice line containing up to 31 µg/g of beta-carotene in the endosperm (Paine et al., 2005).
Where exactly the micronutrient is located within the grain matters considerably. If it is found
mainly in the aleurone layer of the grain, the nutritional impact can be small, since the outer
layers are removed during the process of milling and polishing; the impact is greater when it
is located in the endosperm. Micronutrient toxicities are not expected at levels achieved
through biofortification. For beta-carotene, toxicity is not an issue at all, because the human
body only absorbs as much beta-carotene as it needs.
6

Micronutrient retention. Micronutrient contents in the food actually consumed might be
lower than those produced in the crop, because post-harvest and processing losses can occur.
Beta-carotene in particular is sensitive to bright sunlight and extreme heat. For orange-fleshed
sweetpotatoes, beta-carotene retention after boiling is around 80% (Nestel et al., 2006), but
losses can be much higher with inappropriate storage and cooking techniques. Also for
minerals, losses can occur, although they are usually less sensitive than vitamins and
carotenoids.
Bioavailability. How much of particular micronutrients the human body can absorb and
use for body functions depends on a number of factors. The exact chemical composition of
the micronutrient matters and also how the compound is stored within the plant cell.
Furthermore, enhancing and inhibiting factors in people’s diets can have an important
influence. Beta-carotene absorption, for instance, depends on minimum fat intakes, while
alcohol reduces bioavailability. Iron bioavailability is positively influenced by vitamin C
intake, but phytates and tannins act as inhibiting factors. Haas et al. (2005) have shown that
high-iron rice can indeed improve the iron status of women. Similarly, van Jaarsveld et al.
(2005) have shown that the consumption of orange-fleshed sweetpotato improves the vitamin
A status of children: with 100 µg/g of beta-carotene and 80% retention when consumed in
boiled form, even a 50 gram consumption of this crop is sufficient for meeting 75% of the
recommended daily allowance of vitamin A for children. Also for Golden Rice, a relatively
high bioavailability of the beta-carotene produced has been demonstrated in preliminary
feeding trials (R. Russell, personal communication). While further research is needed to verify
these findings in community settings, preliminary results from the dissemination of orangefleshed sweetpotato in Mozambique are suggestive of substantial nutritional impacts among
micronutrient-deficient target populations.
Farmer adoption. In order for farmers to adopt biofortified crops, micronutrient traits
have to be bred into advanced lines, which are agronomically superior. Nutritional
7

improvement at the cost of lower yields or other agronomic disadvantages is a non-starter. For
example, wheat breeders are attempting to biofortify varieties resistant to a rust that is
expected to affect large areas in Pakistan and India. Thus, adoption of biofortified wheat there
is expected to be driven by rust resistance. It is rather unlikely that farmers are willing to pay
higher prices for biofortified seeds, unless these seeds directly contribute to higher incomes.
Also critical is local adaptation: varieties will have to be targeted to specific agroecological
and socioeconomic conditions. The greater the number of locally-adapted biofortified
varieties, the higher the likely adoption. For wide coverage, plant breeders will need to focus
first on biofortifying ‘mega’ varieties, such as BR28 and BR29 of rice in Bangladesh, which
together occupy almost 60% of the rice area in the Boro season, or BR11, which accounts for
over a quarter of the Aman season rice area (IRRI, personal communication). Finally, the
speed of adoption will depend on the efficiency of existing seed distribution channels and
farmers’ seed replacement rates. Although biofortified seeds can be reproduced on-farm,
some initial public support might be needed for the new varieties to penetrate formal and
informal seed markets.
Consumer acceptance. For reasons outlined earlier, awareness of micronutrient
deficiencies is generally low, so that the nutritional advantages of biofortification might not
be fully appreciated. But even if they are, the willingness and ability to pay higher prices for
biofortified foods are likely to be limited among the poor, who bear the brunt of micronutrient
malnutrition. Also at equal prices, consumers will only purchase micronutrient-dense crops, if
they meet their personal preferences in terms of taste, texture, and visual appearance. Mineral
biofortification at realistic levels is not expected to change consumer characteristics, that is,
iron and zinc traits are invisible (Nestel et al., 2006). This is different for beta-carotene, which
changes the color of the crop to deep yellow or orange, so that it will be necessary to invest
more in demand creation for these varieties through communication and marketing efforts.

8

Consumer acceptance also influences farmer adoption decisions, as low acceptance would
translate into lower market prices.

4

Methodology for impact assessment

In agricultural economics, the usual approach to assess the impact of new crop technologies is
to quantify the economic benefits arising from productivity increases as a result of technology
adoption by farmers. Such productivity increases – either through yield gains or savings in
production costs – cause a downward shift in the crop supply curve, based on which aggregate
economic surplus and surplus distribution effects can be derived (Alston et al., 1995).
However, the main focus of biofortification is on improving the nutritional status of
consumers through quality enhancement. Quality improvements generally lead to a marginal
benefit increase for consumers, which different authors have modeled as an upward shift in
the crop’s demand function (e.g. Unnevehr, 1986). Yet it is unlikely that biofortification
would result in an upward shift in demand, because of awareness and purchasing power
constraints among the poor, as discussed above. In this case, benefits of biofortification
should rather be considered as positive nutrition and health outcomes for individuals suffering
from micronutrient malnutrition and related externalities for society at large. Such
externalities are more complex to evaluate.
Dawe et al. (2002) looked at the potential nutritional effects of Golden Rice by
analyzing likely improvements in vitamin A intakes in the Philippines. This approach
implicitly builds on a measure of program success, which is commonly used also for other
micronutrient interventions, namely the achieved reduction in the number of people with
micronutrient intakes below a defined threshold (e.g. Fiedler et al., 2000). However, since
micronutrient intake is not an end in itself but only a means to ensure healthy body functions,
it is more appropriate to go further and quantify health outcomes directly. In a preliminary

9

assessment of iron biofortification in India and Bangladesh, Bouis (2002) estimated the
reduction in the number of anemia cases and attributed a monetary value to each case averted
for a cost-benefit analysis. Zimmermann and Qaim (2004) suggested a more comprehensive
approach in their analysis of the potential health benefits of Golden Rice in the Philippines:
since micronutrient malnutrition causes significant health costs, which could be reduced
through biofortification, they quantified the health cost of vitamin A deficiency with and
without Golden Rice and interpreted the difference – that is, the health cost saved – as the
technological benefit.

4.1

Quantification of health costs

There are different methodologies available for the quantification of health costs, including
budgeting medical treatment costs, estimating productivity losses, and willingness to pay
approaches (e.g., Brent, 2003). A framework which appears appropriate to quantify the health
costs of micronutrient malnutrition in developing countries is the disability-adjusted life years
(DALYs) approach. DALYs are used to establish the burden of a disease by measuring the
health loss through mortality and morbidity in a single index (Murray and Lopez, 1996). The
annual health costs of a disease are expressed in terms of the number of DALYs lost:
(1)

Health costs = DALYs lost = YLL + YLD weighted

where YLL are years of life lost due to premature deaths and YLD are years lived with
disabilities resulting from the disease, which are weighted according to the severity of
disabling conditions.
The DALYs approach has been used in very different contexts, such as quantifying the
health costs of malaria or HIV/AIDS (e.g., Lomborg, 2004). The World Health Organization
has used it to assess the global health costs of different risk factors, including undernutrition
and micronutrient malnutrition (WHO, 2002). In their Golden Rice study, Zimmermann and

10

Qaim (2004) have refined the DALYs methodology to consider more explicitly different
adverse health outcomes of vitamin A deficiency. Stein et al. (2005) have further developed
the approach by incorporating new nutrition insights and extending it also to iron and zinc
malnutrition. For each micronutrient, the number of DALYs lost can be calculated as:
(2)

DALYslost

⎛ 1 − e − rL j ⎞
⎛ 1 − e − rd ij ⎞
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
= ∑ j Tj M j ⎜
⎟ + ∑i ∑ j T j I ij Dij ⎜
⎟
r
r
⎝ 444
⎝ 4443⎠
14442
3⎠
1444424
YLL

YLD

where Tj is the total number of people in target group j, and Mj is the mortality rate associated
with the particular deficiency. Iij is the incidence rate of adverse health outcome i in target
group j, Dij is the corresponding disability weight, and dij is the duration of the outcome. For
permanent health problems, dij equals the average remaining life expectancy Lj. Future life
years lost are discounted at a discount rate of r. An overview of adverse health outcomes of
iron, zinc, and vitamin A deficiency is shown in Table 1. Only those outcomes for which a
definite causal relationship has been established in meta-analyses are included (Stein et al.,
2005a).
Here should appear Table 1.
Inserting appropriate health and demographic statistics in equation (2), the health costs of
micronutrient malnutrition in a country or region can be calculated. Since biofortified crops
are not yet consumed, this status quo situation is the benchmark without biofortification.
Improved micronutrient intakes through consumption of biofortified crops will reduce
mortality and incidence rates of adverse functional outcomes, so that the number of DALYs
lost decreases.1 The difference in micronutrient-related health costs – that is, the number of
DALYs saved – is considered as the benefit of biofortification.

1

How the reduction in mortality and incidence rates can be derived is explained in the next sub-section.

11

4.2

Improved nutrition and health status through biofortification

Micronutrient intakes required for healthy body functions vary from individual to individual,
based on age, sex, physical activity, and many other factors. Recommended dietary reference
intake levels for each micronutrient are usually specified for particular target groups. If the
actual intake of an individual is below the recommended one, the person is likely to be
deficient. An illustrative distribution of micronutrient intakes is shown in panel (a) of Figure
3. In this example, a certain fraction of the population is deficient at current intake levels
without biofortification.
Here should appear Figure 3.
Future consumption of biofortified crops will shift the intake distribution to the right,
whereby the magnitude of the shift will depend on the actual improvement in bioavailable
micronutrients, which is a function of efficacy and coverage, as discussed above. Some
individuals, who were deficient previously, will achieve sufficiency status; for them, possible
adverse health outcomes will cease. However, especially individuals at the lower end of the
intake distribution might still remain deficient, even after the shift. Also for these individuals
there will be an improvement in health status, though, because the prevalence and severity of
adverse health outcomes is correlated with the degree of micronutrient deficiency. In fact, a
convex relationship between micronutrient intake and adverse health outcomes can be
assumed (Hallberg et al., 2000; Zimmermann and Qaim, 2004), as shown in panel (b) of
Figure 3. The effectiveness of biofortification in improving health status can then be
calculated as the ratio of the areas A and (A + B). The mean effectiveness for a particular
target group (Ej) can be used to derive new, reduced incidence rates of adverse health
outcomes as I ijnew = (1 − E j ) ⋅ I ij . For the reduction in mortality rates, the same formula can be
used.2

2

While the approach described here can be used for all micronutrients, Stein et al. (2005a) proposed an

12

4.3

Cost-effectiveness and returns on R&D investments

A comprehensive economic analysis of projects or policies requires that aggregate benefits
are juxtaposed with aggregate costs. The major cost of biofortification is the investment in
breeding and disseminating micronutrient-dense varieties. If the discounted biofortification
investments are divided by the discounted number of DALYs saved, the average cost per
DALY saved can be calculated, which is a common measure for the cost-effectiveness of
health programs (e.g., World Bank, 1993). Based on this per-DALY cost, it is possible to
compare the cost-effectiveness of biofortification with that of alternative micronutrient
interventions, other public health measures, or pre-defined thresholds for what is considered
cost-effective.
One of the advantages of the DALYs approach is actually that health and life do not have
to be expressed in monetary terms, since this is always associated with ethical concerns. Yet,
since biofortification is an agricultural technology, which also competes with non-health
related, productivity-enhancing technologies in terms of funding, a comparison of the returns
on R&D investments might be desirable in some cases. This requires that a monetary value be
attributed to each DALY saved, in order to convert the health benefits into a dollar figure.
What value to choose per DALY saved is not a straightforward decision. In developing
country contexts, a standardized rate of $1000 has sometimes been used (e.g., World Bank,
1994). Other authors have valued DALYs at the average per-capita income in a country (e.g.,
Zimmermann and Qaim, 2004). These are certainly lower-bound values, and they should not
be considered as an approach to quantify the intrinsic value of life. But, since higher values
translate into larger monetary benefits, the results are more cautious and convincing if
favorable returns can already be shown at these lower-bound values.

alternative method for iron, which derives the reduction in the prevalence of adverse health outcomes through
biofortification by using the cumulative distribution function of iron intakes in a population. Where data
availability permits, this alternative method is preferable for iron, but it is not suitable for zinc and vitamin A.

13

5
5.1

Empirical analyses
Biofortification in India

Using the methodology outlined in the previous section, first comprehensive studies on the
impacts of biofortification have been carried for in India (Stein et al., 2005b; 2006a; 2006b),
where micronutrient malnutrition is a widespread problem. About half of all women in India
and three quarters of all children are anemic (IIPS, 2000),3 the risk of zinc deficiency is high
(Hotz and Brown, 2004), and almost one-third of all preschool children are vitamin A
deficient (UN-SCN, 2004). In the framework of the HarvestPlus Challenge Program, crop
scientists at IRRI and CIMMYT are using conventional tools to breed higher amounts of iron
and zinc into rice and wheat. The resulting breeding lines will be shared with the Indian
public research system for backcrossing the micronutrient traits into local varieties. In
addition, transgenic Golden Rice breeding lines, with high amounts of beta-carotene, will be
transferred to India through the Golden Rice Humanitarian Board. Adaptive research, testing,
and deregulating the technologies will still take some time; it is expected that the first
biofortified varieties might be released in India in 2010. Both rice and wheat are important
staple foods in India, so that significant positive nutrition and health benefits can be expected
in the future.
Since much of the information needed for impact assessment is not observable at this
stage, assumptions have to be made for ex ante analyses. Based on expert interviews, two
impact scenarios were constructed – one with optimistic and the other one with more
pessimistic assumptions. The major assumptions made on technology efficacy and coverage
are shown in Table 2. Furthermore, estimated financial costs are shown. These costs include
only part of the international R&D investments, because the biofortified breeding lines will be

3

Iron deficiency anemia is only a subgroup of anemia. But, because it is the most important form, anemia is
often used as proxy for iron deficiency. It should be noted, however, that individuals can also suffer from iron
deficiency without being anemic (Nestel and Davidsson, 2002).

14

shared also with other developing countries. In addition, national program costs for adaptive
breeding, testing, and dissemination have been considered. For Golden Rice, the aggregate
costs are higher than for iron and zinc biofortification for two reasons. First, since Golden
Rice is a transgenic technology, more costly biosafety and food safety tests have to be carried
out under the national regulatory requirements. Second, since the beta-carotene turns the color
of the rice grain yellow, public marketing efforts will be necessary to promote farmer and
consumer acceptance. More intensive marketing efforts are expected to increase technology
coverage. Since the projected marketing expenditures account for a large part of the total cost,
the cost estimates for Golden Rice are higher in the optimistic than in the pessimistic scenario.
Here should appear Table 2.
Based on recent health and demographic statistics, the current health costs of
micronutrient malnutrition in India were calculated. This was done separately for the three
micronutrients iron, zinc, and vitamin A. The results are shown in Table 3. With an annual
loss of 4 million DALYs, the aggregate costs of iron deficiency are higher than those of zinc
and vitamin A deficiency. Although the latter two are associated with higher mortality,
especially among children, they are less widespread than iron deficiency. For an ad-hoc
estimate of the total health costs of all three micronutrient deficiencies together, the individual
results can be added up, resulting in an annual loss of over 9 million DALYs. This indicates
that hidden hunger is indeed a huge public health problem in India. The DALYs sum will
underestimate the true costs, however, because – owing to micronutrient interactions –
multiple deficiencies in individuals can lead to additional adverse health outcomes, which are
not captured here. Only recently have nutritionists started to pay more attention to
micronutrient interactions. At this stage, the knowledge available is not sufficient to
incorporate these interactions into economic analyses. This is also the reason why iron, zinc,
and provitamin A biofortification have been analyzed separately, although all three
micronutrients might eventually be bred into the same crop varieties.
15

Here should appear Table 3.
For the impact analyses, a nationally representative data set was used, which includes
detailed food consumption data for 120,000 Indian households (NSSO, 2001). Using local
food composition tables and consumer equivalence units, the consumption of different food
commodities was translated into micronutrient intakes for individuals. The results on health
cost reductions through biofortification for the two impact scenarios are shown in the lower
part of Table 3. Under optimistic assumptions, biofortified rice and wheat varieties could
more than halve the health costs associated with micronutrient malnutrition in India. Even
under pessimistic assumptions, the reduction is still significant, ranging between 9-19%.
These findings suggest that biofortification is an effective way to reduce hidden hunger, albeit
it is unlikely to eliminate the problem completely. The differences in impacts between the two
scenarios are mainly due to the underlying assumptions on micronutrient contents in the grain
and coverage rates of biofortified varieties. Since these parameters can still be influenced
through appropriate policies, the results also demonstrate that public support is important for
increasing the positive impacts.
Results of cost-effectiveness analyses for the individual technologies are also shown in
Table 3. The cost per DALY saved through biofortification is very low. The World Bank
(1993) classifies health interventions as cost-effective, when the cost of saving one DALY is
lower than US$ 200.4 Thus, biofortification is highly cost-effective, even under pessimistic
assumptions. Also, the cost-effectiveness of biofortification compares favorably with other
micronutrient interventions. For instance, the cost per DALY saved through iron
supplementation and industrial fortification efforts ranges between US$ 5.6-16.3 (Gillespie,
1998). For zinc supplementation and fortification programs, it ranges between US$ 5.0-18.0,
and for vitamin A interventions between US$ 84-599 (Tan-Torres Edejer et al., 2005). The

4

The World Bank (1993) gives a threshold of US$ 150 (in 1990 dollars); in current terms this corresponds to
more than US$ 200.

16

major reasons for the high cost-effectiveness of biofortification are the enormous health gains
it generates and the low recurrent cost that accrues once micronutrient-dense varieties have
been developed and fed into existing seed distribution systems.5 This was discussed in greater
detail in section 3.
Additionally, internal rates of return (IRRs) for R&D investments in biofortification have
been calculated using the lower-bound monetary values mentioned above for valuing each
DALY saved, namely the international standard of US$ 1000 and the average Indian percapita income of US$ 620. Under optimistic assumptions in particular, IRRs are very high
(Table 3). Even under pessimistic assumptions, they are still comparable to the average
returns on R&D investments in productivity-enhancing agricultural technologies (Alston et
al., 2000). These are clear indications that biofortification can be a worthwhile investment
from a social point of view.

5.2

Overview of other studies

Further ex ante studies on the impacts of biofortification have been carried out at different
CGIAR centers for HarvestPlus target crops and countries. These studies were mainly
conducted for research priority setting within the HarvestPlus Challenge Program. The
methodological approach in these additional studies was largely the same as the one outlined
here, although data constraints necessitated the use of average food consumption data instead
of individual household observations. Therefore, projections of nutritional improvements are
based on mean values for the individual target groups rather than the entire sample
distribution of micronutrient intakes. Additional details on assumptions are provided in
Meenakshi et al. (2006). Results in terms of health benefits and cost-effectiveness are shown
in Table 4 for selected crops and countries. All the examples shown are based on

5

Of course, where seed distribution systems are dysfunctional, coverage rates of biofortification will be lower or
dissemination costs will be higher, both of which would result in a less favorable cost-effectiveness.

17

micronutrient amounts that breeders reckon they can achieve using conventional breeding
techniques.
Here should appear Table 4.
These additional results confirm that biofortification can reduce the problem of
micronutrient malnutrition in developing countries. Most of the examples also suggest that
biofortification is a cost-effective approach, certainly in Asia and Africa, and also in certain
contexts in Latin America. However, there are also striking differences between the individual
results. Comparison of the studies for rice in Bangladesh and the Philippines, for instance,
demonstrates the influence of local dietary patterns. While rice is the main food staple for the
poor in Bangladesh, average rice quantities consumed in the Philippines are lower, because
maize is also an important staple in certain parts of the country. Similarly, cassava is only one
staple crop among other important ones for poor households in the Northeast of Brazil. More
detailed assessments on appropriate approaches have to be case-specific. It is clear, however,
that there is no single crop or technique that will work in every situation. Indeed, in certain
situations, biofortification may not enjoy a cost advantage over other interventions.

6

Conclusions and research challenges ahead

Micronutrient malnutrition is a widespread problem in developing countries, especially
among women and children in the poorer segments of the population. The social costs
associated with adverse health outcomes are often sizeable. Biofortification is a new,
agriculture-based intervention, which is likely to gain in importance in the future, as indicated
by the large number of related international research programs recently launched. As
biofortified crops are still under development, relatively little is known about their economic
impacts and wider ramifications. In this article, we have discussed the main factors that will
influence their future success and have illustrated a suitable methodology for economic

18

impact assessment, which combines agricultural, nutrition, and health aspects. Ex ante studies
from India and other developing countries suggest that biofortified crops can reduce the
problem of micronutrient malnutrition in a cost-effective way, when they are targeted to
specific situations.
The approach presented here is only a first step to explicitly consider nutrition and health
aspects in impact assessments of agricultural technology. More basic research could help to
further improve and extend the methodology and develop welfare measures which include
health and quality of life components. Moreover, additional empirical work is required to
verify the preliminary results reported here, including ex post studies building on observable
data once biofortified crops are disseminated. In the case of the deployment of orange-fleshed
sweetpotato, HarvestPlus researchers are planning a randomized evaluation of impact, an
approach not commonly used in agricultural economics. Such ex post analysis will pose new
challenges, especially with respect to indicators of success, as impact on crop adoption, food
and micronutrient intakes, and nutritional outcomes have rarely been assessed under a
unifying paradigm. This interdisciplinary research – involving economists, other social
scientists, agronomists, and nutritionists – is critical for a more comprehensive analysis of the
multiplicity of impacts of biofortification.
Apart from impact analyses, there are also other open issues, which require further
research. These include questions of bioavailability and micronutrient interactions in the
human body. For instance, enhanced iron and zinc content go hand-in-hand for several crops,
and their combined impact may be greater than what a single nutrient alone may achieve.
Similarly, nutrient interactions are important in understanding the impact of biofortifying
multiple crops. In many countries, diets often feature a primary and one or more secondary
staple crops – cassava is commonly eaten with beans in many parts of Africa and Latin
America, for example. The higher beta-carotene content of cassava may enhance the
absorption of the iron in beans. Likewise, nutrient interactions in plants and linkages between
19

high micronutrient concentrations and other crop characteristics are not yet fully understood.
And finally, it is still unclear how stable the micronutrient traits will be when seeds are
repeatedly reproduced by farmers. A rapid trait dilution would certainly put the assumed
sustainability of the biofortification approach into question.
Where there are technical constraints in breeding, transgenic approaches could help to
increase the amounts beyond what is possible through conventional breeding alone.
Transgenic approaches are also needed when a particular micronutrient does not occur
naturally in a crop. Cases in point are the lack of beta-carotene in the endosperm of rice and
wheat. While transgenic approaches may further increase the impact of biofortification, they
may also involve additional complications in terms of regulatory requirements and consumer
acceptance.
In spite of further research challenges ahead, an important policy implication, which
already emerges from the evidence so far, is that biofortification can play an important role in
achieving nutrition security in particular situations. Apart from the high expected costeffectiveness, preliminary cost-benefit analyses show that social returns on R&D investments
into biofortification are favorable and highly competitive with productivity-enhancing
agricultural technologies. Therefore, further pursuing the strategy of biofortification appears
to be worthwhile. Related funding will have to come primarily from the public sector or
humanitarian organizations. Although the projected social benefits are sizeable, neither
farmers nor poor consumers are likely to have a higher willingness to pay for biofortified
crops, so that incentives for the private sector to invest are rather limited.
To conclude, biofortification should not be seen as substitute for existing micronutrient
interventions but as a complementary strategy. No single approach will eliminate the problem
of micronutrient malnutrition, as our results also indicate. All interventions have their
strengths and weaknesses in particular situations. While supplementation and industrial
fortification might be more suitable for urban areas and feeding programs for well defined
20

target groups, biofortification is likely to achieve a wider coverage, including in remote rural
areas, which are often underserved by other interventions. It is only in the long run that
poverty reduction and economic growth may be expected to contribute to dietary
diversification; in the interim, other interventions need to be implemented.

Acknowledgements
The financial support of the German Research Foundation (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Penelope Nestel, H.P.S. Sachdev, and Zulfiqar A. Bhutta, who cooperated with us
in this research and provided invaluable inputs on nutritional details.

References
Allen, L.H., 2003. Interventions for Micronutrient Deficiency Control in Developing
Countries: Past, Present and Future. Journal of Nutrition 133, 3875S-3878S.
Alston, J.M., C. Chan-Kang, M.C. Marra, P.G. Pardey, and T.J. Wyatt, 2000. A MetaAnalysis of Rates of Return to Agricultural R&D – Ex Pede Herculem? IFPRI Research
Report 113, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Alston, J.M., G.W. Norton, and P.G. Pardey, 1995. Science Under Scarcity: Principles and
Practice for Agricultural Research Evaluation and Priority Setting. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca.
Bouis, H.E., 2002. Plant Breeding: a New Tool for Fighting Micronutrient Malnutrition.
Journal of Nutrition 132, 491S-494S.
Brent, R.J., 2003. Cost-Benefit Analysis and Health Care Evaluations. Edward Elgar,
Cheltenham.
Dawe, D., R. Robertson, and L. Unnevehr, 2002. Golden Rice: What Role Could it Play in
Alleviation of Vitamin A Deficiency? Food Policy 27, 541-560.
Drakakaki, G., S. Marcel, R.P. Glahn, E.K. Lund, S. Pariagh, R. Fischer, P. Christou, and E.
Stoger, 2005. Endosperm-Specific Co-Expression of Recombinant Soybean Ferritin and
Aspergillus Phytase in Maize Results in Significant Increases in the Levels of Bioavailable
Iron. Plant Molecular Biology 59, 869-880.
21

Ducreux, L.J.M., W.L. Morris, P.E. Hedley, T. Shepherd, H.V. Davies, S. Millam, and M.A.
Taylor, 2005. Metabolic Engineering of High Carotenoid Potato Tubers Containing
Enhanced Levels of β-Carotene and Lutein. Journal of Experimental Botany 56, 81-89.
FAO, 2004. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2004. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Fiedler, J.L., D. Dado, H. Maglalang, N.R. Juban, M. Capistrano, and M.V. Magpantay, 2000.
Cost Analysis as a Vitamin A Program Design and Evaluation Tool: A Case Study of the
Philippines. Social Science & Medicine 51, 223-242.
Gillespie, S., 1998. Major Issues in the Control of Iron Deficiency. Micronutrient Initiative,
Ottawa.
Goto, F., T. Yoshihara, N. Shigemoto S. Toki, and F. Takaiwa, 1999. Iron Fortification of
Rice Seed by Soybean Ferritin Gene. Nature Biotechnology 17, 282-286.
Graham, R.D., D. Senadhira, S.E. Beebe, C. Iglesias, and I. Ortiz-Monasterio, 1999. Breeding
for Micronutrient Density in Edible Portions of Staple Food Crops: Conventional
Approaches. Field Crop Research 60, 57-80.
Hallberg, L., L. Hulthén, and L. Garby, 2000. Iron Stores and Hemoglobin Iron Deficits in
Menstruating Women; Calculations Based on Variations in Iron Requirements and
Bioavailability of Dietary Iron. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 54, 650-657.
Haas, J.D., J.L. Beard, L.E. Murray-Kolb, A.M. del Mundo, A. Felix, and G.B. Gregorio,
2005. Iron-Biofortified Rice Improves the Iron Stores of Nonanemic Filipino Women.
Journal of Nutrition 135, 2823-2830.
Horton, S. and J. Ross, 2003. The Economics of Iron Deficiency. Food Policy 28, 51-75.
Hotz, C. and K.H. Brown (Eds.), 2004. Assessment of the Risk of Zinc Deficiency in
Populations and Options for its Control. International Zinc Nutrition Consultative Group
Technical Document No. 1, Food and Nutrition Bulletin 25, S91-S204.
IIPS, 2000. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2), 1998-99: India. International Institute
for Population Sciences, Mumbai.
Lomborg, B. (Ed.), 2004. Global Crises, Global Solutions. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Low, J., P. Kinyae, S. Gichuki, M.A. Oyunga, V. Hagenimana, and J. Kabira, 1997.
Combating Vitamin A Deficiency through the Use of Sweetpotato. International Potato
Center, Lima.

22

Lucca, P., R. Hurrell, and I. Potrykus, 2001. Genetic Engineering Approaches to Improve the
Bioavailability and the Level of Iron in Rice Grains. Theoretical and Applied Genetics
102, 392-397.
Meenakshi, J.V. N. Johnson, V.M. Manyong, H. De Groote, D. Yanggen, J. Javelosa, F.
Naher, C. Gonzalez, J. Garcia, and E. Meng, 2006. Analysing the Cost-Effectiveness of
Biofortification: A Synthesis of the Evidence. Paper presented at the Annual AAEA
Meeting, July 23-26, Long Beach, CA.
Micronutrient Initiative, 2004. Vitamin & Mineral Deficiency: A Global Progress Report.
Micronutrient Initiative, Ottawa and UNICEF, New York.
Murray, C.J.L. and A.D. Lopez (Eds.), 1996. The Global Burden of Disease; Vol. I and II.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Murray-Kolb, L.E., F. Takaiwa, F. Goto, T. Yoshihara, E.C. Theil, and J.L. Beard, 2002.
Transgenic Rice Is a Source of Iron for Iron-Depleted Rats. Journal of Nutrition 132,
957-960.
Nestel, P. and L. Davidsson, 2002. Anemia, Iron Deficiency, and Iron Deficiency Anemia.
International Nutritional Anemia Consultative Group (INACG), Washington, DC.
Nestel P., H.E. Bouis, J.V. Meenakshi, and W. Pfeiffer, 2006. Biofortification of Staple Food
Crops. Journal of Nutrition 136, 1064-1067.
NSSO, 2001. Level and Pattern of Consumer Expenditure in India 1999-2000, NSS 55th
Round, Report No. 457. National Sample Survey Organization, New Delhi.
Paine, J.A., C.A. Shipton, S. Chaggar, R.M. Howells, H.J. Kennedy, G. Vernon, S.Y. Wright,
E. Hinchliffe, J.L. Adams, A.L. Silverstone, and R. Drake, 2005. Improving the Nutritional
Value of Golden Rice Through Increased Pro-vitamin A Content. Nature Biotechnology
23, 482-487.
Stein, A.J., J.V. Meenakshi, M. Qaim, P. Nestel, H.P.S. Sachdev, and Z.A. Bhutta, 2005a.
Analyzing the Health Benefits of Biofortified Staple Crops by Means of the DisabilityAdjusted Life Years Approach: A Handbook Focusing on Iron, Zinc and Vitamin A.
HarvestPlus Technical Monograph 4, International Food Policy Research Institute,
Washington, DC and International Center for Tropical Agriculture, Cali.
Stein A.J., J.V. Meenakshi, M. Qaim, P. Nestel, H.P.S. Sachdev, and Z.A. Bhutta, 2005b.
Health Benefits of Biofortification: An Ex-Ante Analysis of Iron-Rich Rice and Wheat in
India. Paper presented at the AAEA Annual Meeting, July 24-27, Providence, RI.

23

Stein, A.J., P. Nestel, J.V. Meenakshi, M. Qaim, H.P.S. Sachdev, and Z.A. Bhutta, 2006a.
Plant Breeding to Control Zinc Deficiency in India: How Cost-Effective is
Biofortification? Public Health Nutrition, forthcoming.
Stein, A.J., H.P.S. Sachdev, and M. Qaim, 2006b. Potential Impacts of Golden Rice on Public
Health in India. Paper presented at the 26th IAAE Conference, August 12-18, Broadbeach.
Tan-Torres Edejer, T., M. Aikins, R. Black, L. Wolfson, R. Hutubessy, and D.B. Evans, 2005.
Cost Effectiveness Analysis of Strategies for Child Health in Developing Countries. British
Medical Journal 331, e1177.
UN-SCN, 2004. 5th Report on the World Nutrition Situation. United Nations, Standing
Committee on Nutrition, Geneva.
Unnevehr, L.J., 1986. Consumer Demand for Rice Grain Quality and Returns to Research for
Quality Improvement in Southeast Asia. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 68,
634-641.
van Jaarsveld, P.J., M. Faber, S.A. Tanumihardjo, P. Nestel, C.J. Lomrad, and A.J.S. Benadé,
2005. β-Carotene-Rich Orange Fleshed Sweetpotato Improves the Vitamin A Status of
Primary School Children Assessed by the Modified-Relative-Dose-Response Test.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 81, 1080-1087.
Vasconcelos, M., K. Datta, N. Oliva, M. Khalekuzzaman, L. Torrizo, S. Krishnan, M.
Oliveira, F. Goto, and S.K. Datta, 2003. Enhanced Iron and Zinc Accumulation in
Transgenic Rice with the Ferritin Gene. Plant Science 164, 371-378.
Welch, R. M., 2002. Breeding Strategies for Biofortified Staple Plant Foods to Reduce
Micronutrient Malnutrition Globally. Journal of Nutrition 132, 495S-499S.
WHO, 2002. The World Health Report 2002 – Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy Life.
World Health Organization, Geneva.
World Bank, 1993. World Development Report 1993; Investing in Health. Oxford University
Press, New York.
World Bank, 1994. Enriching Lives: Overcoming Vitamin and Mineral Malnutrition in
Developing Countries. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Ye, X., S. Al-Babili, A. Klöti, J. Zhang, P. Lucca, P. Beyer, and I. Potrykus, 2000.
Engineering the Provitamin A (β-Carotene) Biosynthetic Pathway into (Carotenoid-Free)
Rice Endosperm. Science 287, 303-305.
Zimmermann, R. and M. Qaim, 2004. Potential Health Benefits of Golden Rice: A Philippine
Case Study. Food Policy 29, 147-168.

24

Tables and figures

Figure 1. Number of people suffering from different forms of malnutrition worldwide
Sufficient

Deficient

6
5

Billion

4
3
2
1
0

Iron

Zinc

Iodine

Calories

Vitamin A

Sources: WHO (2002), Hotz and Brown (2004), UN-SCN (2004), FAO (2004).

Figure 2. Factors influencing the impact of biofortified crops

Impact of biofortified crops

Coverage

Efficacy

Micronutrient
content

Micronutrient
retention

Bioavailability

Farmer
adoption

Consumer
acceptance

25

Figure 3. Improvement in micronutrient intakes and health outcomes through biofortification

Individuals

(a) Shift in the distribution of micronutrient intakes

Intake with
biofortification

Current intake

Dietary
reference intake

Micronutrient
intake

Dietary reference intake

Intake with biofortification

Current intake

Adverse health outcome

(b) Relationship between micronutrient intake and health outcome

A
B
Micronutrient
intake

26

Table 1. Adverse health outcomes of micronutrient deficiencies for different target groups
Target group

Iron deficiency

Zinc deficiency

Vitamin A deficiency

Children

• Impaired physical

• Diarrhea

• Child mortality

• Pneumonia

• Measles

• Stunting

• Night blindness

• Child mortality

• Corneal scarring

activity
• Impaired mental
development

• Blindness

• Child mortality (related
to maternal deaths)
Women

• Impaired physical

• Night

activity

in

pregnant and lactating

• Maternal mortality
Men

blindness

women

• Impaired physical
activity

Source: Stein et al. (2005a).

Table 2. Assumptions used to simulate the impact of biofortification in India

Baseline MN content

Iron-rich

Iron-rich

Zinc-rich

Zinc-rich

Golden

rice

wheat

rice

wheat

Rice

3 ppm Fe a

38 ppm Fe b

13 ppm Zn a

31 ppm Zn b

0 µg/g βC a

Optimistic scenario
8 ppm Fe a

61 ppm Fe b

35 ppm Zn a

68 ppm Zn b

31 µg/g βC a

MN retention

100%

100%

100%

100%

65%

Coverage

50%

50%

50%

50%

50%

US$ 3.6 m

US$ 4.5 m

US$ 3.6 m

US$ 4.5 m

Improved MN content

R&D cost (net present value)

US$ 27.9 m

Pessimistic scenario
6 ppm Fe a

46 ppm Fe b

20 ppm Zn a

37 ppm Zn b

14 µg/g βC a

MN retention

100%

100%

100%

100%

20%

Coverage

20%

30%

20%

30%

14%

US$ 12.6 m

US$ 13.8 m

US$ 12.6 m

US$ 13.8 m

US$ 21.4 m

Improved MN content

R&D cost (net present value)

Notes: MN = micronutrient, ppm = parts per million, Fe = iron, Zn = zinc, µg = microgram, βC = beta-carotene.
a
Micronutrient contents shown are for milled rice. b Micronutrient contents shown are for whole grain.
Sources: Stein et al. (2005b; 2006a; 2006b).

27

Table 3. Impact of biofortification in India
Iron
biofortification
Health cost of deficiency without
biofortification (DALYs lost)

Zinc
a

biofortification

4.0 m

Provitamin A
b

2.8 m

biofortification c

2.3 m

Optimistic scenario
DALYs saved through biofortification

2.3 m

1.6 m

1.4 m

58

55

59

Cost per DALY saved (US$/DALY)

0.46

0.68

3.06

IRR (%, DALY valued at US$ 620)

149

135

70

IRR (%, DALY valued at US$ 1000)

168

153

77

Reduction in health cost (%)

Pessimistic scenario
DALYs saved through biofortification

0.8 m

0.5 m

0.2 m

19

16

9

Cost per DALY saved (US$/DALY)

5.39

8.80

19.40

IRR (%, DALY valued at US$ 620)

53

46

31

IRR (%, DALY valued at US$ 1000)

61

53

35

Reduction in health cost (%)

Notes:

a

Iron biofortification of rice and wheat is considered.

b

Zinc biofortification of rice and wheat is

considered. c Biofortification of rice with beta-carotene is considered (Golden Rice).
Sources: Stein et al. (2005b; 2006a; 2006b).

28

Table 4. Impact of biofortification in selected crops and countries
Reduction in health cost (%)

Cost per DALY saved (US$)

Optimistic

Optimistic

Pessimistic

Pessimistic
Iron

Rice, Bangladesh

21

8

3

10

Rice, Philippines

11

4

49

197

Beans, Northeast Brazil

36

9

13

56

Beans, Honduras

22

4

20

114

Zinc
Rice, Bangladesh

46

15

2

6

Rice, Philippines

39

11

7

46

Beans, Northeast Brazil

20

5

95

799

Beans, Honduras

15

3

48

423

Provitamin A
Sweetpotato, Uganda

64

38

4

10

Maize, Kenya

32

8

10

44

Cassava, Nigeria

28

3

3

35

Cassava, Northeast Brazil

19

4

84

434

Source: Meenakshi et al. (2006).

29

