Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

Farm productivity and efficiency in the CEE applicant
countries: a synthesis of results
Matthew Gorton a , Sophia Davidova b,∗
a

Department of Agricultural Economics and Food Marketing, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
b Applied Economics and Business Management Section, Imperial College London, Wye Campus,
University of London, Wye, Ashford, Kent TN25 5AH, UK
Received 23 July 2001; received in revised form 27 February 2002; accepted 11 September 2002

Abstract
This article draws together results from farm efficiency studies in six Central and East European countries that are part of
the EU enlargement process. The main questions addressed concern whether there is a clear superiority of one organisational
type, namely, family farms, over corporate structures (production co-operatives and various types of farming companies) and
the nature of the relationship between size and farm efficiency. Results from empirical research show that there is no clear
cut evidence of corporate farms being inherently less efficient for all farming activities than family farms. Where significant
differences have been found in favour of family farms against the average corporate farm, the best corporate farms still tend
to perform as well as the best family farms. As far as size in concerned, in countries in transition where small family farms
are well established and managed continuously by the present farm household, they appear to be less inefficient compared to
larger cohorts as against countries where small family farms are a relatively new phenomenon.
© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: L25; Q12
Keywords: Technical efficiency; Farm size; Transition; Corporate farms; Individual farms

1. Introduction
Since the beginning of transition, academics and
policy makers have been interested in the relative
efficiency of farming in Central and East European
Countries (CEECs). This interest has been stimulated
by the desire to understand how the CEECs may
fair in an enlarged European Union (EU), given that
overall agriculture accounts for a larger share of GDP
∗ Corresponding author. Present address: AEBM, Imperial College at Wye, Wye, Ashford, Kent TN25 5AH, UK.
Tel.: +44-207-59-42-690; fax: +44-207-59-42-838.
E-mail address: s.davidova@ic.ac.uk (S. Davidova).

and employment in the candidate states. This avenue of research was given further prominence after
early studies noted large variations between farms in
terms of their relative efficiency. Understanding why
farms differ in their relative efficiency has been seen
as crucial to several debates concerning likely future structural change (Mathijs and Swinnen, 1998),
supply response (Hughes, 2000a), the size of the
agricultural labour force (Rizov et al., 2001) and international competitiveness (Gorton and Davidova,
2001). However, previous studies have used a variety
of competing methods to investigate farm efficiency
with results presented on a country by country basis.
This paper attempts to draw together these individual

0169-5150/$ – see front matter © 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2002.09.002

2

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

country studies to present a synthesis of findings
from the region and draw out relevant cross-national
patterns. It concentrates on six of the ten CEECs that
are part of the EU enlargement process. Only studies
covering the post-communist period are included.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section
reviews the main frameworks employed for considering farm performance and factors affecting farm
efficiency. Section 3 outlines the empirical studies
conducted for the CEECs and the methodologies employed. Attention is given to the differences between
methodologies and their importance for the interpretation of results. The findings of farm efficiency studies
for the CEECs are presented in Section 4 with the
discussion grouped around the debate on farm size,
organisational type and other factors. Conclusions are
drawn in Section 5.

2. Factors affecting farm efficiency
Studies of farm performance and agricultural transformation in the CEECs have largely been embedded
within one of two widely-used theoretical frameworks.
First, broadly neo-classical studies have attempted to
understand variations in farm performance, particularly technical efficiency, through recourse to differences in the internal structure of farms (especially
size and legal type) and agency factors such as the
level of human capital (Mathijs and Vranken, 2000;
Hughes, 2000b). In these studies the unit of analysis is the individual farm and a common assumption
has been that understanding variations in technical
efficiency provides a basis for predicting structural
change (Hughes, 2000b). The second set of studies,
drawing on the writings of institutional economists,
argue that human behaviour is shaped by institutions
(formal and informal rules, regulations and laws)
(Williamson, 1988). In this framework the unit of
analysis should not merely be the internal structure
of farms but rather capture a farm’s institutional
embeddedness and inter-organisational relationships
(transaction costs) (Pollak, 1985). Variation in technical efficiency is only one of a number of factors
that may explain structural change in agriculture and
the efficiency of a farm will be determined by both
intra- and inter-organisational arrangements (Brem
and Kim, 2000). Authors within this school have been

particularly interested in governance problems, path
dependency and variations in transaction costs between family and corporate farms as factors that may
explain organisational change in the CEECs (Schmitt,
1993; Brem, 2000). The remainder of this section
reviews the literature on factors identified by both
schools that may explain variations in farm efficiency.
2.1. Economies of size and the ‘optimal farm size’
debate
The literature on transitional economies has witnessed a wide debate about the relationship between
farm size and efficiency as land reform and farm restructuring have brought about comprehensive, politically induced changes in the distribution of farm sizes.
When land reform strategies were formulated at the
outset of transition, some argued that it was desirable
to preserve large farm structures and pursue attempts
to administratively impede farm fragmentation on the
basis that smaller farms are less efficient. These authors tended to see restitution strategies, where they
would lead to farm structures returning to the pre-war
pattern of small-scale peasant units, as highly undesirable (Kanchev, 2000). In contrast, others argued that
the large farms in Eastern Europe suffered from diseconomies of size so that land reform strategies must
include proposals to reduce the mean size of farms
(Koester and Striewe, 1999).
Debates concerning the ‘optimal farm structure’
and ‘optimal farm size’ have a long history in agricultural economics. Writings on Western economies
have sought to understand whether larger farms benefit from being more technically efficient (which may
be decomposed into pure technical efficiency and
scale effects), and/or more allocatively efficient (Hall
and LeVeen, 1978). As mean farm sizes in Western
economies have increased, many have hypothesised
that significant size effects exist (Seckler and Young,
1978). This assumes that firms in a competitive industry will be driven to produce at the lowest point
of the long-run average cost (LAC) curve and that
the frequency distribution of farm sizes will reveal
the lowest LAC point. From this one can infer that
rising mean sizes indicates the presence of economies
of size (Seckler and Young, 1978). It was initially
assumed that the LAC curve is U-shaped, but empirical research for Western agriculture has tended

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

to indicate that an L-shaped curve is more prevalent.
Dawson and Hubbard (1987), for example, found
sharply decreasing LAC curves when small farms
grow to a ‘family’ size in the UK but much less evidence for increasing costs for the group of largest
farms. These findings imply that increasing average
farm sizes do not necessarily imply the presence of
economies of scale, merely the absence of significant
diseconomies (Seckler and Young, 1978; Dawson and
Hubbard, 1987).
Research on developing countries has centred
round the ‘inverse hypothesis’ that smaller farms
are more productive because land is used more intensively (Bharadwaj, 1974; Johnson and Ruttan,
1994; Cornia, 1985). These studies, have largely concentrated on partial productivity measures, typically
yields per hectare, with size measured in terms of
total hectares (ha) managed (Barrett, 1998) and often
fail to account for the differential use of other inputs.
The most common explanation of the inverse hypothesis has been labour market dualism. According to
this theory, households are believed to face a lower
opportunity cost of labour than large, commercial
farms. As a result, small farms apply their own labour
in such quantities that the expected marginal value
product of household labour applied to own cultivation is less than a market-wage-based measure of the
opportunity cost of labour (Carter and Wiebe, 1990).
Assuming agricultural production technology does
not exhibit increasing returns to scale, peasant farms
with a presumed proclivity to labour (Barrett, 1998),
yield an inverse relationship between farm size and
productivity. Binswanger and Elgin (1998) use this
theory to explain why small-scale private plots produced a disproportionate share of agricultural output
in the CEECs during the communist period. While
these traditional Western European and development
literatures approach the size-efficiency debate from
different perspectives, they are both united in a belief
that an optimal farm size can be determined by empirical study and that this should be promoted (Munroe,
2001).
Traditional approaches to the size-efficiency debate
have been increasingly criticised on both empirical and
conceptual grounds (Kislev and Peterson, 1996). Conceptually, Kislev and Peterson (1996) argue that scale
economies are temporary disequilibrium phenomena
that persist only under specific circumstances. Several

3

authors have argued that the observed relationships
between farm size and efficiency may be due to unobserved variables and that traditional explanations of
farm growth as a mechanism for exploiting economies
of size are insufficient to explain the growth in mean
farm sizes. This is developed by Seckler and Young
(1978) who argue that differences in management input are more important: farms with good managers
yield profits to invest in land to increase their income
and may purchase loss-making farms that have inferior management. So, what is revealed in practice, that
mean farm size increases and that larger farms are
more profitable and efficient, is rather related to the
influence of management than to the relationship between size and efficiency per se. Such a trend could
occur even if the LAC curve was horizontal (Seckler
and Young, 1978). A discussion of other ‘missing
variables’ is presented in Section 2.3 below.
The empirical measures used to classify farm size
have also been criticised. As Lund (1983) notes, there
has been no generally accepted measure of firm size in
the economics literature to guide the choice in agricultural studies. Various measures of outputs, inputs (both
flow and stock based such as the number of employees
or value of fixed capital), and of incomes have been
employed. The most commonly employed agricultural measure, geographical land area managed, may
be inappropriate for capturing differences in farming
systems, for example the size of intensive livestock
production. Another commonly used set of measures
of farm size are those based on the stocking of different types of animals and sown areas for crops, often
weighted on the basis of the typical gross margins
earned or the typical amount of labour input (Lund and
Price, 1998). These weighting approaches have been
used to estimate standard gross margins (SGM) which
are used to estimate European Size Units (ESUs),
based on periodically revised evaluations of the SGMs
earned from livestock and other land uses (Lund and
Price, 1998). However ESUs have rarely been used
as a measure of farm size in efficiency studies.
Having used one measure of size, it has been
common for empirical studies to divide samples into
two groups, of ‘large’ and ‘small’ farms (Verma and
Bromley, 1987). This approach suffers from the arbitrary nature of the division of what is essentially a
continuous variable and a lack of evidence on whether
the results are robust with respect to other groupings

4

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

(Doran, 1985). In dealing with this, Doran (1985)
suggests applying a logistic function that enables the
data to determine whether a simple classification into
small and large is appropriate and, if so, what the
cut-off value should be.
In classifying farm size, two other empirical issues
should be noted surrounding farm fragmentation and
differences between land ownership and use. The issue of farm fragmentation has been highlighted in
the development economics literature as, for example,
Sau (1973) for India notes that a farm of 20 ha will
typically be comprised of five separate plots. A consideration of farm fragmentation in efficiency studies appears important as work on China by Nguyen
et al. (1996) found that gains were associated with
economies in plot size rather than farm size. Given the
nature of decollectivisation processes in the CEECs
and the structure of peasant farms that were never
collectivised, farm fragmentation is a concern in the
region. Mech (1999) reports a high degree of land
fragmentation in Poland with “small long strips of
ribbon-like fields” prevailing. Second, the distribution of farm sizes may be very different according
to whether measured by ownership or management
(Binswanger et al., 1993). This is a particular issue
in the CEECs where restitution has dramatically increased the number of owners, many of whom however choose to rent out their land to corporate actors.
As Swain (1998) notes, decollectivisation in the region has created a structure of rental arrangements in
which many own and few rent, the inverse of the historical norm and Western patterns.
Given these empirical and conceptual issues, Verma
and Bromley (1987) argue that size is a relative concept and studies that do not recognise this are of
limited usefulness. The search for a single ‘optimal
size’ is futile given the heterogeneity of farming systems and specialisation of factors of production. Instead Verma and Bromley (1987) conclude that the
“fetish for farm size-productivity relations” has detracted analytical attention from understanding the importance of the larger institutional and infrastructural
environment.
2.2. Organisational type
At the beginning of the transition process, there
were several assumptions about the farm structures

that would emerge as a result of land reform and farm
restructuring in the CEECs. These assumptions were
widely shared by academics and the main international donors (World Bank, 1998). The most common
view was the strong belief that once the centrally
planned system had been dismantled, farm structures
would go back to their ‘normal’ trajectory, namely
smaller individual/family type farms (Csaki and
Lerman, 1996). On economic grounds, this assumption was based on the view that family farms are more
efficient than co-operatives and other types of corporate farms (Schmitt, 1991). The formulated hypothesis
(Schmitt, 1993; Hagedorn, 1994) is that “if the freedom of self-organisation is guaranteed, mainly family
farms develop and survive, except for explicable exceptions, because they have low transaction costs”
(Hagedorn, 1994, p. 5). One of descriptive arguments
employed in support of this hypothesis is that in
Western Europe family farms predominate. Hagedorn
(1994), however, acknowledges that although family
farms are expected to be the main outcome from the
institutional reorganisation of socialised agriculture,
they may differ from the present structure in Western
Europe, mainly in a sense of a higher proportion of
larger farms employing non-family labour.
Studies employing a New Institutional Economics
framework have attempted to explain the circumstances under which it could be expected that one
organisational form is preferred (Allen and Lueck,
1998; Roumasset, 1995). Allen and Lueck (1998)
present a model of farm organisation with at one end
of a spectrum “pure family farms”, with labour paid
by residual claims, and at the other “factory style corporate agriculture”, where farms have many owners
and specialised wage labour. In between are various
partnerships. As the family farmer is the full residual
claimant, there are no moral hazard costs associated
with a worker’s gains from shirking. However, due
to the lack of labour task specialisation in the family
farm, the marginal product of labour in any given
task is lower than in the case of specialised labour
in the corporate farms. In addition, family farmers
have the highest capital costs, as they lack the pool
of resources that is available to corporate farms from
their group of owners. As a result, family farms are
smaller than partnerships and corporate farms, and
possess less equipment. At the opposite end of the
spectrum, the ‘factory style’ corporate farms have

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

high costs to monitor labour as hired workers have
incentives to shirk. However, as corporations face the
lowest capital costs they are more capital intensive.
The quantity of hired labour depends on the balance
between the gains from specialisation and the costs
of monitoring. From these propositions, Allen and
Lueck (1998) argue that corporate farming will be
more efficient and predominate when the production
task makes it less costly for the residual claimant to
relate individual effort to commonly produced results
(such as capital intensive, less seasonal sectors like
poultry or horticultural production). Using data from
Canada and the USA, they argue that arable farming
will continue to be dominated by family farming as
waged labour is difficult to monitor and the benefits
of specialisation are limited. In contrast, livestock
production, which is typically more spatially concentrated and where farmers can better control the effects
of nature and accurately monitor individual labour,
will gravitate toward large scale corporate forms as
found in the rest of the economy (Allen and Lueck,
1998). In this model, the nature of the production
system determines which organisational type will be
more efficient. Brem and Kim (2000) have applied
this framework to study the reorganisation of Czech
agriculture. However, as they note, farm governance
structures in transitional economies are typically more
complex than the stylised models of agricultural firms
presented by Allen and Lueck (1998). Labourers in
corporate farms (producer co-operatives or other type
of companies) are often not only wage earners, but
also residual claimants as they contribute land and
non-land assets to the company.
2.3. Other factors affecting farm productivity and
efficiency
A host of other issues has been investigated in studying variations in farm efficiency, and these can be
divided into agency and structural factors. The most
common agency factor investigated has been human
capital. Stefanou and Saxena (1988) test for the effects of education and training of farm operators on
efficiency. They found that both education and experience have a significant positive effect on the level of
efficiency and that they are substitutes. Welch (1970)
treats education as a factor of production and attributes
the ‘productive value of education’ to two different

5

phenomena. The first is the ‘worker’s effect’ that permits the worker to achieve more with the available
resources, and the second is ‘allocative effect’ that enhances a worker’s ability to acquire and decode information about other inputs (Welch, 1970). Sumner and
Leiby (1987) link the importance of human capital to
the size debate by arguing that the selection of people
to engage in farming and their decision to stay in the
sector will affect the size distribution. Particular emphasis is placed on experience in farming (Sumner and
Leiby, 1987; Evans, 1987), as farmers with more experience have lower average marginal production costs
and may choose to operate larger farms. This variability in management input, human and other resources
implies that there may be more variation in productivity within farm size groups than between size groups
due to factors other than economies of size (Buckwell
and Davidova, 1993).
Regarding structural factors, these can be divided into on-farm and off-farm issues. The most
prominent on-farm issue investigated has been
agri-environmental conditions, including soil quality,
altitude, climate, rainfall and access to water. For
example, Davidova et al. (2002) found a significant
effect of farm location on efficiency in the Navarra region of Spain with the best performing farms located
in the middle of the region and the worst in the northern counties due largely to their mountainous landscape. Environmental factors have been seen as the
‘missing variables’ from assessments of economies of
size (Bhalla and Roy, 1988). For example, Benjamin
(1995) claims that unobserved agri-environmental
factors are responsible for the observed inverse productivity relationship seen in studies of developing
agriculture. Using data on rice production in Java
he argues that to the extent that high-quality land is
subdivided more often than low quality land, yields
per hectare are greater for smaller farms. Bhalla and
Roy (1988) also found that differences in soil quality
across households within the same district partially
explain the inverse productivity relationship. In other
words, land quality is one determinant of farm size
and efficiency studies should account for this. Finally
regarding on-farm structures, security of land ownership rights can effect farm performance (Cristoiu,
2001) as farms with more secure ownership rights are
more prone to make long-term investments and so
may display higher efficiency.

6

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

Off-farm structural factors include wider institutional factors such as up- and downstream relationships and the nature of transaction costs between
agents along agri-food supply chains. For example,
the performance gains from better functioning upstream markets may include better terms of trade
that lower the average costs of production. Similarly,
farms may benefit from the ‘backward transmission’
of scale economies from the downstream sector via
improved contractual arrangements with processors
or marketing enterprises (Hughes, 2000a). The nature of supply chain relationships has been seen as
critical by some authors in explaining the performance of post-communist agriculture in the region
(Hughes, 2000a; Gow and Swinnen, 2001). Hughes
(2000a) for example argues that some CEECs have
institutional environments that are more conducive to
small-scale farming than others because supply and
marketing opportunities were better developed in the
pre-reform period with lower transaction costs. Acquired learning is also important. Established farms
may benefit from accumulated social capital which
can provide advantages in negotiations with input
suppliers, creditors and processing firms (Meurs,
2001).
In summary, the farm size-efficiency debate on its
own is too restrictive a framework for studying variations in farm performance in the CEECs. No absolute generalisations can be made regarding an optimal
farm size (Binswanger and Elgin, 1998), as the optimal farm size for a particular production system in a
particular country will depend on a set of structural
and agency factors.

3. Methodologies employed and studies
conducted
Broadly three sets of approaches to the measurement of production efficiency can be delineated:
parametric techniques (deterministic and stochastic),
non-parametric techniques based on Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), and productivity indices based
on growth accounting and index theory principles
(Coelli et al., 1998). Each of these broad approaches
has been applied in studies on the CEECs (Table 1).
Before reviewing the empirical results of these studies
it is necessary to understand the differences between

these methods and how such variations can affect the
results presented.
The deterministic frontier approach attributes all deviations from the frontier to inefficiencies. Therefore,
it does not take into account the effects of errors of
measurement and other random noises. For this reason, it has not usually been applied to efficiency estimations in transition economies, except in studies
with a stronger emphasis on methodological comparison (Piesse, 1999). In contrast, the stochastic frontier
(Aigner et al., 1977; Meeusen and van den Broeck,
1977) accounts for the effect of random factors such as
errors of measurement, unspecified variables, or hazard factors. Morrison (2000) and Curtiss (2000) have
used the stochastic frontier approach in farm efficiency
studies on transition countries. It has been acknowledged that data from transition economies are generally noisy in comparison to those from developed
economies (Morrison, 2000). From this point of view,
the stochastic frontier approach is more appropriate
than the deterministic one.
The stochastic frontier methodology is, however,
more suitable for a single-output case. In multiple
output situations, data must be aggregated and this
requires price data, which are not always readily
available for transition countries. There is also another
point that raises doubts about the appropriateness of
the production frontier approach to farm efficiency
studies for the CEECs. If farms operate using different technologies, the production function becomes
farm-specific. In this case the assumption that the
slope coefficients are equal across farms is no longer
valid and the measurement of efficiency is not reliable (Lansik, 2000). The assumption that all farms
in transition economies apply the same technology is
quite strong. At the very least, there are differences
between individual and corporate farms, particularly
co-operatives. For example, in the Czech Republic
limited liability companies have their origins in the
privatisation of the state farms. At the beginning of the
process, the assets of state farms were leased to small
groups of people, usually including the former farm
managers (Ratinger and Rabinowicz, 1997). Gradually, the non-land assets were sold to these lessees
at favourable conditions with rescheduled payments.
Hence the managers of these companies had some
managerial experience from the pre-reform period and
access to machinery from the previous state farms at

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

7

Table 1
Empirical studies of farm efficiency in the CEECs and the methodologies employed
Country

Author(s)

Dataset

Sample size

Methodology

Comments

Bulgaria

Mathijs and Vranken
(2000)
Hughes (1998)

1998 ACE survey

93

Specialist crop farms onlya

VUZE panel 1996

411

Czech Republic

Mathijs and Swinnen
(2000)

227

Czech Republic

Curtiss (2000)

Agrocensus and
VUZE panel data
for 1996
VUZE FADN
1996–1998

Data envelopment
analysis (DEA)
Tornquvist-Theil
TFP Index
DEA

Stochastic Frontier
Analysis (SFA)

Wheat, rape seed and
sugar beet only

Hungary

Hughes (2000a,b)

AKII 1996–1997

Hungary

1998 ACE survey

Poland

Mathijs and Vranken
(2000)
van Zyl et al. (1996)

1993 IERiGZ data

178 crop and
77 dairy
248

Poland

Munroe (2001)

1996 IERiGZ data

1200

Slovakia

Mathijs et al. (1999)

1996

151

Cobb–Douglas
stochastic frontier
DEA

Slovakia

Morrison (2000)

1994–1996

30–39

SFA

Slovakia

Hughes (2000b)

1990/1–1996

80

Slovenia

Brümmer (2001)

1995/6 FADN data

147 useable

Tornquvist-Theil
TFP Index
SFA and DEA

Czech Republic

95 wheat farms,
70 rapeseed &
43 sugar beet
153 (1997)

Tornquvist-Theil
TFP Index
DEA
TFP and DEA

Specialist crop and
dairy farms onlya
Two regions. Individual
farms above 3ha only
Individual farms only
Producer co-ops &
companies only
Frontiers constructed for
7 products. Co-ops only
Only covered producer
co-operatives
Specialist horticulture
excluded

a Specialist dairy and crop farms defined as enterprises for which cow milk or grain production accounted for more than 50% of the
total value of agricultural output.

favourable conditions. Yet most of this machinery was
old, and therefore, burdened the companies with high
replacement costs. The limited liability companies
also accumulated liabilities to the state for acquiring
assets from the former state farms. This might have
impeded their access to credit. Thus, due to their different histories, the emerging farm structures in CEECs
have different constraints and different qualities of
management, which makes the assumption that farms
use the same technologies highly questionable. In
addition, there is some evidence that individual farms
face different factor and output prices and therefore
use different technologies (Meurs, 2001). Therefore,
it is not surprising that only a few of the reviewed
studies have used a production frontier approach.
More often, non-parametric approaches have been
applied. DEA does not require arbitrary assumptions
about the functional forms and the distribution of the
error term. In essence, DEA uses a linear programming

procedure to minimise inputs per unit of output to
determine the frontier of best-practice firms, and then
to determine the efficiency of each production unit
relative to their frontier (Ali and Seiford, 1993). The
main reasons for its wide use are computational ease
and the possibility of isolating scale efficiency from
technical and allocative efficiency.
Two issues have pre-occupied researchers studying
farm efficiency during the first years of transition:
First, whether there is systematic evidence about the
superiority of one or another management form, and
particularly whether individual farms are more efficient than the co-operatives; and second, whether the
individual farms created as a result of land restitution
have been too small and exhibited scale inefficiencies. DEA, given that it allows for the separation of
scale and pure techincal efficiency effects, has been
perceived as an adequate approach these questions.
Another advantage of DEA in comparison to

8

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

Table 2
Summary of frontier efficiency analysis for Hungarian agriculture
Year

1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991

Deterministic

Stochastic

Non-parametric

Mean

Standard deviation

Mean

Standard deviation

Mean

Standard deviation

0.669
0.628
0.637
0.715
0.499
0.669
0.478

0.094
0.086
0.093
0.094
0.084
0.106
0.097

0.865
0.989
0.946
0.896
NA
NA
NA

0.075
0.046
0.012
0.049
NA
NA
NA

0.843
0.803
0.788
0.787
0.599
0.759
0.763

0.115
0.120
0.117
0.109
0.138
0.123
0.137

Source: Piesse (1999).

the parametric approach is that it can handle
multiple-output and multiple-input situations simultaneously and cases where inputs and outputs are quantified using different units of measurement (Thiele and
Brodersen, 1999). However, DEA is based on a deterministic approach, so all deviations from the frontier
are attributed to inefficiencies. Hence, the above mentioned ‘noisy’ data for transition economies might not
be well-suited for DEA. Moreover, DEA estimates
could be biased towards higher scores if the most efficient farms within the population are not contained in
the sample. Thus, a certain overestimation of sample
efficiency is possible.
Given these issues, some authors have advocated
the application of index methods, using Malmquist
or Tornqvist-Theil productivity indices (Piesse, 1999;
Hughes, 2000a,b).1 Indices allow the consideration of
detailed data on inputs and outputs but by their very
nature cannot be checked for consistency statistically.
However, they are easy to calculate and analysis may
be carried out on a small sample, and this has made
them appealing to researchers studying economies in
transition.2
In order to illustrate the importance of the above
points when interpreting results derived by different methods, Table 2 shows the results of three
efficiency frontier estimations based on 117 observations in Hungary. Efficiency measures constructed by
1 Under the assumption of constant returns to scale, the latter is
calculated as a geometric mean of two Malmquist indices (Caves
et al., 1982).
2 When Farm Accountancy Data Network (FADN) procedures
were introduced in the EU applicant countries, they were based on
small samples. For example, the FADN survey began in Hungary
in 1996 with a sample of just 42 farms (Hughes, 2000b).

stochastic frontier are consistency higher than those
derived from the deterministic one. The same is true
for the non-parametric frontier, but the standard deviation is also higher. The numerical results of studies
of farm efficiency in the CEECs should be interpreted
accounting for the method of estimation.

4. Review of results
The empirical findings of the studies listed in
Table 1 are grouped according to three topics mirroring
the topics discussed in Section 2: farm size, farm structures and other factors. These are discussed in turn.
4.1. Variations between farm sizes
As expected from the arguments presented in
Section 2, the clearest finding on the size-efficiency
relationship is that there does not appear to be a
uniform, cross-national ‘optimum’ farm size. This is
based on studies that in the majority of cases have
used hectares managed as a measure of farm size.
An exception to this has been for livestock farming
where the value of total assets or total output has
been applied (Mathijs and Vranken, 2000; Hughes,
2000b). None of the studies have measured size in
terms of ESUs or controlled for farm fragmentation
and differences in plot sizes.
For arable farming, in the Czech Republic there appear to be economies of size up to 750 ha, in Slovakia
economies of scale persist above 2000 ha,3 while in
3 TFP analysis by Hughes (2000b) and the scholastic frontier
analysis by Morrison (2000) obtained very similar results for
Slovakia.

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

9

Table 3
Empirical evidence on variations in efficiency by farm size
Country

Author(s)

Findings

Czech Republic

Hughes (1998)

Economies of scale up to 750 ha for arable farming and up to 1,000,000 CZK in 1996 for
livestock farms

Czech Republic

Curtiss (2000)

On average farms above 150 ha perform better for wheat and rapeseed production

Hungary

Hughes (2000b)

Diseconomies of scale over 500 ha, but variation could be accounted for by structural
factors rather than size per se. Small private farms (up to 10 ha) perform remarkably well

Poland

van Zyl et al. (1996)

Larger private farms (above 15 ha) are in general less efficient although results are sensitive
to the methodology employed

Poland

Munroe (2001)

Farms greater than 15 ha were less efficient

Slovakia

Morrison (2000)

For all commodities analysed, a positive relationship between the scale of production and
level of efficiency is observed

Slovakia

Hughes (2000b)

Strong evidence of economies of size in crop production (best performing farms over
2000 ha). No evidence of economies of size in livestock production. Small farms’ relative
productivity improved over the period 1991–1996

Hungary diseconomies of scale appear to set in above
500 ha (Table 3). For Poland, van Zyl et al.’s (1996)
analysis indicated that farms which are relatively large
by Polish standards (above 15 ha) were, on average,
less efficient for the year of study (1993) than their
smaller counterparts. While the van Zyl et al. (1996)
study is outdated, Munroe (2001) using data from
1996 also found that farms greater than 15 ha exhibited lower efficiency.
The van Zyl et al. (1996) study also illustrates
how results may differ according to the methodology
applied. Their TFP results indicate that large farms
are not more efficient than smaller farms, particularly
those within the 10–15 ha range and in fact a downward sloping curve for TFP with respect to farm size
was observed (van Zyl et al., 1996). The DEA analysis, however, found insignificant differences between
the mean sizes of scale efficient (SE) and inefficient
farms (P < 0.10), as well as for the different farm
size categories. The results for allocative efficiency
(AE) were similar, yielding no significant differences.
On the other hand, large farms (>15 ha) were significantly (P < 0.10) less technically efficient (TE)
than smaller farms, but in terms of total efficiency
(SE × TE × AE) large farms (>15 ha) did not differ significantly from smaller farms (van Zyl et al.,
1996). The differences between the results obtained
by the two approaches may be attributed to inherent
differences in methodology. While DEA isolates scale

efficiency from technical and allocative efficiency,
TFP measurements do not differentiate between them.
The discussion of the lack of economies of size for
Poland by Munroe (2001) and van Zyl et al. (1996) is
based on a dichotomy of small and large farms with
15 ha set as the threshold. This is an arbitrary distinction, as criticised by Doran (1985) and in one of the
regions studied by van Zyl et al. (1996) no farm exceeded 54 ha. By Czech and Slovakian standards, all
farms in this Polish region are ‘small’ and it is not possible to say whether economies of size exist outside the
range of farm sizes provided in the Polish samples.4
This illustrates how size is a relative concept.
Notwithstanding these sampling issues, Hughes
(2000b) argues that cross-national differences are
linked to variations in the institutional environment
for, and social capital of, small-scale farming. In
Poland and Hungary small-scale farming was relatively more important during the communist era
(especially in Poland) and more conducive support
structures were developed in these countries. Hungary
has had a much more supportive environment for
small-scale private farming dating back to the New
Economic Mechanism, and since 1989 has embarked
on a more wholesale decollectivisation than the former Czechoslovakia, creating a larger, more well
4 Curtiss (2000) uses a threshold of 150 ha for classifying ‘small’
and ‘large’ farms in the Czech Republic.

10

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

supplied market for small farm inputs and services.
The availability of external services for crop production, such as harvesting services and inputs for small
farms, has historically been far better developed in
Hungary and Poland. The availability of such services
is seen as an important means of overcoming some of
the sources of diseconomies of size (Hughes, 2000b).
In the Czech Republic and Slovakia, far less land is
operated by small farms and the market for supplying
them with inputs and services is smaller and less well
developed. Small-scale farms created by restitution in
the Czech Republic and Slovakia are principally new
phenomena. In the latter two countries it is expected
that accumulated appropriate human and social capital
in small-scale farming is also smaller than in Hungary
and Poland. Where small, private farms are well established and managed continuously by the present farm
household, they appear to be less inefficient relative
to larger cohorts than in countries where small farms
are a relatively new phenomenon. However, one must
note the time frame of these studies. The data used
by Brümmer (2001); Curtiss (2000); Hughes (2000b);
Mathijs et al. (1999) and Munroe (2001) was from
the mid-1990s. van Zyl et al. (1996) use data from
1993. It may be that as new owners become more

experienced or sell their land to more efficient farmers
and the former large state and collective farms adopt
a more professional management approach, some of
these country variations, which have their origins in
pre-transition farm structures, will diminish.
In their analysis of economies of size, the majority
of authors do not control for differences in soil quality or other environmental factors (e.g. Mathijs and
Swinnen, 2000; Mathijs et al., 1999; van Zyl et al.,
1996, Curtiss, 2000). In most cases this has been due
to lack of data, but where soil quality and altitude have
been measured they have proved significant. For example, Brümmer (2001) found that Slovenian farms
600 m above sea level displayed lower technical efficiency and these ‘high altitude’ farms are on average
larger.
4.2. Variations between structures
The most striking feature of the research on farm
structures and productivity is that the evidence is far
from clear cut (Table 4). In Hungary, when other factors are controlled for, family farms do appear to be
more efficient, based on both Tornqvist-Theil TFP
Indices and DEA analysis (Hughes, 2000a; Mathijs

Table 4
Empirical evidence on variations in efficiency by farm structure
Country

Author(s)

Findings

Bulgaria

Mathijs and Vranken (2000)

For crop production, companies performed better than family farms (although based on
a very small sample). The share of insiders has a positive influence on the technical
efficiency of co-operatives

Czech Republic

Hughes (1998)

Individual private farms were significantly more productive for livestock, but not crop
farming. Co-operatives performed better than farming companies

Czech Republic

Mathijs and Swinnen (2000)

For animal breeding and dairy farming, family farms were more efficient than
co-operatives and companies. For crops no significant differences between co-operatives
and companies are observed. Co-operatives were found on the production technology
frontier of all specialisations

Czech Republic

Curtiss (2000)

Co-operatives performed better than individual farms and companies except for sugar
beet where individual private farms performed best. The latter are more labour intensive
but geographically dispersed

Hungary

Hughes (2000b)

Individual private farmers had significantly higher TFP scores than any other farm type

Hungary

Mathijs and Vranken (2000)

For crop farming, while all three structures investigated (family farms, companies,
co-operatives) could be technically efficient, on average family farms were best with
companies performing better than co-operatives

Slovakia

Mathijs et al. (1999)

Family farms performed best except for mixed crop-dairy farms where companies and
co-operatives were more scale efficient

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

and Vranken, 2000), but no such relationships hold
in Bulgaria. For the Czech Republic, both Hughes
(1998) and Mathijs and Swinnen (2000) found that
individual private farms were significantly more productive than corporate farms in livestock farming but
not in crop production. In Curtiss’ (2000) analysis of
crop production in the Czech Republic she found that
co-operatives performed better in wheat and rapeseed
cultivation compared to individual farms but that the
latter were superior in sugar beet production. In Slovakia family farms appear to be more efficient in the
specialist livestock sector but not for combined dairy
and crop production (Mathijs et al., 1999).
Comparatively assessing these results, it appears
that arguments that co-operatives or other forms of
corporate farming are inherently less efficient, for all
types of farming, than family farms are misplaced.
Even where the average corporate farm is less productive than the average family farm, one still sees some
co-operatives and companies which are on the frontier or registering high TFP scores (Hughes, 2000a;
Mathijs and Vranken, 2000). In explaining why there
appear to be significant differences in efficiency between corporate farms and family farms for certain
activities and not others, Mathijs and Vranken (2000)
follow the propositions of Allen and Lueck (1998).
They argue that governance problems in corporate
farms will be most severe where production is spatially diffused and sequential, as in these cases the
costs of supervising and monitoring hired labour are
highest (e.g. arable farming). Mathijs et al. (1999) and
Mathijs and Vranken (2000) argue that this explains
why family farms in the Czech Republic, Hungary and
Slovakia appear more efficient for crop production
but such advantages disappear in the dairy sector. It
should be noted, however, that Curtiss (2000) finds no
such advantages for family farms in wheat or rapeseed
production. In her stochastic frontier analysis, individual farms were only for sugar beet production seen
to be more efficient. She argues that this result might
be due to sugar beet production being more labour intensive so that only in this case are the advantages of
family farms in the supervision of labour significant.
Hughes (2000b) takes a different approach in arguing why the performance of corporate farms has
been better than some of the initial assumptions made
about them would have led one to suppose. He argues that while in the pre-reform period co-operatives

11

and state farms were beset by low labour effort,
free-riding problems and principal-agent difficulties,
these have now been much reduced by changes in the
external environment and internal structures. Worker
bargaining power has been reduced by the presence of
high rural unemployment, so that whereas previously
villagers could hold on to a co-operative job irrespective of work effort, today the costs of being caught
shirking and being dismissed are far higher. Political
developments in the Czech and Slovak Republics have
also reduced worker bargaining power in the general
assemblies of co-operatives so that decisions are no
longer guaranteed to be made on the basis of one
member one vote (Hughes, 2000a).5 In this environment as the marginal productivity of labour is higher,
managers have a greater ability to detect and resist
free riding by farm workers (Hughes, 2000a). From
this viewpoint many of the governance problems attributed to corporate farms are not seen as being inherent to this structure per se, but were rather generated
by the external environment in which they operated
before transition. On these grounds, and given the
empirical evidence from other studies, one should not
expect non-family farms to disappear in the region
or to be inherently less competitive, although one
may see greater specialisation into activities in which
labour supervision and monitoring is less costly.
4.3. Evaluation of other factors
The majority of farm efficiency studies for the region have focused on size and structural matters. Both
the dominance of size and structural issues in policy
debates and the availability of data have influenced
this. Most previous studies have used farm accounting
records that do not contain information on human and
social capital. This is unfortunate given that, where investigated, human and social capital appear to be significantly related to farm efficiency (Lockheed et al.,
1980; Stefanou and Saxena, 1988). The consideration
of human capital-efficiency effects is of particular importance for the CEECs as the level of formal education and training held by small-scale farmers in the
region tends to be low.
5 Hungary’s 1992 Co-operative Transformation Law also weakened the bargaining power of workers as the requirement that
co-operatives had to provide jobs for all members was removed.

12

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

Table 5
Empirical evidence on variations in efficiency accounted for by other factors
Country

Author(s)

Findings

Bulgaria

Mathijs and Vranken (2000)

Strong relationship between education and technical efficiency for dairy and crop
production. Positive relationship with contracting

Czech Republic

Hughes (1998)

Significant regional variation (mountainous farms registered the worst performance)

Hungary

Mathijs and Vranken (2000)

Strong relationship between education and technical efficiency for dairy and crop
production. Share of women in the household has a positive effect but only significantly
so for crop farms. Farms that have bought land are more efficient. Contracting was
positively related with technical efficiency especially for crop farming

Poland

Munroe (2001)

Positive relationship between efficiency and both experience (age of farmer) and farm
modernisation (measured as use of electricity and gas heating)

Slovenia

Brümmer (2001)

Lower efficiency associated with higher altitude (>600 m above sea level) and part-time
farming

Some attempts, however, have been made to investigate other agency and structural factors affecting farm
efficiency (Table 5). In both Bulgaria and Hungary,
Mathijs and Vranken (2000) found a significantly positive relationship between education and technical efficiency in family farms for both crop and dairy farming,
where education was measured as years spent in formal education. However, the evidence on other aspects
of human capital was less clear. For example, age had
a positive impact on the efficiency of Hungarian crop
farms, as it did in Munroe’s (2001) analysis for Poland,
but a negative relationship was recorded for Bulgaria.
Both of these studies found no significant relationship
between efficiency and the number of women in the
household. Mathijs and Vranken (2000) found that the
share of the workforce aged over 60 years has a significant influence on technical efficiency in dairy farming
but not arable. This evidence points to the importance
of human capital, but not all the dimensions of this
are clearly understood. Even in the case of the relationship between technical efficiency and education
there is a need to distinguish between agricultural and
non-agriculturally specific education to see to what extent career-specific skills or the stimulation of wider
key skills (or a combination of both) are important.
Mathijs and Vranken’s (2000) other main finding
concerns the relationship between technical efficiency
and contracting. They found that contracting was
significantly related to higher technical efficiency especially for crop production. Contracting has been
seen as a means of overcoming imperfections in credit
markets where downstream processors provide credit

or physical inputs combined with technical advice
and information (Gow and Swinnen, 1998). However,
it may (also) be that upstream processors purposely
select farms they know as being ‘good’, and as the
Mathijs and Vranken (2000) study offers a snapshot
it is not possible to draw conclusions regarding the
causality of the relation between contracting and efficiency. In investigating on-farm factors, Munroe
(2001) found a positive relationship been farm modernisation (measured as the use of electricity and gas
heating) and technical efficiency for Poland. Brümmer
(2001) tests for differences in technical efficiency between part and full-time farms in Slovenia. He found
that full-time farms are more efficient and this is interpreted as reflecting that part-time farmers have lower
opportunity costs for labour and certain types of capital as a result of quality differences and the ‘hobby’
character of some part-time farms. Only Brümmer
(2001) tests for differences between full and part-time
farms, and this is unfortunate given that decollectivisation has created a mass of new, small units and in
countries which were not extensively collectivised
(such as Poland and Slovenia) small-scale farming still
prevails.
Finally, reviewing all the studies it should be noted
that the evidence presented is biased towards the
Central European countries. Looking at the applicants
for EU membership, there is a lack of evidence on
the Baltic States and Romania. This matters because
the findings to date show considerable differences
between countries, especially regarding the importance of the institutional environment. A critical issue

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

in this regard is the nature of a country’s marketing
environment for small farms.

5. Conclusions
A recent World Bank paper on the CEECs argues
that “production co-operatives have consistently failed
to demonstrate competitiveness with private family
farms” and that there is “no evidence in favour of
economies of scale in farming, rather the opposite”
(World Bank, 1998, p. 6). The review in this paper of
factors affecting efficiency and of the empirical findings from the CEECs point to more complex conclusions.
The majority of studies on arable farming have
found evidence of economies of size and these may
extend above the typical size of contemporary family farms in the region. However, these conclusions
are largely based on studies that do not control for
variations in human capital and agri-environmental
factors. Previous research on developing countries
has indicated that these factors are important ‘missing variables’ which, when controlled for, may substantially weaken previous assumptions made about
the role of size. Path dependency factors appear to
play a role and small farms appear to be relatively
more efficient in countries where support services for
small-scale farms are better developed.
Some authors have advocated the amalgamation of
small farms to realise economies of size in the region
(Curtiss, 2000). While amalgamation may aid technical and allocative efficiency in certain cases, such appeals tend to often ignore the nature of decision making in, and the dynamics of, peasant households (Ellis,
1988). A more fruitful approach may be consider ways
of improving service provision (especially mechanisation services) to small-scale farms that reduce some
of the diseconomies of small farm sizes. Small-scale
agriculture in the CEECs does not appear to be a temporary phenomenon and the rate of structure change
in Poland, where small farms predominate, has been
modest (Safin and Guba, 2000). Improving the institutional environment for small farms will be more beneficial than appeals for farm amalgamation.
Regarding the economics of farm structures there
is no clear cut evidence of corporate farms being inherently less efficient, for all farming activities, than

13

family farms. Where significant differences have been
found in favour of family farms against the average
corporate farm, the best corporate farms still tend to
perform as well as the best family farms (Hughes,
2000b). One should not expect corporate farms to always be unable to compete, and many will survive and
thrive in the future. However, at a commodity level,
corporate farming appears most suited to activities in
which production is spatially concentrated or labour
represents a smaller proportion of costs (Curtiss, 2000;
Mathijs and Swinnen, 2000). Corporate farms are also
likely to perform better where the costs of being caught
shirking are higher (i.e. managers have the ability to
dismiss free-riding workers or high rural unemployment acts as deterrents).
While size and structural effects have been investigated by a number of authors, there has been comparatively little research on the linkages between the
human and social capital of CEEC farmers and technical efficiency. Mathijs and Vranken (2000) did find
a significant relationship between years of education
and farm efficiency. The educational level of farmers
in the region has given cause for concern. For example
in Poland, 59% of those employed mainly or exclusively on individual farms in 1998 had, at most, only
primary education, and of these over 8% had not even
completed primary school (Safin and Guba, 2000).
Under one-sixth (14%) had completed secondary education and just 1% had completed university. Those
employed in farming have tended to see their incomes
fall relative to national and rural averages during transition and many suffer from a lack of the skills demanded on non-agricultural labour markets. The question of how to improve human capital in rural areas
both to improve farm efficiency and to aid diversification out of farming remains pressing.
Another area for future research is the relationship
between farm efficiency and non-agricultural activities. Previous studies have focused almost exclusively
on the agricultural activities of farms but there is evidence of widespread diversification of both individual and corporate farms (Davis and Pearce, 2000).
Understanding the linkages between farm efficiency
and non-agricultural activities is important, as studies
on developing countries have shown (Savadogo et al.,
1994).
Finally, one should note that cross-national comparisons have been limited by differences in data

14

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

collection procedures between countries (especially
the allocation of fixed costs) and, in some cases,
access to data. While most associated countries are
harmonising their own surveys with the EU’s FADN,
this has taken longer than initially envisaged (AKII,
2000). It is therefore difficult to use the results of
efficiency studies directly, compare performance between CEECs and existing EU member states. While
one is able to identify farms which are relatively
more efficient (e.g. on the production frontier or with
a higher TFP index score) in a particular sample for
one CEEC, the frontier for that country might bear
little relationship to what is internationally efficient.
However, from the efficiency studies already conducted one can conclude that a more nuanced set of
conclusions concerning the farm size, structure and
efficiency debate should be drawn than was present in
many of initial pronouncements on decollectivisation.

Acknowledgements
Research for this paper was supported by the
EU Framework Five Programme, IDARA Project
QLRT-1999-1526.
References
Aigner, D., Lovell, C., Schmidt, P., 1977. Formulation and
estimation of stochastic frontier production function models. J.
Econometrics 6, 21–37.
AKII, 2000. The development of FADN in Hungary.
Agrárgazdasági Kutató és Informatikai Intézet, Budapest.
Ali, A., Seiford, L., 1993. The mathematical approach to
efficiency analysis. In: Fried, H., Lovell, K., Schmidt, S. (Eds.),
The Measurement of Productive Efficiency, Techniques and
Applications. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 120–159.
Allen, D., Lueck, D., 1998. The Nature of the Farm. J. Law Econ.
XLI (October 1998), 343–386.
Barrett, C.B., 1998. On price risk and the inverse farm sizeproductivity relationship. J. Develop. Econ. 51, 193–215.
Benjamin, D., 1995. Can unobserved land quality explain the
inverse productivity relationship? J. Develop. Econ. 1, 51–84.
Bhalla, S., Roy, P., 1988. Mis-specification in farm productivity
analysis: the role of land quality. Oxford Econ. Pap. 1, 55–73.
Bharadwaj, K., 1974. Production Conditions and Indian
Agriculture. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Binswanger, H., Elgin, M., 1998. Reflections on land reform
and farm size. In: Eicher, C., Staatz, J. (Eds.), International
Agricultural Development, third ed. Johns Hopkin, Baltimore,
pp. 316–328.

Binswanger, H., Deininger, K., Feder, G., 1993. Agricultural land
relations in the developing world. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 5, 1242–
1248.
Brem, M., 2000. Getting rid of organizational legacy—what
costs restructuring of the Czech agricultural production. Paper
Presented at the KATO Symposium Berlin, Germany, November
2–4th.
Brem, M., Kim, J.-M., 2000. The status of agricultural producer
co-operatives in East European Countries. Korean J. Int. Agric.
3, 238–256.
Brümmer, B., 2001. Estimating confidence intervals for technical
efficiency: the case of private farms in Slovenia. Eur. Rev.
Agric. Econ. 28, 285–306.
Buckwell, A., Davidova, S., 1993. Potential implications for
productivity of land reform in Bulgaria. Food Pol. 6, 493–506.
Carter, M., Wiebe, K., 1990. Access to capital and its impact on
agrarian structure and productivity in Kenya. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 5, 1146–1150.
Caves, D.W., Christensen, L.R., Diewart, E.W., 1982. The
economic theory of index numbers and the measurement of
input, output, and productivity. Econometrica 50, 1393–1414.
Coelli, T., Rao, P., Battese, G., 1998. An Introduction to Efficiency
and Productivity Analysis. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Norwell, Massachusetts.
Cornia, G., 1985. Farm size, land yields and the agricultural
production function: an analysis of fifteen developing countries.
World Develop. 4, 513–534.
Cristoiu, A., 2001. Technical Efficiency and its Determinants in
Romanian Farming during Transition. Imperial College at Wye,
unpublished, mimeo.
Csaki, C., Lerman, Z., 1996. Agricultural Transformation in
Central and Eastern Europe and the Former USSR: Issues of
Land Reform and Farm Restructuring. Paper Presented at the
VIIIth Congress of the European Association of Agricultural
Economists, Edinburgh.
Curtiss, J., 2000. Technical Efficiency and Competitiveness of the
Czech Agricultural Sector in Late Transition—The Case of
Crop Production. Paper Presented at the KATO Symposium
Berlin, Germany, November 2–4th.
Davidova, S., Gorton, M., Ratinger, T., Zawalinska, K., Iraizoz, B.,
Kovacs, B., Mizik, T., 2002. An Analysis of Competitiveness
at Farm Level in CEECs. EU FP5 IDARA Project, Working
Paper Series, Working paper 2/11, Imperial College at Wye.
Davis, J., Pearce, D., 2000. The Rural Non-Farm Economy in
Central and Eastern Europe. NRI Rural Non-Farm Economy
Project, Chatham, Discussion Paper No. 00/01.
Dawson, P., Hubbard, L., 1987. Management and size economies
in the England and Wales dairy sector. J. Agric. Econ. 1, 27–37.
Doran, H.E., 1985. “Small” or “large” farm: some methodological
considerations. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 1, 130–132.
Ellis, F., 1988. Peasant Economies: Farm Households and Agrarian
Development. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Evans, D., 1987. Empirical analysis of the size distribution of
farms: discussion. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 2, 484–485.
Gorton, M., Davidova, S., 2001. The international competitiveness
of CEEC agriculture. World Econ. 2, 185–200.

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16
Gow, H., Swinnen, J., 1998. Up- and downstream restructuring,
foreign direct investment, and hold-up problems in agricultural
transition. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 3, 331–350.
Gow, H., Swinnen, J., 2001. Private capital and contract
enforcement in transitional economies. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 3,
686–690.
Hagedorn, K., 1994. Changing Organisation of Agriculture as a
Result of the Transformation Process. Paper Presented at the
Workshop The Impact of CEE Agricultural Reform on Domestic
and International Markets, Leuven, 10–11th June.
Hall, B., LeVeen, P., 1978. Farm size and economics efficiency:
the case of California. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 4, 589–600.
Hughes, G., 1998. Agricultural Productivity and Farm Structure in
the Czech Republic. EU FAIR Project Agricultural Implications
of CEEC Accession to the EU. Working Paper Series, Working
Paper 2/7, Wye College, University of London.
Hughes, G., 2000a. Total productivity of emergent farm structures
in Central and Eastern Europe. In: Banse M., Tangermann,
S. (Eds.), Central and Eastern European Agriculture in an
Expanding European Union, CABI, Walingford, pp. 61–87.
Hughes, G., 2000b. Agricultural Decollectivisation in Central
Europe and the Productivity of Emergent Farm Structures.
Ph.D. Thesis, Wye College, University of London, unpublished,
mimeo.
Johnson, N., Ruttan, V., 1994. Why are Farms so Small? World
Develop. 5, 691–706.
Kanchev, I., 2000. Agrarian structures in Bulgarian- problems and
development. In: Tillack P., Pirscher, F. (Eds.), Competitiveness
of Agricultural Enterprises and Farm Activities in Transition
Countries. Wissenschaftsverlag Vauk, Kiel, pp. 205–213.
Kislev, Y., Peterson, W., 1996. Economies of scale in agriculture:
a re-examination of the evidence. In: Antle, J., Simner, D.
(Eds.), Essays on Agricultural Economics in Honor of D. Gale
Johnson, vol. 2. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Koester, U., Striewe, L., 1999. Huge potential, huge losses—the
search for ways out of the dilemma of Ukrainian agriculture. In:
Siedenberg, A., Hoffman, L. (Eds.), Ukraine at the Crossroads:
Economic Reforms in International Perspective. Physica-Verlag,
New York, pp. 257–270.
Lansik, A., 2000. Productivity growth and efficiency measurement:
a dual approach. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 1, 59–73.
Lockheed, M.E., Jamison, D.T., Lau, L.J., 1980. Farmer education
and farm efficiency. Econ. Develop. Cultural Change 1, 37–76.
Lund, P., 1983. The use of alternative measures of farm size in
analysis of size and efficiency relationship. J. Agric. Econ. 2,
187–189.
Lund, P., Price, R., 1998. The measurement of average farm size.
J. Agric. Econ. 1, 100–110.
Mathijs, E., Blaas, G., Doucha, T., 1999. Organisational form and
technical efficiency of Czech and Slovak farms. MOCT-MOST:
Econ. Policy Trans. Econ. 3, 331–344.
Mathijs, E., Swinnen, J., 1998. The economics of agricultural
decollectivization in East Central Europe and the former Soviet
Union. Econ. Develop. Cultural Change 1, 1–26.
Mathijs, E., Swinnen, J., 2000. Technical efficiency and the
competitiveness of agricultural enterprises: results from Eastern
Germany and the Czech Republic. In: Tillack, P., Pirscher, F.

15

(Eds.), Competitiveness of Agricultural Enterprises and Farm
Activities in Transition Countries. Wissenschaftsverlag Vauk,
Kiel, pp. 86–97.
Mathijs, E., Vranken, L., 2000. Farm restructuring and efficiency
in transition: evidence from Bulgaria and Hungary. Selected
Paper, American Agricultural Economics Association Annual
Meeting, Tampa, Florida, July 30–August 2.
Mech, D.-M., 1999. The Survival of Peasant Agriculture in Poland.
Ph.D. Thesis. Wye College, University of London, unpublished,
mimeo.
Meeusen, W., van den Broeck, J., 1977. Efficiency estimation from
Cobb–Douglas production function with composed error. Int.
Econ. Rev. 18, 435–444.
Meurs, M., 2001. The evolution of Agrarian institutions: A
Comparative Study of Post-Socialist Hungary and Bulgaria.
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Morrison, J., 2000. Resource Use Efficiency in an Economy in
Transition: An Investigation into the Persistence of the Cooperative in Slovakian Agriculture. Ph.D. Thesis, Wye College,
University of London, unpublished, mimeo.
Munroe, D., 2001. Economic efficiency in Polish peasant farming:
an international perspective. Regional Stud. 5, 461–471.
Nguyen, T., Cheng, E., Findlay, C., 1996. Land fragmentation and
farm productivity in China in the 1990s. China Econ. Rev. 2,
169–180.
Piesse, J., 1999. Efficiency Issues in Transitional Economies: An
Application to Hungary. Ashgate, Aldershot.
Pollak, R., 1985. A transaction cost approach to families and
households. J. Econ. Lit. 23, 581–608.
Ratinger, T., Rabinowicz, E., 1997. Changes in farming structures
in the Czech Republic as a result of land reform and
privatisation. In: Swinnen, J., Buckwell, A., Mathijs, E. (Eds.),
Agricultural Privatization, Land Reform and Farm Restructuring
in Central Europe. Ashgate, Aldershot, pp. 80–99.
Rizov, M., Mathijs, E., Swinnen, J., 2001. The role of human
capital and market imperfections in labor allocation in transition
economies: theory and evidence from Hungary. American
Agricultural Economics Association Annual Meeting, Chicago,
Illinois.
Roumasset, J., 1995. The nature of the agricultural firm. J. Econ.
Behav. Org. 26, 161–177.
Safin, M., Guba, W., 2000. Rural development and rural labour
markets in Poland, EU Network of Independent Agricultural
Experts in the CEEC Candidate Countries. Issue Paper No. 5,
Warsaw.
Sau, R.K., 1973. Indian Economic Growth: Constraints and
Prospects. Orient Longman, New Delhi.
Savadogo, K., Reardon, T., Petiola, K., 1994. Farm productivity in
Burkina Faso: effects of animal traction and nonfarm income.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 3, 608–612.
Schmitt, G., 1991. Why is the agriculture of advanced Western
countries still organised by family farms? Will this continue to
be so in the future? Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 3, 443–458.
Schmitt, G., 1993. Why collectivisation of agriculture in socialist
countries has failed: a transaction cost approach. In: Csaki,
C., Kislev, Y. (Eds.), Agricultural Cooperatives in Transition.
Westview Press, Boulder, pp. 143–159.

16

M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Agricultural Economics 30 (2004) 1–16

Seckler, D., Young, R., 1978. Economic and policy implications
of the 160-Acre limitation in Federal Reclamation Act. Am. J.
Agric. Econ. 4, 575–588.
Sumner, D., Leiby, J., 1987. Analysis of the effects of human
capital on size and growth among dairy farms. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 2, 465–470.
Stefanou, S., Saxena, S., 1988. Education, experience and allocative
efficiency: a dual approach. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 2, 338–345.
Swain, N., 1998. Agricultural restitution and co-operative
transformation in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia.
Europe-Asia Stud. 7, 1199–1219.
Thiele, H., Brodersen, C., 1999. Differences in farm efficiency
in West and East Germany. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 3, 331–
347.

van Zyl, J., Miller, W.R., Parker, A.N., 1996. Agrarian Structure in
Poland: The myth of large farm superiority. The World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Verma, B., Bromley, D., 1987. The political economy of farm size
in India: the elusive quest. Econ. Develop. Cultural Change 4,
791–808.
Welch, F., 1970. Education in production. J. Political Econ. 1,
35–59.
Williamson, O., 1988. The logic of economic organization. J. Law,
Econ. Org. 4, 65–117.
World Bank, 1998. Rural Development in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia: Progress To Date and Strategic
Directions For ECA, Internal Document, June 16, 1998,
http://wbln0018.worldbank.org/Networks/ESSD/icdb.nsf.

