AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Adoption of soil conservation: the case of the Philippine uplands
Ma. Lucila A. Lapar, Sushil Pandey*
Social Sciences Division, International Rice Research Institute, P.O. Box 933, Manila 1099, Philippines

Received 11 February 1998; received in revised form 18 June 1999; accepted 6 July 1999

Abstract
Soil degradation in the sloping uplands of Asia is a serious problem that threatens the sustainability of agriculture. Although several soil conservation technologies have been developed and promoted, their adoption has not been widespread. A
micro-economic analysis of adoption of contour hedgerows by upland farmers in the Philippines is conducted to identify the
factors that determine adoption. The empirical results show that adoption depends on several farm and farmer characteristics
and the relative importance of these factors differs across sites. The high cost of establishment, maintenance and the loss of
land to hedgerows are considered to be the major constraints to adoption by non-adopters. The economics of the contour
hedgerow system is found to improve substantially if crop intensification or cash cropping is possible. In addition to the need
to develop a range of cost-effective technologies, the study indicates that in the more marginal environments, on-site benefits
alone may not be sufficient to justify investment in soil conservation. ©1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Soil conservation; Uplands; Contour hedgerow technology

1. Introduction
One of the major factors leading to the unsustainability of agriculture in the sloping uplands is soil
erosion (Blaikie and Brookfield, 1987). Although the
extent of anthropomorphic soil erosion is debatable
(Oldeman et al., 1991), activities such as deforestation
and intensified land use in the uplands undoubtedly
have led to increased soil erosion. In the humid tropics of Asia, farmers grow a range of subsistence crops
in sloping and marginal uplands using practices which
are often highly erosive (Garrity et al., 1993). In addition to reducing the in-situ productivity and sustainability, these practices also reduce the sustainability
of lowland agriculture through siltation and damage
of irrigation infrastructure (Francisco, 1994).
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +632-845-0563
E-mail address: spandey@irri.cgiar.org (S. Pandey)

What are the conditions under which farmers will
adopt practices which conserve soil and enhance the
long-term sustainability of agricultural production systems in these sloping uplands? Experiences from a
large number of projects implemented in these uplands
indicate that the problem is often not the lack of technology per se but rather the incompatibility of the technology promoted with the socio-economic conditions
under which farming is carried out (Fujisaka, 1989;
Anderson and Thampapillai, 1990; Baum et al., 1993;
Lutz et al., 1994). Engineering solutions such as rock
walls, check dams, and terraces have had very little
success in generating a wider impact due to their high
costs. Other less costly technologies such as contour
hedgerows, contour plowing, and cover management
have also been adopted but sporadically. Overall, technological research and promotional work done so far
seem to have had a limited impact in increasing the
adoption of conservation technologies.

0169-5150/99/$ - see front matter ©1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: SO 169-5150(99)00028-6

242

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

The limited success of these efforts highlights
the need to develop a better understanding of conditions which encourage the adoption of conservation practices. Such factors could be farmer-specific,
farm-specific, or technology-specific. Farmer-specific
factors include the goals of the farmer and the resource base. At a broader level, the socio-economic
milieu under which production takes place determines
the resource base by allowing resource augmentation
through market participation. Farm-specific factors
are related to the biophysical characteristics of the
production systems such as soil characteristics and
climate, as well as the broader characteristics of the
production system. Technology-specific factors are
features of the technology available to the farmers and
which are designed to alter the farmers' production
systems. This paper focuses on the microeconomic
factors conditioning the adoption decision of upland
farmers in the Philippines. The paper starts with a
discussion of the broader policy and institutional conditions essential for ensuring that soil conservation
practices are potentially profitable to farmers. This
conceptual discussion is followed by the presentation
of results based on an analysis of adoption of contour
hedgerows in the Philippine uplands.

2. The nature of production systems and
incentives for soil conservation
As soil conservation is an investment to enhance
the future productive capacity of the soil, a microeconomic model of investment analysis can be utilized
to study adoption behavior. Several specifications of
such models are available in the literature (McConnell,
1983; Clarke, 1992; LaFrance, 1992). These models
indicate that the factors determining both the potential benefits and costs of soil conservation depend critically on the nature of the production systems. The
characteristics of the production system at any point
in time is the result of the interplay between the farmers' attempts to change it in a particular way to meet
their goals and the environmental factors which determine what is feasible. The three major determinants
of the nature of the production system are population
density, market access, and the agroclimatic conditions (Boserup, 1965, 1981; Pandey, 1996). A simplified construct based on population density and mar-

ket access is presented in Fig. 1. When the population
density is low and no outside market demand exists,
returns to labor are maximized by adopting an extensive land use strategy, such as shifting cultivation
based on long fallow periods (Type I). The farmers'
primary objective in this land surplus situation is to
allocate labor to expand the area and not necessarily
to improve the yield. As a result of lack of investment,
land quality suffers over time until the field is finally
rested/fallowed and the farmer moves to a new plot.
During the long fallow period, the natural regeneration may restore soil productivity sufficiently to allow
re-cultivation of the field. Incentives to soil conservation under this situation will be minimal.
When the land frontier is closed, further increases
in population provide incentives for intensification
of agricultural production so that sedentary farming systems evolve (Type II). Farmers attempt to be
self-sufficient by producing a range of agricultural
output under a subsistence mode of production in the
absence of markets. As the scope for increasing the
area is limited, the only option available is to improve the yield per unit area by using more labor and
other inputs for current production. Labor-intensive
methods of soil conservation are likely to be more
appropriate to Type II systems. Although investment
in soil quality is also a way of improving productivity, whether or not farmers will actually do so will
depend on several factors which determine economic
incentives. Where such incentives are lacking, soil
degradation will continue until migration reduces the
population pressure or the area itself is abandoned.
When population density is low but market access is
well-developed, plantation-type commercialized production systems are likely to emerge (Type III).
Annual or perennial food/fiber or industrial crops
predominate depending on market conditions. On the
other hand, commercialized production systems are
likely to develop when both population density and
market access are high (Type IV). Such production
systems may be diversified or specialized depending
on a range of conditions. The opportunity to interact
with the market in these systems can influence soil
conservation decisions in two ways. First, to the extent that cash crops are more profitable per unit area
than food crops, an increase in cash crop production
would increase the marginal value product of soil
and encourage the adoption of conservation practices.

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Agricultural Economics 21 ( 1999) 241-256

243

MARKET ACCESS

High

Low

Low

* Traditional

Perennial or food crop

* Subsistence

Sustainable?

* Sustainable
Type I

Type III

POPULATION
DENSITY

High

* Intensified

* Diversified

* Subsistence

* Food and cash crops

* Sustainable??

* Sustainable??
Type II

Type IV

Fig. 1. Effect of market access and population pressure on land use and sustainability (Source: Pandey, 1996).

Income from cash crops will also help relax liquidity
constraints that may restrict such investments. Second, market access will also increase the opportunity cost of labor used for conservation investment.
This will make labor-intensive conservation practices
more expensive, thus encouraging a preference for
labor-saving methods. If such techniques are not available or limited security of tenure restricts the planning
horizon, farmers may allow the land to degrade.

3. Intensification, property rights, and soil
conservation
Extensification of land use as a means of enhancing
sustainability is not an option in densely-populated areas of Asia. Land use needs to be intensified to feed
the increasing population. What are the conditions
under which land use intensification is compatible
with conservation?
The effect of intensification on soil conservation
depends on the structure of property rights, the level
of development of land and capital markets, access to
technology and information, and developments in the
nonfarm sector. Security of tenure is a critical variable determining incentives to conserve land quality.

If property rights to land are well-defined and enforceable, farmers will have incentives to conserve soil as
future benefits from soil conservation will accrue to the
farmer who makes the investment. Security of tenure
will lengthen the planning horizon or lower the effective discount rate. On the other hand, if property
rights are ill-defined or are unenforceable, a 'mining'
strategy based on rapid exhaustion of soil fertility will
be adopted. This kind of 'mining' strategy can be observed mainly in the forest margins, as well as in
rapidly commercializing areas with ill-defined property rights (Fujisaka et al., 1986; Cruz and Repetto,
1992). For example, farmers who followed loggers
in the uplands of the Philippines grew food crops in
logged areas for a few years and abandoned the fields
afterwards. As these fields did not belong to the farmers, they had no incentive to conserve the productive
capacity of such fields.
The possession of a legal title to land is not, however, necessary for ensuring the security of land tenure
(Bromley, 1992; Place and Hazell, 1993). Empirical
evidence indicates that farmers who do not have legal
titles have often invested in soil conservation while
others with legal titles have not always done so. In
many communities, the local land tenure system provides the security of tenure which a legal title does

244

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

not necessarily provide. The local land tenure system
can in fact assign rights to own, use, and transfer land
in the same way that a legal title does, but often at a
much lower cost due to community enforcement. In
fact, attempts by governments to replace the community land tenure system by legal titles that are costly
to enforce have often increased the insecurity of land
tenure in many societies (Bromley, 1992).
How do the property rights to land evolve as land
use is intensified? The theory of induced innovation
indicates that when the land use intensity is low, the
property rights to land tend to be non-specific and
usufruct (Hayarni and Ruttan, 1985; Binswanger and
Pingali, 1987). As the land use intensity increases due
to population pressure and/or expanded export opportunities, property rights become more specific with
rights to own, use, and transfer. The natural evolution
of property rights to land from general to specific
rights breaks down if intensification occurs at a pace
faster than the capacity of local institutions to adapt to
the changes in property rights or if government policies hinder such a natural evolution. When intensification occurs in response to rapid migration to a newly
opened area, the natural process of evolution of property rights tends to break down leading to adoption
of agricultural practices that are not sustainable
(Fujisaka et al., 1986). If such areas happen to be
sloping uplands with highly erodible soils, land degradation in such societies can be a severe problem.
The existence of well-defined and enforceable property rights to land is a necessary but not a sufficient
condition to adoption. The adoption of soil conservation practices is dependent on the existence of several
additional conditions. A poorly-developed land market may fail to internalize land quality improvements
in land values, thus discouraging the adoption of conservation practices. Similarly, a poorly-developed capital market may constrain adoption by limiting funds
available for such investments. Soil conservation in
the sloping uplands may be more effective if implemented at the watershed level. Without strong community level enforcement, such efforts could be stymied
by the free-rider problem. The adoption of conservation practices in the uplands is also tied up with
the macro and sectoral policies that determine incentives for different land use patterns (Cruz and Repetto,
1992; Coxhead and Jayasuriya, 1994). Some types of
land use are soil eroding while others are soil conserv-

ing. For example, soil erosion under most perennial
crops is minimal as such crops provide a continuous
year-round ground cover. On the other hand, the production of annual food crops tends to cause more erosion unless remedial measures are undertaken. When
faced with rising population, limited off-farm employment opportunities, and limited access to markets, upland farmers may have no alternative but to intensify
the production of staple food using a subsistence mode
of production even though the long-run sustainability
is threatened. The history of upland development in
the Philippines, Vietnam, and Thailand highlights the
effect of macro and sectoral policies on the adoption
of conservation practices very well. The migration of
lowland population to the uplands in the Philippines
in the 70s and 80s has been attributed mainly to the
stagnant productivity of rice in the lowlands, a high
rate of population growth and low absorptive capacity of the nonfarm sector. The migration, coupled with
poorly defined property rights in the uplands, is considered to be a major factor causing soil erosion in
the uplands. In addition, the overvalued exchange rate
encouraged the production of food crops at the cost
of perennial export crops. Similarly in Vietnam, the
government policy of regional food self-sufficiency
until the late 80s was a major factor for the expansion of area under shifting cultivation and the consequent soil erosion. On the other hand, improved market
access through increased investment in infrastructure
in the uplands helped diversify the upland production systems in Thailand (Shinawatra, 1985). The diversification and market integration not only relaxed
the liquidity constraints to investment in conservation
practices faced by upland farmers, but also improved
their food security with the emergence of land use
patterns based on comparative advantage. Additionally, the rapid growth in the nonfarm sector helped
to siphon-off the excess population from these fragile
upland areas and subsequently reduced the pressure
for intensification.
With the right mix of policy and institutional interventions, there is no reason why intensification cannot
be achieved sustainably. The Machakos experience in
Kenya is a case in point. Despite a five-fold increase
in population, Machakos residents were able to increase per capita agricultural output through a correct
mix of institutional and technological innovations
and improved linkage with the nonfarm economy

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

(English et al., 1994). Although the Machakos experience may not be replicable in many of the Asian
uplands, it highlights the importance of various policy
and institutional options in encouraging the adoption
of sustainable practices.

4. Some microeconomic evidence from the
Philippines
4.1. Study area and sampling design
Claveria and Cebu are the two major sites in the
Philippines where the contour hedgerow technology
was actively promoted in the early 80s. The World
Neighbors, in collaboration with the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources, promoted a
range of soil conservation practices including contour hedgerows in Cebu in the early 80s. The soil
conservation technology was a component of the
overall technology to encourage a shift in production
systems from subsistence to cash crops. Overall, the
contour hedgerow technology has spread around the
initial target area and the Cebu case is often cited as
a successful example of adoption of soil conservation
technology (Garcia and Gerrits, 1995).
In 1985, the International Rice Research Institute
initiated a farming systems research program in the
acid uplands of Claveria, Misamis Oriental in collaboration with the Department of Agriculture. A contour hedgerow-based farming system was promoted
using the farmer-to-farmer extension approach based
on the strategy of the World Neighbors in Cebu
(Fujisaka and Garrity, 1988). Sixty-four out of 182
farmers trained had established contour hedgerows by
the end of 1990 (Fujisaka, 1993). A subsequent study
by Cenas and Pandey (1996) documented the status
of the contour hedgerow systems of these farmers
in 1995. While contour hedgerows were considered
ineffective and subsequently abandoned by about
25% of the initial adopters, others modified and/or
maintained their hedgerow structures.
This study focuses on the contour hedgerow technology as a soil conservation practice. A sample of 130
farmers consisting of74 adopters and 56 non-adopters
was selected from Cebu and Claveria. The city of
Cebu provides a good market outlet for commercial

245

production from the peri-urban sloping areas. On the
other hand, the market for the products from Claveria
which is located in the province of Misamis Oriental
is somewhat limited to the smaller city of Cagayan de
Oro. The population densities in the provinces of Cebu
and Misarnis Oriental are 574 persons per km2 and
285 persons per km2 , respectively (NCSO, 1997). The
study area in Cebu comes under Cebu City which has
a population density of 2358 persons per km2 . Thus,
in terms of Fig. 1, Cebu represents an area with good
market access and high population density, whereas
Claveria represents an area with a lower population
density and somewhat limited market access.
The sampling design used to select farmers was
stratified purposive. As the objective of the study is to
carry out an in-depth analysis of adoption behavior,
farmers were divided into two strata, namely adopters
and non-adopters. Adopters were defined as farmers
who have established contour hedgerows in at least
one parcel of their farms, were cultivating and maintaining their contoured parcels, and had crop production during the year prior to the survey year. The
sample consisted of 39 adopters and 21 non-adopters
from nine villages in Claveria and 35 adopters and
35 non-adopters from six villages in Cebu. In order to reduce the effect of environmental variations,
non-adopters were selected from the same villages
and, where possible, were farmers with fields adjacent to the contour hedgerow fields of the adopters.
Given the purposive nature of the sampling design,
caution should be exercised in extrapolating the farm
and farmer characteristics of the sample farmers to the
overall population.
A structured questionnaire was used for the field
interviews. Detailed information on production systems, input use, costs and returns, nature and extent of adoption of contour hedgerows, adoption
of soil conservation practices other than contour
hedgerows, and farmers' perceptions regarding advantages/disadvantages of contour hedgerows were
collected. Interviews with key informants including
government officials, non-government organizations,
and other government agencies engaged in soil conservation were also conducted.
The farm level data on production systems collected
during the survey pertains to the 1995 cropping season.
The basic characteristics of the production systems in
these two locations are summarized in Table 1. While

246

M .. A. Lapar; S. Pandey! Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

Table 1
General characteristics of the production systems in the study area
Features

Cebu

Average area per household (ha)
Average parcel size (ha)
Cropping intensity (%)
Average slope (%)
Area under maize (%)
Area under cash crops (%)
Average yield of maize (kg ha-l)
Average gross income ($ household-! )a

0.7
150
32
54
14
902
1616

1.7

operating. Households of adopters also live closer to
the main road relative to those of non-adopters.

Claveria

3.0
1.2
190
24
84
5
1284
1470

auS$1=P25.

maize is the dominant crop in both locations, cash
crops (mainly vegetables and flowers) are more extensively produced in Cebu compared to Claveria. The
average farm size in Claveria (3.0 ha) is much larger
than that in Cebu (1.7 ha). Due to the relatively larger
share of cash crops, the gross farm income per household in Cebu is higher than that in Claveria.
4.2. Characteristics of adoption and adopters
The extent of adoption, as measured by the proportion of farm area with contour hedgerows of
households who have adopted the technology and the
proportion of farmers who have established contour
hedgerows in the whole farm, is higher in Cebu than
in Claveria (Table 2). Adoption started earlier in Cebu
where almost a quarter of the sample farmers have
adopted contour hedgerows for more than 10 years.
Adopters of contour hedgerows in both Cebu and
Claveria have a larger proportion of farm area under
cash crops than under subsistence crops (Table 3).
The adoption of contour hedgerows may have encouraged a shift towards cash cropping 1 . The heads
of households that have adopted contour hedgerows
are younger and have more years of schooling. A
larger proportion of households that have adopted
contour hedgerows are members of alayon, a local
labor-sharing group, and have received training in soil
conservation for a slightly longer period compared to
those of non-adopters. Likewise, a larger proportion
of adopters own at least a parcel of the land they are
1 If the causality runs in this direction, the opportunity cost of
not adopting contour hedgerows is the income from cash cropping
forgone. Benefit-cost analysis of conservation practice based solely
on the difference in yield of food crops with and without contour
hedgerow will underestimate the economic value.

4.3. Characteristics of contour hedgerows
Based on the combined data for Cebu and Claveria,
the average height of the riser 2 is estimated to be
0.8 m.lt is found to be positively related to the number
of years of adoption. The average annual increase in
the height of the riser is estimated at 5 em per year.
The average width of the hedgerows is 1.3 m and the
average length of hedgerows per hectare contoured is
1300m.
Natural grasses are the predominant hedgerow
species (Table 4). Napier grass is the second most
commonly used species. A larger proportion of contoured parcels in Cebu are planted with Napier grass
compared to those in Claveria. Due to the limited
grazing area in Cebu, farmers consider Napier grass
hedgerows to be valuable as fodder. Other hedgerow
species used are gliricidia (Gliricidia sepium), setaria
(Setaria sp.), and leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala).
There appears to be a movement towards natural
grass-based hedgerows which is consistent with the
results of a previous study done in Claveria by Cenas
and Pandey (1996). While only about 8% ofthe fields
started out with natural grass as hedgerow species and
have remained that way, 35% of the fields have shifted
from planted species to natural grasses as hedgerow
species. Natural domination of grasses and high mortality of the planted species are the major reasons cited
for a shift towards a natural grass-based system.
4.4. Farmer perceptions regarding contour
hedgerows
More than half of the respondents considered the
reduction of soil erosion to be the major benefit from
contour hedgerows 3 , while 16% of the respondents
indicated that hedgerows improve soil fertility. Obviously, one would expect the reduction in soil erosion
and improvement in soil fertility to ultimately help
2 A riser is the portion of the land that connects the upper terrace
with the terrace immediately below it. For a given slope, flatter
terraces have higher risers.
3 Farmer perceptions were obtained using an open-ended interview format.

247

M.. A. Lapar; S. Pandey/Agricultural Economics 21 ( 1999) 241-256

Table 2
Extent of adoption of contour hedgerows

Percent share of contour hedgerow area to total area operated by adoptersa
Percentage of full adoptersb
Partial adopters:
:0::50% but< 100%c
<50%d
a Average share
b Adopters who
c Adopters who
d Adopters who

for all adopters. Figs. in
have established contour
have established contour
have established contour

Cebu

Claveria

All

87(23)

69(33)
46

78(30)
54

26
28

27

63

29
9

19

parentheses are standard deviations.
hedgerows on 100% of their farm.
hedgerows on at least half but less than all area of their farm.
hedgerows on less than half of their farm.

Table 3
Characteristics of adopters and non-adopters of contour hedgerows
Characteristics

Adopters

Non-adopters

Mean age of the household head (years)
Mean years of schooling (years)
Farmers with membership in alayona (%)
Mean duration of training on soil conservation obtained (weeks)
Average distance of house from road (km)
Farmers owning at least a parcel of land (%)
Area under cash crop (%)

45

47

a

4
2
0.6
0.55

6

13
1.4
0.47
54

37
5

12

Alayon is a local organization of farmers with labor-exchange arrangements among members.

improve the yield. But yield increase ranked only third
among the responses ( 11%). Although there may have
been visible improvements in soil attributes with adoption, farmers probably did not observe a very clear
yield gain. This indicates that yield gain is probably
not very substantial and is confounded by other factors. If farmers do not in fact consider yield gain to
be the major benefit, the extension message for promoting soil erosion is likely to be better received if
couched in terms of other benefits that farmers can easily perceive. Other benefits cited by the respondents
were the ease of land preparation as alleys become
flatter (5%), hedgerow species serving as fodder (8%),
and the avoidance of physical damage to crops due to
gully formation and landslide (4%). These other benefits, however, tend to be somewhat location specific.
In terms of problems with the technology, 50% of
the respondents indicated no problem with the technology while 35% considered the high cost of labor
for establishment and maintenance to be the major
problem. Other problems cited include the increased
labor time for land preparation (3%), destruction of
hedgerows by stray animals (4%), shading of crops
by hedgerows (2%), and the persistence of soil
erosion despite the presence of hedgerows (2%). A

Table 4
Percent shares of parcels by type of hedgerow species
Species

Cebu

Claveria

All

Natural grass
Napier grass
G. sepium
Setaria sp.
L. leucocephala
Others•

45
37
6
3
5
4

47
19
9
9

46
30
8
5
3
8

16

a Includes gmelina, guinea grass, bananas, mulberry, pineapple
and ferns.

comparison of the characteristics of the farm, farmer,
and hedgerows of farmers who have no problems with
the technology with the characteristics of those having
problems show no statistically significant differences
(based on t-tests and chi-square tests) except for the
membership in alayon which is higher (21 %) among
farmers reporting no problem than for farmers having
problems (6%) 4 . An a layon is an informal group of
farmers in which labor exchange among members is
practiced under the principle of reciprocity. As alayon
is a mechanism to help relax labor constraints, differences in perception may be related, at least in part,
4

Significant at the 10% level.

248

M.. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Agricultural Economics 2 I (1999) 241-256

to the severity of labor constraints faced by different
households.
Responses from non-adopters about the reasons
for not adopting contour hedgerows indicate that the
high labor requirements to establish and maintain the
hedgerows is the most commonly cited major reason
(38%). Lack of technical knowledge and loss of cultivable area are considered to be the major reasons for
non-adoption by more than 10% of the respondents.
Other reasons cited include the difficulties in land
preparation in the presence of contour hedgerows
(5% ), non-ownership of the land (5% ), lack of capital
(2%), and the perception that soil erosion is not a
problem (5%).
Among the factors that would encourage non-adopters
to adopt contour hedgerows, the need for technical assistance and training on the technology and the need
to have sufficient labor and capital are cited by almost
one-third and one-fifth of the respondents, respectively. A wider choice of hedgerow species (11% ),
ownership of the land (5% ), and clear evidence of
loss of soil on their farms (5%) are the other major
factors that would encourage non-adopters to adopt
contour hedgerows. On the other hand, about 15% of
the respondents feel that there is no need for them to
adopt contour hedgerows as they do not perceive soil
erosion to be a major problem on their farms.
The majority of non-adopters consider the destruction of crops and loss of seedlings and inputs to be the
major erosion-related problems on their farms while
about 16% of the farmers consider gully formation to
be the major problem resulting from erosion. Judging
from these responses, it appears that visible damage
to the fields and physical losses of seedlings and crops
loom large in the farmers' minds. No farmer mentioned the reduction of yield due to soil erosion as a
major problem.
The majority of non-adopters have taken measures
to reduce the soil erosion on their fields, of which
23% have constructed diversion/drainage canals, another 23% have practiced contour plowing, and about
16% have responded simply by using more fertilizer.
Fallowing the land and placing other physical barriers are the other erosion-reducing measures practiced
by 12% of the farmers. These responses indicate that
farmers use other practices that may be more suitable
to the specific conditions of their fields and/or cheaper
to undertake than contour hedgerows. The implication

is that promoters of soil conservation in the uplands
must not view contour hedgerows as the universal solution for all farmers but only as one of the options.
If a wider range of methods is promoted, farmers will
have the flexibility to choose practices that they consider to be the most appropriate to their fields.

4.5. Factors determining adoption

The adoption data were analyzed using a probit
model (Maddala, 1983; Greene, 1997) to identify the
factors determining the adoption of contour hedgerows
for soil conservation. A number of variables are hypothesized to determine the farmer's decision to adopt
a soil conservation technology. These variables are
classified into four categories, namely, personal factors, economic variables, institutional factors and the
soil erosion potential of the field. Descriptive statistics of these variables and their anticipated effects are
summarized in Table 5.
The effect of age of the farmer on adoption decision
can be taken as a composite of the effects of farming
experience and planning horizon. While longer farming experience as equated with older farmers is expected to have a positive effect on adoption, younger
farmers, on the other hand, may have longer planning
horizons and, hence, may be more likely to invest in
conservation. The net effect on adoption, therefore,
could not be determined a priori. Hoover and Wiitala
(1980) found in their study of Nebraska farmers that
age has a significant negative influence on adoption.
Higher education levels may be associated with
greater information on conservation measures and
the productivity consequences of erosion, and higher
management expertise (Ervin and Ervin, 1982; Hoover
and Wiitala, 1980; Feder et al., 1985). As a human
capital variable, education is also found to positively
affect the efficiency of adoption of conservation practices (Rahm and Huffman, 1984). Hence adoption
is hypothesized to be positively correlated with the
farmer's education level.
Membership in local labor exchange groups, called
alayon, is posited to have a positive effect on adoption.
The labor-exchange mechanism that is characteristic
of these groups may help relax the labor constraint to
adoption. Studies in other locations in the Philippines
have found membership in alayon to be positively cor-

M .. A. Lapm; S. Pandey/Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

249

Table 5
Sample mean values of the independent variables used in the probit model and their expected effects on adoption
Variable

Cebu

Claveria

Effect

Age of household head
Education (years)
Land/labor ratio
Slope (percent)
Distance from the road (km)
Nonfarm incomea
Tenureb
Memberc

48.2 (13.5)d
4.4 (2.7)
0.1 (0.1)
31.3 (11.5)
0.2 (0.4)
48.8 (35.2)
30
12

46.5 (11.0)
7.1 (3.4)
0.2 (0.2)
21.9 (13.3)
0.8 (1.0)
35.3 (33.4)
52
3

+, +
-,+
+
+,+
+

a Percent share of nonfarm income to total household income.
b Percent share of owned parcels.
c Percent share of parcels cultivated by alayon members.
d Figs. in parentheses are standard deviations.

related with the adoption of soil conservation (Sajise
and Ganapin, 1991; Gabunada and Barker, 1995) 5 .
Tenure status affects investments in soil conservation by altering the planning horizon. As discussed
earlier, security of tenure can be expected to be positively related to adoption. Our interview with farmers indicates, however, that ownership is not always
a necessary condition for having security of tenure
that would lead to investment in contour hedgerows
in the Philippines. For example, in Cebu, almost 72%
of the fields with contour hedgerows is rented while
only 28% is owned. Moreover, most of the adopters
of hedgerows in Cebu have revealed that their rented
fields belong to a close relative. This suggests that the
reciprocity involved in kinship ties may encourage the
farmers to treat the rented field as their own. Recent
evidence from the Philippines shows that the behavior of share-croppers with a kinship relation with their
landlords is not affected by the disincentive effects
of product and factor sharing (Sadoulet et al., 1997).
Such kinship relations may also similarly influence investment decisions.
Land/labor ratio, measured as the ratio of the area
operated to the number of family members engaged
5 Alayon groups may be strengthened and activated in the context of a specific project. To the extent that farmers acquire the
alayon membership after deciding to adopt contour hedgerows,
the causation may be reversed. Our survey data do not permit an
assessment of the extent to which this may have happened in the
study area. Nevertheless, studies in other sites in the Philippines
(Sajise and Ganapin, 1991; Gabunada and Barker, 1995) show
that alayons were pre-existing at the time of adoption of contour
hedgerows.

in farming on a full-time basis, is used as an indicator of the population pressure. Households with
lower land/labor ratio may have incentives to invest in
soil conservation for crop intensification. On the other
hand, the potential loss of land to contour hedgerows
may discourage adoption. It has been found that contour hedgerows occupy nearly 20% of the land (Cenas
and Pandey, 1996) resulting in reduced cropping area.
For households with more land per unit of labor, this
potential loss of land and the subsequent reduction in
cropping area may be less of a constraint relative to
those with little land. Hence, households with higher
land/labor ratio may be more likely to adopt contour
hedgerows. The effect of land/labor ratio on adoption
is, therefore, indeterminate a priori.
The distance of the homestead to the nearest road,
as a proxy for market access, may capture the effect
of several variables. Access to markets provides the
farmer with opportunities for income-earning activities. Thus, there is more incentive for the farmer to
ensure that farm productivity is improved or at least
maintained in order to take advantage of market opportunities. Farmers who can potentially generate good
returns from the production and sale of crops that are
highly demanded in the market may therefore find soil
conservation economically attractive (Clarke, 1992).
Several farmers mentioned during the interviews that
soil conservation is important for realizing high levels
of profits from cash cropping. In addition to this effect,
farmers who live closer to the road are more likely
to be visited by extension agents than the ones who
are situated far away. The cost of accessing technical
knowledge and information will be lower for farmers

250

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

Table 6
Estimated coefficientsa of tbe probit model and the marginal probabilities of the independent variables
Variable
Constant
Age of household head
Education (years)
Tenure (dummy)b
Member (dummy)c
Landllabor ratio
Slope (percent)
Nonfarm income
Distance from tbe road
-2Log Likelihood ratio
Probability of adoption

Cebu coefficient
-1.78***
0.007
0.17***
-0.31
0.84**
0.10
0.02**
0.005
-0.94**
192.54***
0.51

Marginal probabilities (%)
0.3
6.7
-12.4
33.5
4.0
0.8
0.2
-37.3

Claveria coefficient
0.52
-0.03**
-0.03
1.02***
0.34
-0.94
0.05***
-0.005
-0.10
165.51***
0.46

Marginal probabilities (%)
-1.2
-1.2
40.2
13.4
-37.1
2.0
-0.2
-3.9

a ***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%.
b 1 for owner, 0 otherwise.
c 1 for alayon member, 0 otherwise.

living close to the road. The anticipated effect of this
variable is, therefore, positive.
To the extent that liquidity is a constraint to adoption, nonfarm income will have a positive effect on
adoption by relaxing this constraint. The level of nonfarm income, however, may not be exogenous but be
affected by the profitability of the farming operation
that in tum depends on conservation decisions. Thus,
adoption of conservation practices and the level of
nonfarm income may be determined simultaneously.
The simultaneity arises due to the labor allocation decisions of the households into farm and nonfarm activities. The nonfarm income of the households surveyed
is, however, mostly derived from remittances of family members working overseas, from nonfarm business
activities, and from employment in the nonfarm sector. As skill requirements for these jobs are likely to be
different from that for farming, the farm and nonfarm
employment may be considered as non-competitive
activities. In this situation, the level of non-farm income would be largely exogenous to the adoption decision.
Slope of the field is the only indicator used as a
proxy for the erosion potential. Although the erosion potential depends on rainfall pattern, soil physical characteristics and slope in a complex way,
the nature of the data collected does not permit
the inclusion of factors other than slope. In addition, rainfall patterns and soil physical characteristics may not vary much from field to field within a
location.

The results of the probit analysis are presented in
Table 6. Two separate probit equations were estimated
for each site after an F-test for the null hypothesis of
no structural differences between the data from Cebu
and Claveria turned out significant. A test of multicollinearity among the independent variables did not
indicate collinear relationships among the variables to
be a problem. The condition number (Belsley et al.,
1980) was used to determine the presence of multicollinearity.
Adoption in Claveria is found to be significantly
influenced by the age of the household head, ownership of the land, and slope. The results suggest that a
farmer who is younger, owns the farm, and operates
a field with steeper slope is more likely to adopt the
contour hedgerow technology. The likelihood of adoption in Claveria is estimated at 46% on average. For
Cebu, adoption is significantly influenced by the level
of education, membership in alayon, slope, and market access. The effect of all these variables on adoption is positive. The likelihood of adoption in Cebu
is estimated at 51% on average. If only the significant factors in these two sites are considered, they are
age of the farmer, level of education, land ownership,
membership in alayon, access to markets, and slope 6 .

6 Given the nature of the data collected, it is not possible to
explain tbe reasons for the different sets of factors tbat significantly
affect adoption in these two locations. A more in-depth study of
the differences in the production systems in these two sites is
needed to provide a satisfactory answer to tbis question.

M.. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

251

Table 7
Average labor mandays per hectare for construction and maintenance of contour hedgerows, by type of hedgerows
Natural vegetative

Planted species•

All

Construction
A-frame construction
Layouting
Plowing
Shoveling
Hauling of planting materials
Seeding/planting

12.4 (13.9)b
0.0
1.6
10.1
0.7

55.1 (63.7)
0.5
9.5
8.1
22.5
5.3
9.2

48.9 (58.9)

Maintenance
Fertilizer application
Pruning and weeding
Replanting
Gully repair

13.2 (13.9)

13.5 (13.8)
0.1
10.7
0.9
1.8

13.5 (13.7)

13.1
0.1

a Includes leguminous species, forage grasses and perennial species.
Figures in parentheses are standard deviations.

b

The effect of land ownership turned out to be significant in Claveria but not in Cebu. The difference in
the importance of ownership in determining adoption
behavior in these two sites indicates that ownership is
not a good proxy for security of tenure in the uplands
of the Philippines. There are other factors such as the
patron-client relationship between the tenant and landlord and kinship relations that may provide security of
tenure even if the land is not owned. Obviously, these
conditioning social factors vary from location to location. Similarly, the different sets of significant variables, except for the field slope, in these two locations
also makes it difficult to generalize the results across
locations. This can make the task of designing policy and institutional interventions much more difficult
since a blanket approach would not be appropriate. A
multi-site comparative study backed up by a detailed
characterization of the production systems in each site
may be needed to identify the intermediate conditioning factors that generate variability in responses.
4.6. Returns to adoption
Data problems beset a truly dynamic cost-benefit
analysis of investment in contour hedgerows. Two
major relationships are required. The first is the
relationship between erosion (or soil depth) and productivity. The second is the relationship between conservation measure and soil erosion. The time path of
land productivity with erosion control measure can be
predicted by combining these two relationships. Con-

siderable investments in research efforts have been
made to understand the nature of these relationships,
as well as to develop simulation models to predict the
effect of soil conservation practices on productivity.
Although several models with different degrees of
sophistication are now available (Young and Muraya,
1990; McCown et al., 1995), the practitioner is constrained by the fact that the calibration and validation
of these models often require considerable data and,
sometimes, the reworking of some of the relationships.
Given the difficulties mentioned above, a somewhat
simpler approach of relying on sensitivity analysis to
highlight the major factors that determine the profitability of investment in soil erosion control is undertaken instead of conducting a full-fledged cost-benefit
analysis. Temporal patterns of changes in yield from
fields with and without contour hedgerows are ignored
in this approach and, instead, yield is assumed to remain constant over time at their respective levels in
both situations. The average cost of establishing contour hedgerows (49 mandays), the average annual cost
of maintenance (14 mandays), and the proportionate
area lost to hedgerows (20%) are obtained from the
survey data (Table 7). The percentage increase in yield
of maize required to recoup these costs at different discount rates are calculated assuming the life of contour
hedgerows to be 10 years 7 . As adoption of contour
7 Contour hedgerows assist in the formation of flatter alleys that
could be maintained at a relatively low cost almost indefinitely.
The assumed life of 10 years provides a somewhat conservative
estimate of the benefits of contour hedgerows.

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Agricultural Economics 21 ( 1999) 241-256

252

\

.~14

"'E

'012

Cropping Intensity- 1

-e-- Discount rate 0.4

-+- Discount rate 0.2

"'">.10
a;

Cropping intensity= 2

.,c

-.- Discount rate 0.4

~ 80

""".,"'
.ii

-+- Discount rate 0.2

60

·=~ 40
!!!

-~ 20
#-

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

Yield of maize (kg ha"1)
without contour hedgerows

Fig. 2. Percentage increase in yield of maize needed for investment in contour hedgerows to break-even at different discount rates and
cropping intensity.

hedgerows may encourage intensification of production, two levels of cropping intensity are also considered, namely, single cropping (cropping intensity= 1)
and double cropping (cropping intensity= 2) 8 .
The results presented in Fig. 2 indicate that the
breakeven increase in percentage yield declines
rapidly with the increase in base yield in the case of
no conservation. In very poor environments where the
maize yield is only 200 kg/ha, the breakeven increase
in yield required is as high as 160% under a 40%
discount rate and single cropping scenario. On the
other hand, the required yield increase is only 26%
under the most favorable scenario of maize yield of
1.6 tlha, a 20% discount rate, and double cropping assumption. These results highlight a paradox. A much
higher increase in productivity is needed to persuade
farmers to adopt conservation practices in relatively
low-yielding (or more degraded) environments where
investment in soil conservation may be most needed
to prevent further erosion. In contrast, yield gains
required are much lower in relatively high-yielding
(or less degraded) environments where the need to
conserve soils may not be so apparent. These suggest that agricultural researchers face a much tougher
8 Although we have assumed that contour hedgerows may lead to
intensification through more frequent cropping, changes in farming
practices (such as the use of more input) may be the source of
additional profits while the cropping intensity remains constant.
The outcome of the breakeven analysis is independent of the
mechanism through which additional profits are generated.

challenge in making investment in soil conservation
economically attractive to farmers in areas with low
initial productivity. It may be difficult to justify soil
conservation in these degraded marginal areas on the
basis of on-site benefits alone. On the other hand,
even if the on-site benefits are low, off-site effects
may be large enough to justify a publicly-assisted
conservation program in these low productivity environments. Further research on the off-site benefits
from soil conservation is needed to address this issue
which is beyond the scope of the present analysis.
The breakeven increase in yield is lower if the adoption of contour hedgerows subsequently encourages
cropping intensification (or helps generate more income by encouraging farmers to switch to high-value
crops). In areas with more favorable climatic conditions, an improvement in market access may, thus, promote adoption by facilitating crop intensification or
a switch to cash cropping. Yield-increasing technologies may also similarly foster adoption.
Why do farmers need such a large increase in yield,
especially in areas with lower initial productivity? Is
investment in contour hedgerows too costly? Which
of the three components of cost matters the most?
To answer these questions, the above analyses are repeated for different scenarios of cost reduction. The
base values assumed are maize yield of 400 kg/ha, a
20% discount rate, and single cropping. The analysis
is done by changing one of the cost components at a
time while keeping the other two fixed at their base

253

M.. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256
:!
·;

75
----- Loss of area to hedgerows

~ 70

-+- Establishment cost

0

"0

~65
c

-.- Maintenance cost

.

~ 60
~

..0

·~ 55

..

~

.~50
"it.
45
40
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

% reduction in cost of hedgerow

Fig. 3. Percentage increase in yield of maize needed for investment in contour hedgerows to break-even under different percentage reduction
in cost.

values. The results presented in Fig. 3 indicate that
among the three cost components, the breakeven increment in yield declines most rapidly with a given
percentage reduction in the cost of maintenance. This
result is consistent with farmer perception that the
maintenance of hedgerows is a problematic aspect of
the contour hedgerow technology. Careful selection of
hedgerow species that require minimal maintenance
could improve the benefits from adoption.
Natural vegetative strips are believed to be the least
costly in terms of establishment as well as maintenance. Although the estimate of the average maintenance cost of natural vegetative strips is almost the
same as that of planted species, the average establishment cost of the former is much lower (Table 7). It
is not surprising, therefore, that these systems are becoming more popular. The major cost of establishment
of planted species is the cost of the planting material,
the cost of transportation, and the cost of shoveling to
prepare the planting area. Farmers using natural vegetation do not incur these costs, hence, the overall cost
of establishing hedgerows is much lower. If the cost of
maintenance of natural vegetation and the loss of land
could be reduced to 3 mandays and 7%, respectively,
the breakeven increment in yield for the base values
used in Fig. 3 is estimated to be only 25% which is a
more achievable target. This will certainly make natural grass-based contour hedgerows more economically
attractive compared to hedgerows of other species.

Grasses that are not too tall and whose growth can be
checked effectively by small quantities of herbicides
could substantially reduce the maintenance cost. The
loss of land could also be minimized by widening the
alleys. Research to find ways to reduce these costs under a range of environmental conditions is, therefore,
warranted.

5. Concluding remarks
The large body of literature on adoption of
high-yielding varieties and crop management technologies in developing countries points towards a
number of factors that condition the adoption of
some of these seemingly profitable technologies
(Feder et al., 1985; Smale et al., 1994). Even for
these technologies that produce economic returns
within a production cycle, the conditioning factors
operate in quite complex and interactive ways. A
relatively longer time required for the realization
of benefits of soil conservation means that benefits
are likely to be more uncertain. Informational problems limit farmers' ability to correctly anticipate the
long-term productivity consequences of current land
use practices. This along with failures in land and
credit markets-common features of many developing
countries-increases the risk and makes conservation
investment economically less attractive. The risk can-

254

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey!Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

not, however, be reduced simply through the usual
extension approach as the processes that affect land
productivity are still imperfectly understood. Empirical estimates of erosion-productivity relationships
tend to be site-specific and typically have wide confidence intervals (Anderson and Thampapillai, 1990).
The situation becomes worse if off-site effects are
also considered. Given this uncertainty, it is difficult
to predict economically tolerable rates of erosion applicable to different types of production systems. A
major challenge to the researchers hence is to develop
methods and tools that permit a more reliable prediction of on-site and off-site effects of various land
management practices. Such information would then
provide a more scientific basis for developing policy
and institutional interventions to encourage adoption
of soil-conserving practices. In the mean time, lessons
from micro-economic studies of adoption behavior
such as the ones reported in this paper may have to
be utilized to guide the formulation of conservation
strategies and approaches.
An important implication of the results presented
in this paper is that policy support to increase farm
production, as well as to encourage a switch from
low-value subsistence crops to high-value cash crops
would improve the returns to investment in soil conservation. Without access to improved technologies and
better marketing infrastructure, farmers are unlikely
to view investment in soil conservation as being economically worthwhile. Investment in rural infrastructure and policies to facilitate the development of an
efficient marketing system could, therefore, encourage adoption. Promoters of soil conservation technology have to consider it not in isolation but as an integral component of interventions designed to increase
the profitability of the overall production system. A
paradigm shift from that of finding a technical fix to
the problem of soil erosion towards that of improving
the farmers' income by facilitating a transition to more
remunerative land use systems is needed. Otherwise,
research efforts are unlikely to make a significant dent
on the problem of continuing erosion in the sloping
uplands of Asia.
The results also highlight the need to reduce the cost
of adopting contour hedgerows, the need to provide
a range of options, and the need for better targeting.
Contour hedgerows, especially of planted species, are
found to be too expensive by most farmers. Reducing

the cost of establishment and maintenance will certainly improve the economics of contour hedgerows.
The recent popularity of hedgerows of natural vegetation is due mainly to its cost advantage.
Contour hedgerows are but one of the many pracc
tices to reduce soil erosion. Farmers in the study area
use many other complementary and substitute methods
ranging from contour plowing, mulching, other physical barriers, diversion canals, and fallowing. One or a
combination of these methods may be more suitable in
a specific situation depending on field conditions and
farmers' resource constraints. Promotion of these other
methods and improvement in their effectiveness will
provide more choices to farmers so that they can select
methods that they consider to be the most appropriate
to their situations. Most often, promotional activities
narrowly target a specific technology and ignore other
options that may be equally or more effective than the
one being promoted. An output-oriented (such as area
covered by different soil conservation methods, the
extent of soil erosion reduced) rather than a physical
target-oriented (meters of contour hedgerows established) incentive structure may encourage extension
agents and technology promoters to take a broader perspective. In the more marginal areas where soil conservation may be most needed to prevent soil erosion,
on-site benefits alone may not be sufficient to justify
investment in soil conservation. Off-site effects may
be large enough to justify the use of public funds to
finance a conservation program in these low productivity environments.
A range of field, farm, and farmer-specific factors
condition the adoption of soil conservation technology.
Although factors such as low population density, low
slope, insecurity of tenure, low initial productivity, and
limited access to market are expected to discourage
adoption, the response may vary across sites as indicated by the empirical results in this paper. Technology
targeting would, therefore, require a detailed characterization and identification of conditioning variables
that alter responses to different interventions.
The recent changes in the production systems in
the Asian uplands indicate that factors that lead to the
adoption of erosive land use practices often originate
outside the upland systems. Policies that encourage
a subsistence mode of agricultural production and
reduce labor absorption outside agriculture are major contributing factors to land degradation in the

M.. A. Lapar; S. Pandey/Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

uplands. In addition, ill-defined and unenforceable
property rights to land can aggravate the degradation
problem. Hence, institutional and policy reforms, as
well as technologies that not only reduce soil erosion but also directly increase farmers' income are
needed. A greater understanding of the dynamics of
land use changes in the uplands is likewise essential
in designing technological, institutional, and policy
interventions for reducing soil erosion and enhancing
sustainability.

Acknowledgements

This research was partially funded by GTZ, Federal Republic of Germany. The authors acknowledge
the research assistance of Pio Adan Cenas and S.P.
Regmi in the field survey and data processing. Assistance from Dr Hermann Waibel, University of Hannover, Germany in the course of this study is also
acknowledged.
References
Anderson, J., Thampapillai, J., 1990. Soil conservation in
developing countries: project and policy intervention. Policy
Research Series No. 8. Agriculture and Rural Development
Department, The World Bank.
Baum, E., Wolff, P., Zobisch, M., 1993. Acceptance of soil and
water conservation: strategies and technologies. DITSL, Federal
Republic of Germany.
Belsley, D., Kuh, E., Welsch, R., 1980. Regression Diagnostics:
Identifying Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity. Wiley,
New York.
Binswanger, H., Pingali, P., 1987. The evolution of farming
systems and agricultural technology in sub-Saharan Africa. In:
Ruttan, V.W., Prey, C.E. (Eds), Policy for Agricultural Research.
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Blaikie, P., Brookfield, H., 1987. Land Degradation and Society.
Methuen, London.
Boserup, E., 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Allen
& Unwin, London.
Boserup, E., 1981. Population and Technological Change: a Study
of Long-term Trends. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
Illinois.
Bromley, D., 1992. Making the Commons Work: theory, practice
and policy. Institute of Contemporary Studies, San Francisco,
California.
Cenas, P., Pandey, S., 1996. Contour hedgerow technology in
Claveria Misamis Oriental. Philippine J. Crop Sci. 21, 34-39.
Clarke, H., 1992. The supply of non-degraded agricultural land.
Aust. J. Agric. Econ. 36, 31-56.

255

Coxhead, 1., Jayasuriya, S., 1994. Technical change in agriculture
and land degradation in developing countries: a general
equilibrium analysis. Land Econ. 70, 20-37.
Cruz, W., Repetto, R., 1992. The environmental effects of
stabilization and structural adjustment program: the Philippine
case. World Resources Institute.
English, J., Tiffen, M., Mortimore, M., 1994. Land resources
management in the Machakos District, Kenya 1930-990. World
Bank Environment Paper No. 5, Washington, DC.
Ervin, C., Ervin, D., 1982. Factors affecting the use of
soil conservation practices: hypotheses, evidence, and policy
implications. Land Econ. 58, 277-292.
Feder, G., Just, R., Zilberman, E., 1985. Adoption of agricultural
innovations in developing countries: a survey. Econ. Dev.
Cultural Change 33, 255-298.
Francisco, H., 1994. Upland soil resources of the Philippines:
resource assessment and accounting for soil depreciation.
INNOTECH, Manila, Philippines.
Fujisaka, S., 1989. A method for farmer-participatory research and
technology transfer: upland soil conservation in the Philippines.
Exp. Agric. 25, 423-433.
Fujisaka, S., 1993. A case of farmer adaptation and adoption of
contour hedgerows for soil conservation. Exp. Agric. 29, 97105.
Fujisaka, S., Garrity, D., 1988. Developing sustainable food
crop farming systems for the sloping acid uplands: a
farmer-participatory approach. Paper presented at the 4th
Southeast Asian Universities Agroecosystem Network (SUAN)
Research Symposium, Khon Kaen, Thailand, Agricultural
Economics Department Paper No. 88-16.
Fujisaka, S., Sajise, P., Castillo, R.D., 1986. Man, Agriculture and
the Tropical Forest: Change and Development in the Philippines
Uplands. Winrock International, Bangkok.
Gabunada, F., Barker, R., 1995. Adoption of contour hedgerow
technology in Matalom, Leyte, Philippines. Mimeo.
Garcia, J., Gerrits, R., 1995. Soil conservation in an upland
farming system in Cebu: a socioeconomic survey. SEARCA-UQ
Uplands Research Project, Survey Report No. 1, Los Baiios,
Laguna, Philippines.
Garrity, D., Kummer, D., Guiang, E., 1993. The Philippines.
In: Sustainable Agriculture and the Environment in the
Humid Tropics. Committee on Sustainable Agriculture and the
Environment in the Humid Tropics, Board of Agriculture and
Board of Science and Technology for International Development
and National Research Council. National Academy Press,
Washington, DC.
Greene, W., 1997. Econometric Analysis. MacMillan, NY.
Hayarni, Y., Ruttan, V., 1985. Agricultural Development: an
International Perspective. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, Maryland.
Hoover, H., Wiitala, M., 1980. Operator and Landlord Participation
in Soil Erosion in the Maple Creek Watershed in Northeast
Nebraska. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC.
LaFrance, J., 1992. Do increased commodity prices lead to more
or less soil degradation? Am. J. Agric. Econ. 36, 57-82.
Lutz, E., Pagiola, S., Reiche, C., 1994. The costs and benefits
of soil conservation: the farmers' viewpoint. The World Bank
Research Observer 9, 273-295.

256

M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey!Agricultural Economics 21 (1999) 241-256

Maddala, G., 1983. Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables
in Econometrics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
McConnell, K., 1983. An economic model of soil conservation.
Am. J. Agric. Econ. 65, 83-89.
McCown, R., Hammer, G., Hargreaves, J., Holzworth, D.,
Freebairn, D., 1995. APSIM: A novel softwared system
for model development, model testing, and simulation in
agricultural systems research. Agricultural Systems, in press.
NCSO, 1997. Philippine statistical yearbook 1996. National Census
and Statistics Office, Manila, Philippines.
Oldeman, L., Hakkeling, R., Sombroek, W., 1991. World map of
the status of human-induced soil degradation: an explanatory
note. International Soil Reference and Information Center,
UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya.
Pandey, S., 1996. Socioeconomic context and priorities for
strategic research in Asian upland rice ecosystems. In: Piggin,
C, Courtois, B, Schmit, V. (Eds.), Upland Rice Research
in Partnership. International Rice Research Institute, Manila,
Philippines.
Place, F., Hazell, P., 1993. Productivity effects of indigenous land
tenure systems in Sub-Saharan Africa. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 75,
10-19.

Rahm, M., Huffman, W., 1984. The adoption of reduced tillage:
the role of human capital and other variables. Am. J. Agric.
Econ. 66, 405-413.
Sadoulet, E., de Janvry, A., Fukui, S., 1997. The meaning of
kinship in sharecropping contracts. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 79,
394-406.
Sajise, P., Ganapin, D. Jr., 1991. An overview of upland
development in the Philippines. In: Blair, G., Lefroy, R. (Eds.),
Technologies for Sustainable Agriculture on Marginal Uplands
in Southeast Asia, ACIAR Proceedings No. 33. Australian
Centre for International Research, pp. 31-44.
Shinawatra, B., 1985. Highland-lowland interrelationships in
Northern Thailand: a study of production, distribution, and
consumption. Ph. D. dissertation. Michigan State University.
Smale, M., Just, R.E., Leathers, H.D., 1994. Land allocation
in HYV adoption models: an investigation of alternative
explanations. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 76, 546-553.
Young, A., Muraya, P., 1990. Soil changes under agroforestry:
computer program with user's handbook, version 2.
International Center for Research in Agroforestry, Nairobi,
Kenya.

