AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS

ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259
www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon

Valuing groundwater recharge through agricultural production in the
Hadejia-Nguru wetlands in northern Nigeria
Gayatri Acharyaa·*, Edward B. Barbierb
" Environmental Economist, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, Washington DC 20433, USA
b Reader, Environment Department, University of York, Heslington, York Y01, 5DD, UK
Received 5 May 1998; received in revised form 10 November 1999; accepted 24 November 1999

Abstract

This study applies a production function approach to value the groundwater recharge function of the Hadejia-Nguru wetlands
in northern Nigeria. The groundwater recharge function supports dry season agricultural production which is dependent on
groundwater abstraction for irrigation. Using survey data this paper first carries out an economic valuation of agricultural
production, per hectare of irrigated land. We then value the recharge function as an environmental input into the dry season
agricultural production and derive appropriate welfare change measures. Welfare change is calculated using the estimated
production functions and hypothetical changes in groundwater recharge and hence, groundwater levels. By focusing on
agricultural production dependent solely on groundwater resources from the shallow aquifer, this study establishes that the
groundwater recharge function of the wetlands is of significant importance for the floodplain. © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V.
All rights reserved.
JEL classification: QlO; Q25
Keywords: Production function approach; Valuation; Wetlands; Groundwater recharge; Ecosystem function

1. Introduction
The Hadejia-Nguru wetlands in northern Nigeria are
formed by the floodwaters of the region's two principal rivers, the Hadejia and the Jama'are. The rivers
exhibit ephemeral flow patterns with periods of no
flow in the dry season (October-April). Almost 80%
of the total annual runoff occurs in August/September.
(Thompson and Hollis, 1995). During this period, waterlogged areas known as fadamas are formed and are
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-202-458-9545;
fax: + 1-202-676-0977.
E-mail address: gacharya@worldbank.org (G. Acharya)

important not only for fishing and agricultural activities, making these some of the most productive areas
in northern Nigeria, but also for providing recharge to
the underlying aquifers (Hollis and Thompson, 1993).
Water from these aquifers is used for domestic consumption and for irrigation during the dry season.
A number of water diversion schemes have been
constructed or are planned upstream of these wetlands. These schemes will divert floodwater away
from the wetlands, reducing the annual flooding
within the floodplain (Hollis et al., 1993). Barbier
et al., (1993) and Barbier and Thompson (1998) have
shown that the economic value of the wetlands in
terms of floodplain agriculture and fishing, is signif-

0169-5150/00/$ - see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: SO 169-5150(99)00054-7

248

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier I Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

icant and will be affected by the construction of new
dams and water diversion schemes. The economic
value of the opportunity costs associated with diverting this water away from the wetlands has not been
fully realised and incorporated into the development
plans for this region. Hydrologists have noted that an
important environmental function of these wetlands
is in recharging the groundwater resources of the area
(DIYAM, 1987; Thompson and Hollis, 1995).
The aim of this paper is to partially value the
groundwater recharge function of the wetlands by applying the production function approach to analysing
groundwater use in irrigated agriculture. 1 The
groundwater recharge function is assumed to support dry season agricultural production dependent
on groundwater abstraction for irrigation. Using survey data on agricultural production in the floodplain,
this paper first carries out an economic valuation of
agricultural production, per hectare of irrigated land.
Following approaches advocated in the valuation literature (Ellis and Fisher, 1987; Maler, 1992; Freeman,
1993; Barbier, 1994), we value the recharge function
(through water input) as an environmental input in dry
season agricultural production dependent solely on
groundwater resources from the shallow aquifer. Two
welfare change measures are derived and related to the
recharge function of the wetland. Welfare change is
then calculated using the estimated production functions and hypothetical changes in groundwater level.

2. Groundwater use in irrigated dry season
farming
Agriculture in the Hadejia-Jama'are floodplain involves both dryland andfadama farming. These areas
are flooded during the wet season and gradually dry
out until they are flooded again during the next wet
season. Floodplain activities have adapted to make use
of the floodwaters and the fadamas in an ingenious
way, taking advantage of the wetland's resources for
grazing, agriculture and other economic uses.
1 Throughout this paper, irrigated agriculture refers to irrigation
with groundwater pumped up from the shallow aquifer with the
use of small tubewells. Domestic water consumption within the
wetlands is also dependent on groundwater resources, see Acharya

(1998).

Total cultivated area in the floodplain is estimated
as 230,000ha (Barbier et al., 1993). Upland or dryland farming is rain-fed, and millet, sorghum and
cow-melon are cultivated. Fadama farming is mainly
rice cultivation. In addition, there are irrigated lands
where vegetables may be grown during the dry season. The three main types of irrigation technologies
used in this area are identified by Adams (1993) as
ditch irrigation, shadoof irrigation and pump irrigation. This study focuses on pump irrigation using water from shallow aquifers. Irrigation farming begins in
October, after the floods have receded, and continues
up until March/April. The floodplain has experienced
a dramatic rise in small-scale irrigation following the
introduction of small petrol powered pumps for surface water irrigation and tubewells to tap the shallow
aquifers under the floodplain (Kimmage and Adams,
1992; Kaigama and Omeje, 1994). Although the
extent of small scale tubewell irrigation within the
Hadejia-Jama'are wetlands is not well documented,
changes in hydrological conditions, economic conditions, government initiatives, and in particular the
policies of World Bank supported Agricultural Development Programs (ADPs) have promoted the use of
small irrigation pumps through subsidies and/or loans
for tubewell drilling and pump purchase. DIYAM
(1987) suggests that shallow aquifers could irrigate
19,000 ha within the wetlands through the use of these
small tubewells. NEAZDP (1994) suggests that the
annual increase in cropped area within the wetlands
is at least 10% and could be higher in areas where
water and suitable land is available.
Expansion of dry season cultivation in the area has
resulted from the increased availability of small-scale
irrigation technology and higher producer prices for
some dry-season crops such as peppers, onions and
wheat. In the influence area of the Madachi fadama,
the increase in tubewell irrigation is clearly visible
in the large numbers of irrigated fields producing
off-season grains such as irrigated rice and wheat and
high value perishables such as tomatoes, onions and
pepper. The availability of pumps has also resulted in
irrigation of certain dry-season crops such as sweet
potato, to increase yields, and farmers in the area are
experimenting with new commercial crops such as lettuce and garlic. Availability of, and access to, groundwater resources ensures the farmers a more secure and
year-round water supply for these crops. Farming in

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

Table I
Main commercial crops cultivated
Crop
Grains
Wheat
Rice
Vegetables
Onions
Spring onions
Tomatoes
Pepper (sweet)
Pepper (chilli)
Tubers
Sweet potatoes

Percentage of farmers
surveyed growing crop (%)
56.7
42.4
36.4
15.6
60.6
27.3
9.1
12.1

this area is generally subsistence and to hedge against
uncertainty farmers practice multi-cropping and intercropping. Farmers are, therefore, mainly subsistence
oriented agricultural households, also producing cash
crops.

3. Economic valuation of dry season irrigated
agriculture
Production data on crops grown in the study area
are based on the results of field surveys carried out in
four villages in the Madachi fadama from November
1995-March 1996. The villages of Madachi, Ando,
Alaye and Maluri are believed to be representative of
the villages in the wetlands, comprising a range of
large, medium and small farmers. A total of 37 farms
were surveyed for crop production data. In addition,
the entire influence area of the Madachi fadama
was surveyed to establish the number of operational
tubewells in the area and a total of 309 operational
tubewells were counted during this survey period
(HNWCP, 1996). Wheat, tomatoes and pepper are the
main cash crops being cultivated in the study area
(Table 1). Okra and eggplant (the latter is grown in
large quantities where there is surface irrigation) are
also grown but mainly for home consumption and in
small quantities.
The total area of small scale irrigation using groundwater resources within the Madachi fadama and its
influence area is estimated to be around 66 krn2 , or ap-

249

proximately 6600 ha. 2 The value of the output from
the farms surveyed as shown in Table 2. Financial
prices for the outputs are estimated from market surveys conducted between December 1995 and May
1996 and from survey findings of farmgate prices received by farmers. Outputs are based on harvest figures reported in sacks or bundles by farmers and converted to weight measures, based on results from the
market survey.
The per hectare value for irrigated agriculture in
the Madachi area is 36,308 Naira or US$ 412.5 per
hectare. The economic value of dry season irrigated
agriculture from the Madachi fadama influence area
(6600 ha) is estimated as 2.39x 108 Naira or US$
2,723,077. 3

4. The production function approach and
crop-water relationships
This section develops the underlying general welfare estimation theory based on the production function approach (see Maler, 1992; Freeman, 1993;
Barbier, 1994). The specific production functions for
wheat and vegetables based on the production and
input data collected by the survey are estimated in
Section 5. Based on this analysis and the production
functions, welfare estimates related to a change in
water input are calculated in Section 6.
4.1. Productionfunction approach

We begin by assuming that farmers produce 1= 1,
... , n crops, irrigated by groundwater. Let Yi be the
aggregate output of the ith rop produced by the farmers. The production of Yi requires a water input Wi,
2 This figure is based on Thompson and Goes (1997) which states
that the influence area of the Madachi fadama may be estimated
as 136km2 , assuming a minimum of 1 km radius of influence.
The largest extent of the actual swamp area has been estimated as
78 km 2 and we estimate an area of 66 km 2 as being serviced by the
recharge from the fadama and as being available for agricultural
activities.
3 Economic prices for the grains are calculated from World Bank
data on commodity prices. For non-tradables (i.e. vegetables and
tubers), the standard conversion factor is approximately I and no
additional adjustment is considered necessary since most of the
economy uses the black market rate of N88 to US$ I for its
transactions and faces no foreign exchange premium.

G. Acharya, E.B. Barbier/Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

250

Table 2
Economic valuation of irrigated agriculture for survey villages (area: 20.23 ha)•
Crop

Output
(kg)

Financial
price (per kg)

Economic
price (per kg)

Financial
benefits (N)

Economic
benefits (N)

Wheat
Rice
Tomatoes
Onions
Spring onions
Sweet pepper
Chilli pepper
Sweet potatoes
Total
Financial benefits per ha (Niha)
Gross Economic benefits per ha (N/ha)
Costs of inputs (N/ha)
Net Economic Benefits per ha (N/ha)

57,250.00
29,070.00
11,030.25
21,336.00
3,280.00
2,607.00
1,423.75
1,400.00
127,397.00

22.00
12.50
25.60
4.80
6.25
50.10
22.00
5.10

6.86
12.3
25.60
4.80
6.25
50.10
22.00
5.10

1,259,500
363,375
282,374
102,413
20,500
130,611
31,323
7,140
2,197,235.40

392,964
357,561
282,374
102,413
20,500
130,611
31,323
7,140
1,324,886
108,612.7.
65,491.15
29,183.38
36,307.7

• Exchange rate N88=$1.

abstracted through shallow tubewells, and}=l, ... , J
of other variable inputs (e.g. fertilisers, seed, labour),
which we denote as x;, ... , XJ or in vector form as X J.
Because of the relationship between recharge and the
level of water in the aquifer, we also assume that the
amount of water available to the farmer for abstraction
is dependent on the groundwater level, R. The aggregate production function for crop i can be expressed
as:
Yi = y;(x; 1

•••

x;j, W;(R))

foralli

(1)

curve (3), less the cost of the inputs used in production 4 :
S; = S; (x; 1 ,

=

•••

x;,, W; (R); cw(R))

foYI P;(u)du- CxXJ-Cw(R)W;

foralli, j

To maximise (4) we find the optimal values of input
and water input W; through setting the following
first order conditions to zero:

x; 1

(5)

and the associated costs of producing y; are:
C; =CxXJ +cw(R)W;

foralli

(4)

(2)

where C; is the minimum costs associated with producing Yi during a single growing season, Cw is the
cost of pumping water and C x is a vector of Cx; ... ex,
strictly positive, input prices associated with the variable inputs x; 1 ••• x; 1 . Note that we assume cw is an
increasing function of the groundwater level, R, to
allow for the possibility of increased pumping costs
from greater depths, i.e. c'w > 0, c"w > 0. We first
assume that there exists an inverse demand curve for
the aggregate crop output, Yi:
(3)

where P; is the market price for Yi, and all other
marketed input prices are assumed constant.
Denoting S; as the social welfare arising from producing Yi, S; is measured as the area under the demand

as;

ay;

aw; = P;(y;) aw; - cw(R) =

o

for all i

(6)

Eqs. (5) and (6) are the standard optimality conditions
indicating that the socially efficient level of input use
occurs where the value of the marginal product of each
input equals its price. If each farmer is a price-taker,
then this welfare optimum is also the competitive equilibrium. We assume that this is the case.
4 We assume here that the demand function in (3) is compensated,
so that consumer welfare can be measured by the appropriate areas.
Welfare change is the sum of the consumer and producer surplus
measures. However, if the production units are small relative to the
market for the final output, and they are essentially price-takers, it
can be assumed that product and variable input prices will remain
fixed after a change in the environmental resource, W. In this
case the benefits of a change in W will accrue to the producers
(Freeman, 1993).

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

The first order conditions in (5) and (6) can be
used to define optimal input demand functions for
all other inputs as x;J * = Xi 1 * (cx 1 , Cw(R), R) and
for water as Wt = Wt(cx 1 , Cw(R), R). In turn, the
optimal production and welfare functions are defined as y( = Yt(x(, ... , xj, Wj(R)) and s; =

251

farmers yields the welfare effects of a no-marginal
change in groundwater levels on the aggregate output
of crop i.

s;cx0' ... 'x;J' WJ(R); Cw(R)). 5
From the above relationships, we are interested
in solving explicitly for the effects on social welfare of a change in groundwater levels, R, due to a
fall in recharge rates. Assuming that all other inputs
are held constant at their optimal levels, and that all
input and output prices (with the exception of cw)
are unchanged, it follows from the envelope theorem
that:
dS; _

dR-

(P·

* ayi _ c ) (awi acw
aW;)
,(y;)awi
w
acwaR+aR

- W;* (

~c;)

(7)

The net welfare change is, therefore, the effect of
a change in groundwater levels on the value of the
marginal product of water in production, less the per
unit cost of a change in water input. The marginal
change in pumping costs also affects the total costs of
water pumped (W;*(acw/aR)). The effect of a change
in water input due to a change in groundwater levels
occurs both directly (aW jaR) and indirectly through
the marginal effect of a change in pumping costs on
water input ((aW;jacw)(acwfaR)). As long as per
unit pumping costs are not prohibitively high, one
would expect an increase in groundwater levels (to a
point) to lead to a welfare benefit, or at least to maintain the initial welfare levels, whereas a decrease in
groundwater levels would result in a welfare loss,
either due to increased pumping costs and/or change
in productivity.
If we now assume that all farmers face the same
production and cost relationships (I) and (2) for each
crop i and are price takers, then it is possible to derive
the aggregate welfare effects of a non-marginal change
in groundwater levels. Let there be 1, ... , k farmers
producing Yik output of crop i and using w;k water
inputs. It follows that by integrating (7) over Ro (old
level) to R1 (new level) and aggregating across all K
5

Asterisks denote optimally chosen quantities.

Implementing the above welfare measure in (8) requires knowledge of the production function for each
crop, as well as how the equilibrium output and inputs change with R. Alternatively, we could measure
the aggregate welfare effects directly from changes
in social welfare, S;, in Eq. (4) above. This would
imply:
f:!..S; = (SR 1 ) - (SR 0 ) =

laYt P;(yt)dy

-CxXj- Cw(Rl)Wj(Rl)
-CxXj+cw(R)Wj(Ro)

laYl P;(yt}dy
foralli,j

(9)

where Yo is the initial output level and Yl is the final
output level. To use (9) as a welfare measure we would
also need to estimate production functions for each
crop and calculate optimal levels of inputs and outputs. We return to these welfare measures in Section
6 where, using the information from estimated production functions, we use both measures to calculate
welfare change for our sample of wheat and vegetable
farmers.
4.2. Irrigation inputs and crop yields
Assessing the importance of groundwater recharge
for the maintenance of groundwater at levels suitable
for irrigated agriculture requires that we know that (i)
the water-yield relationships influencing the crops and
(ii) the technological ability of the pumps to pump water. The extent to which crop yields will be affected by
changes in water application will depend on a number
of factors including, the stage of crop development affected by reduced or no availability of irrigation water; the sensitivity of the crop to fluctuations in water

252

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

availability; climatic factors such as evaporation rates;
soil factors, including soil type and soil moisture and
the length of the growing period. Fig. 1 below depicts
seasonal crop response to variable water input showing zones of increasing returns (0, W), diminishing
returns (Wr,Wz) and negative returns (>Wz).
Various functional forms have been used in the literature to describe production technologies using data
from field experiments and from observed farm data.
The simplest conception of crop response to water
application is the linear response and is most likely
when the range of application of the variable inputs is
small. Log-linear relationships using Cobb-Douglas
production functions have also been used to estimate
crop-water relationships, although a maximum product is not defined by the Cobb-Douglas and consequently, a decreasing total product (e.g. at high levels
of water application) is not possible. A polynomial
function such as a quadratic or Gompertz function
would allow estimation of the effect of increasing input levels and diminishing marginal returns, as would
a Cobb-Douglas translog function, particularly when
a wider range of inputs are considered (Hexem and
Heady, 1978; Carruthers and Clark, 1981). 6 The
survey data used here contains information on actual quantities and market prices of inputs used and
yields. It therefore reflects optimisation behaviour on
the part of the farmers and is more than a physical
relationship between the inputs it reflects economic

j"
Seasonal water input

Fig. I. Crop-water relationships (adapted from Carruthers and
Clark, 1981).

Cw =f(R)

Cz

----------------------------------

R

Fig. 2. Water pumping costs as a function of water table depth.
6 Crop-input functions such as Mitscherlich-Spillman functions
are often used to estimate effects of changes in water input,
given that the application of all other inputs remain constant.
These functional forms obey the von Liebig law of the minimum
which asserts that there may be non-substitution between some
nutrients and a yield plateau. Mitscherlich proposed an exponential
functional form specified as:

y; = m(l - ke-fl 2;)
where y; is the observed yield and a; is the growth factor of the
crop. m is defined as the asymptotic yield plateau. The Von Liebig
function assumes that output increases linearly in the input up
to some maximum. These functional forms have been used with
experimental data to study the input-crop production relationship.
Experimental data would need to be generated to find the maximum
for each input. Yield and output data generated by these agronomic
experiments do not, however, reflect optimising behaviour and we
use market generated and farm data for the production function
estimation.

decisions as well. Hence, production functions for the
crops are estimated using the survey data. 7
Before estimating production functions and welfare
changes we also consider the technological relationship between groundwater levels and tubewells. A typical tubewell consists of a length of pipe pump casing
sunk into the ground below the maximum depth to the
water table. This maximum depth should be such that
during pumping, the aquifer's water level does not fall
below the pipe's reach. If the rate of withdrawal from
7 Cost functions are not estimated, although the literature advocates the estimation of cost function in lieu of production function
whenever possible. The cost data in this case is less reliable than
the physical data since some or all of the inputs are purchased at
subsidy prices, market prices or black market prices.

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

253

W (water inputs)

X (other inputs)

Fig. 3. Effect of a non-marginal change in water table depth on the production possibilities frontier.

the aquifer exceeds the recharge, and groundwater levels do not recover to the original base level, the use of
the shallow tubewell will need to be abandoned. 8
For the purpose of this study, there are two possible
effects of a fall in groundwater levels:
(i) as groundwater falls below a certain level, the
costs of pumping water are likely to rise, and
(ii) if groundwater levels fall below the maximum
depth of the sunken tubewells, the farmer will cease
pumping for the rest of the dry season and agricultural production will fall.
Fig. 2 describes the effect of changing groundwater levels on the marginal costs of pumping water and
Fig. 3 depicts the effect of changing groundwater levels on the farmer's production possibilities frontier.
Water inputs are denoted by W and other inputs by X,
while R denotes groundwater levels.
The tubewells in the study area are sunk to depths
of approximately 9 m. This implies that the groundwater table would have to fall to a level greater than 9 m
(Rs in Fig. 2) before pumping capabilities fall to zero,
i.e. for case (ii) to occur. If this occurs, and assuming that all other inputs are held constant, the farmer
normally producing at Point A (Wo,Xo) is forced to
operate at Point B, defined by (W,,Xo) in Fig. 3. The

farmer's production possibilities frontier (PPF) moves
in because of a fall in depth beyond 9 m. He cannot
maintain his original level of utility and move to Point
C at (W1 ,x,) because this point lies outside the production possibilities frontier (since the farmer cannot
change input decisions during the season). The farmer
will, therefore, operate at Point B and produce a lower
output, or not produce at all. 9 At Rs, the discontinuity that sets in due to technological limitations, in
effect drives the cost of pumping water to infinity for
the farmer. This non-convexity in the cost curve may
be offset by technological innovation. However, given
the present level of technology, if the water levels stay
below 9 m, the farmer will not be able to irrigate at
all and the associated drop in yield can be calculated
from the production function by setting water input to
zero. This is only expected to occur in the wetlands
if there is a long period of very low flooding and no
technological change.
For case (i) to occur, we expect that the speed of the
pump will be affected by a drop in groundwater levels
but water will still be available to the farmer using the
given technology. The pumps being used in the floodplain are surface mounted pumps, and it is likely that
at depths approaching 7 m (denoted as R1 in Fig. 2),

8 However, increased costs of pumping from a greater depth may
cause pumping to be curtailed until a new groundwater level is
established. Because the farmer is forced to stop pumping, water
levels may recover, allowing some sporadic pumping throughout
the season. This introduces uncertainty into the problem and makes
it a dynamic problem. This is beyond the scope of the present
paper.

9 We are assuming no technology shifts in this case since, in the
short run, the farmer is unable to change technologies. There are
high financial costs associated with the change in technology to
deeper boreholes and very few farmers were observed to be using
the deep boreholes for irrigation. The small pumps are subsidised
and are being promoted by government and bilateral organisations.

G. Acharya, E.B. Barbier/Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

254

these pumps will slow down because of the increase
in lift. To maintain input levels, the farmer would have
to increase pumping hours, thereby incurring higher
costs of production (C1). However, the farmer may be
able to continue production in the short run. Using the
data on pumping hours and the specifications of the
pumps being used, we estimate that as water levels
drop from 6 m to 7 m, pump speeds will decrease from
37,636Uh to 26,434Uh (approximately 30% decrease
in speed). 10
We use this information to calculate the unit pumping cost at the new groundwater level, R2. As Fig. 2
shows, Cw(R)=Co for levels of R-sRo. Pumping costs
increase thereafter. By linearising the cost function between Ro and R1 in Fig. 3, we derive the functional
relationship between pumping costs, Cw and groundwater level R for Ro"SR"SR1 as:
(10)

cw(R) =a +bR

where a=-19.56; b=5.34.
Note that this functional form, with the values for
a and b as noted above, only describes the portion
of the curve between Ro and R1 in Fig. 2. We can
estimate the change in pumping costs due to a fall in
groundwater levels using the above relationship and
the welfare measure in (9). Increases in pumping costs
will also affect the level of water input during the
growing season and optimal levels of water input and
associated change in output levels can be calculated
from the production functions, estimated in Section 5,
and the optimality conditions in (5) and (6).

5. Estimating production functions for wheat and
vegetables
In the production functions estimated below, we assume that output (y) depends on land (L), labour (B),
Seeds (S), fertiliser (F) and water inputs (W). The
farmers in the Madachi area mainly grow wheat, irri10 Although, theoretically per unit costs of pumping water should
be constant for the given technology, surface mounted pumps are
less efficient at groundwater depths approaching 7 m. If costs are
constant the welfare change for the farmer would be measured by:

dS·

d~

=

r

}Ro

1

[(

ay·
P;(yt) a~i -

Cw

)

(aw
ai )]

dR

gated rice and vegetables. The crops are divided into
these three groups because of the different nature of
irrigation, fertiliser application and other farming decisions. Wheat and rice are generally grown earlier
in the season and vegetables are grown well into the
dry season. In the following sections, we estimate production relationships for wheat and vegetables only
since irrigated rice is grown by very few farmers in the
sample. 11
We consider linear and log-linear functional forms
for wheat and vegetable production. 12 The linear form
assumes constant marginal products and excludes any
interaction between the inputs. Although the lack of
interaction terms is restrictive, we observein the literature that linear relationships are likely, particularly for
wheat production and with low levels of inputs. The
log-linear form assumes constant input elasticities and
variable marginal products. Note that the coefficients
estimated by using this form represent output elasticities of individual variables and the sum of these elasticities indicates the nature of returns to scale. Table 3
lists the variables used in the analysis. The estimated
linear and log-linear production functions for wheat
are:

Y = ot + fhL + fhB + fhS + f34F + f3sW +
In Y = ot + fJ1ln L + f3zB

8J

(11)

+ f33ln S

+f34ln F + f3sln W + ez

(12)

and Si is the random disturbance associated with the
production function.
The production function for vegetables was also estimated as a single function since all the vegetables
11 Since crop level data is often not available, many studies analyse
farm level aggregated input demands. Although fixed factors, such
as land, may cause jointness in the production process, we argue
that crop level production functions can be estimated in this case
for wheat and for vegetables since (1) crop level data was collected
through the survey and is available and (2) vegetables are clearly
grown only after the winter wheat production implying that input
decisions may be considered as separate in terms of the production
processes.
12 Although a quadratic function allowing interactions between
variables was also fitted to the data, the results are not reported
here. The small sample size for wheat production (21 farmers)
makes it impossible to include all the variables specified by the
quadratic model in the estimation. The model requires 18 degrees
of freedom to estimate. The quadratic function for vegetables also
performs poorly.

255

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

Table 3
Table of variable names
Variable

Definition

y

Output (kg)
Land (ha)
Labour (workers)
Fertiliser (kg)
Seeds (kg)
Water (I)
LN (Y)
LN (Land)
LN(Labour)
LN (Fertiliser)
LN(Seeds)
LN(Water)

L
B
F

s
w
LY
LL
LB
LF
LS
LW

are grown at the same time (after the wheat has been
harvested) or in quick succession and receive similar quantities of inputs. Data on seeds/seedlings (S)
was unreliable and this variable was dropped from the
above estimated production functions (11) and (12)
for vegetables.
Table 4 reports the results for the linear and
log-linear functions for wheat production. The linear
model has an R2 of 0.93 and F statistic of 54.4. Both
the values suggest a good fit. The Breusch-Pagan Lagrange Multiplier test is not significant for the linear
model (critical value for LM x2 =13.27; with 5 d.f.),
Table 4
Results for the wheat production functiona
Variable

Linear

Land
Labour (B)
Seeds
Fertiliser
Water
LL
LB
LS
LF
LW
Constant
Adjusted R2
F statistic
Breusch-Pagan X 2
Observations

1993.7b (2.865)
52.711 (0.824)
3.6165° (2.566)
71.581" (2.438)
I 1.610° (2.134)

-1662.5b (3.598)
0.93
54.4
1.05 (d.f.5)
21

a t statistics in parenthesis.
b 2% significance level.
c 5% significance level.
d 10% significance level.

Log-linear

0.38 (1.442)
-0.024 (0. !56)
0.026 (0.33)
0.47b (2.71)
0.6885d (1.881)
3.4° (2.39)
0.9
37.49
18.27 (d.f.5)
21

and we accept the hypothesis of homoscedasticity.
However, the large, negatively signed and statistically
significant value for the constant term would suggest
that there might be misspecification of the functional
form.
The log-linear functional form also performs well
in terms of R 2 (0.9) and F statistics (37 .49). The coefficients for LW and LF are found to be statistically
significant in the log-linear model, with the expected
signs. The Lagrange multiplier statistic is however
significant for the log-linear model, indicating some
heteroscedasticity in this model. The presence of this
heteroscedasticity indicates that the least squares estimators are still unbiased but inefficient. Since the
estimators of the variances are also biased we correct for the standard errors of the coefficients and
find relatively small differences in the values. The
log-linear model is, therefore, considered as the most
satisfactory version of the wheat production function.
According to the literature on crop-water production functions determined from experimental studies,
wheat is often seen to have a linear or log-linear shape
unlike other crops which may show diminishing returns at high levels of water application. Wheat may
continue to show increasing returns up to fairly high
levels of water application (Hexem and Heady, 1978;
Carruthers and Clark, 1981).
Table 5 reports the econometric results for the functions estimation for vegetable production. The linear
Table 5
Results for the vegetable production functiona
Variable

Linear

Land
Labour (B)
Fertiliser
Water
LL
LB
LF
LW
Constant
Adjusted R2
F statistic
Breusch-Pagan
Observations

-786.67 ( -0.524)
282.76d (1.591)
265.04° (2.380)
5.8358° (2.433)

x2

-1449.4 (1.512)
0.55
11.9
13.49 (d.f.4)
37

a t statistics in parenthesis.
b 1% significance level.
c 5% significance level.
d 10% significance level.

Log-linear

0.23 I (0.823)
0.585c (2.206)
0.593b (2.827)
0.4268c (2.437)
3.13b (11.439)
0.66
18.88
4.24 (d.f.4)
37

256

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

and log-linear models again perform well in terms
of R 2 and F statistics. The Breusch-Pagan Lagrange
Multiplier test is significant for the linear model
(x 2 =13.49; with 4 d.f.), and we reject the hypothesis
of homoscedasticity. For the log-linear model, the
Lagrange multiplier statistic is less than the critical
value at the 5% significance level (x 2 =4.24; with 4
d.f.), indicating no heteroscedasticity in this model.
The coefficients on the variables LF, LB, LW and the
constant term are statistically significant.

effect of changing pumping costs on water input and
use the production function estimated earlier for the
purpose of estimating welfare changes. However, in
order to do so, we need to calculate (aWiJacw), the
marginal change in water demand due to a marginal
change in the cost of pumping.
In Section 5 we estimated production functions for
wheat and vegetable production. Holding all other inputs constant and noting that only water input will
vary, we use the log linear production functions estimated in Section 5, together with the optimality conditions in Eqs. (5) and (6) to solve for Wi as:

6. Valuing the recharge function
(13)

Hydrological evidence for the relationship between flood extent and recharge to village wells show
that there is some fluctuation with flood extent and
mean water depth of the shallow aquifer. The effect of planned upstream water projects will have
an impact on producer welfare within the wetlands
through changes in flood extent therefore groundwater
recharge. By hypothesising a drop in groundwater levels from 6 m to 7 m in depth (due to reduced recharge
in the current period), we calculate the expected
change in welfare associated with this reduction in
recharge. This exogenous change affects the farmers
decision making process during the farming season,
i.e. after decisions on other inputs have already been
taken since the effect of the reduced recharge will
not be felt until after the dry season agriculture has
started.
Recall that in Section 4.1, the welfare change measure for non-marginal changes in R (level of naturally
recharged groundwater) is given by (8). This welfare
change measure is used together with the results of
the production function estimates to calculate welfare
changes for individual farmers. We also assume that
farmers in the Madachi area are price takers and hence
face a 'horizontal' demand function, i.e. Pi (yi )=Pi.
From Eq. (8) we see that the effect of R on welfare is felt through a change in water input due to increased costs ((aWifacw)) and/or a change in water
availability (a Wi/ aR). This second effect will occur
only if a change in recharge were to cause a decline
in groundwater levels below 9 m (see Section 4.2 and
Fig. 3 above). This is unlikely to happen within a single season and we do not therefore consider this aspect
in calculating welfare change. Instead we consider the

1/(fJwi-1)

W* _
i -

(

)

Cw

PiafJwj LflL BflB s.Bs pfJF

(14)

where L,B, S and F are all the other inputs in the
specified production function (for crop i) with estimated parameters fJL, fJs, fJs and fJp. 13 We solve
for(aWifacw) as:

awi
acw =

1

fJw-1

(

Cw

)(2-flw)/(flw-1)

PafJwLfJL BfJB s.Bs pfJF

X ( PafJwLfJL

~fJB s.Bs FfJF)

(1 5 )

This is calculated for each farmer, using the estimated
values for the relevant parameters and constant terms
and the market price of the crop.
We now calculate welfare change due to a drop in
groundwater levels to 7 m, for individual farmers, using the welfare measures in Eq. (8) or Eq. (9) (see
Appendix A for the derivation of expressions used to
calculate welfare changes). The production functions
from Section 5 are used to calculate the associated
change in productivity due to a fall in recharge levels. We calculate optimal levels of water input from
(13) and output levels from the production function.
The average and total change in welfare for a drop in
groundwater levels from 6 to 7 m depth, using both
welfare measures (8) and (9), are given below. From
(8), the welfare change of a drop in groundwater levels (R) to 7 m is calculated as given in Table 6. From
13 Note that for the vegetable production function, the variable S
(seeds/seedlings) is not included and is therefore not included in
the estimation of Wi either.

257

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier!Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

Table 6
Welfare change for sample using Eq. (8)
Crop

Total welfare change (Naira)

Average welfare change per hectare

Total land (ha)

Average land holding (ha)

Wheat
Vegetables

551,201
105,916

54,459
3,566

10.51
29.7

0.645
0.803

Table 7
Welfare changes for sample using Eq. (9)
Crop

Total welfare change (Naira)

Average welfare change per hectare

Total land (ha)

Average land holding (ha)

Wheat
Vegetables

550,320
130,659

54,372
4,399

10.51
29.7

0.645
0.803

(9), the welfare change of a drop in groundwater levels (R) to 7 m is calculated as in Table 7.
As expected, there is only a small variation between
the results from using the two welfare change measures. The welfare change associated with the effects
of groundwater loss on wheat production is very high.
Although vegetable production is, in general, more
water intensive, it appears that wheat production is
more sensitive to changes in water input. The elasticity of production to water inputs for wheat is higher
than it is in the case of vegetable production. However,
vegetable production takes place well into the dry season and may be subject to even higher pumping costs
for water if the water table falls below 7 m during the
dry season. To properly measure this welfare change
we would, however, require knowledge of the full relationship between pumping costs and groundwater
levels. Since there is little evidence that groundwater
levels could fall much below 7 m we have restricted
our present analysis to this level for both wheat and
vegetable production.
The Madachi fadama affects an area of about
6600 ha. Although there are at least 963 tubewells
installed in the area, only 309 were found to be currently operational (i.e. 32% of installed tubewells are

operational). Approximately 56.7% of the farmers in
this area grow wheat while 100% of the farmers grow
vegetables. This implies that 56.7% of the farmers
would be affected by the welfare change associated
with growing wheat and vegetables and 43.3% would
be affected by the welfare change associated with
growing vegetables only. We assume there are a corresponding number of farmers for each of the 309
operational tubewells and conclude that there are 175
wheat and vegetable farmers and 134 vegetable farmers in the Madachi fadama influence area. We use
the welfare change measures for a fall in groundwater levels from 6 to 7 m depth from Eq. (9) for the
welfare changes reported in Table 8.
This study shows that irrigated agriculture using water from the shallow groundwater aquifer has a value of
36,308 Naira (US$ 413) per hectares for the Madachi
area. The change in welfare associated with a decrease
in recharge to the aquifer is estimated as 2,863 Naira
(US$ 32.5) for each vegetable farmer and as 29,110
Naira (US$ 331) for farmers growing wheat and vegetables. Average household income is the study area
is Naira 3,155 per month (Acharya, 1998) and welfare loss estimated by this study, therefore, amounts
to approximately 7.56% of yearly income for veg-

Table 8
Welfare change in the Madachi fadama in Nairaa

Vegetable farmer
Wheat+vegetable farmer
a Exchange rate: 88 N=US$ !.

Average welfare change per farmer

Total loss for Madachi farmers

2,863
29, !10

383,642
5,094,296

258

G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier I Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

etable farmers and 77% of yearly income for vegetable
and wheat farmers. The total loss associated with the
1 m change in naturally recharged groundwater levels (resulting in a decline of groundwater levels to
approximately 7 m) is estimated as 5,477,938 Naira
(US$ 62,249) for the influence area of the Madachi
fadama.
The welfare estimates for wheat are surprisingly
high. It is argued that the reason for this is that wheat
is a newly introduced crop within the wetlands and
because of its recent introduction displays a high yield
response to water inputs. Since our data is collected
over a single dry season, this is reflected in our results. Continued production of wheat within the wetlands could be subject to declining yields over time
and is generally considered to be unsustainable within
the wetlands over the long run (Barbier et al., 1994).
Disregarding wheat production the estimated welfare
loss is therefore 383,642 Naira or US$ 4360 for the
study area.
DIYAM (1987) suggested that shallow aquifers
could irrigate 19,000 ha within the wetlands through
the use of small tubewells. Using the average welfare change for the study area of 5478 Naira/ha or
US$ 62/ha, we estimate a welfare loss of 1.04x 108
Naira or US$ 1,182,737 for the wetlands, due to a
decrease in groundwater levels to approximately 7 m
in depth. 14 Again disregarding wheat production, the
welfare loss associated with this change in groundwater levels, amounts to 82,832 US$ for the wetlands.
Although there is considerable difference in the level
of welfare loss with and without consideration of
wheat production, the value of groundwater recharge
in terms of irrigated agriculture is clearly positive and
significantly large.

7. Conclusions and policy implications
The emphasis on increasing tubewell 1rngation
within the wetlands is contradictory to policies such
as dam construction and channelization that would
reduce flooding within the wetlands. The economic
14 Note that this figure is based on the percentage of installed
tubewells actually working during the study period (32%) and
could be much higher for a higher percentage of operational
tubewells within the wetlands.

value of the opportunity costs associated with diverting this water away from the wetlands has not been
fully realised and incorporated into the development
plans for this region. Although there is at present
apparently little concern for the over-exploitation
of groundwater resources, this optimism is based
on relatively little data on aquifer recharge and the
effect of increased or reduced flooding of fadama
areas. Cropping patterns in the area have changed
due to credit and technological facilities as well as
due to changing hydrological conditions. Increasing
dependence on small-scale irrigation for dry season
crops may also result in increased sensitivity of small
farmers to changes in prices and market demand.
As previous studies have asserted, and as this study
confirms, groundwater recharge is of considerable importance to wetland agriculture and reduced recharge
resulting in lower levels of groundwater will result
in high welfare losses for the floodplain populations.
Furthermore, this analysis has been conducted in the
Madachi fadama, a regularly inundated area with
good groundwater stocks. It is very likely that in other
areas of the wetlands where flooding is not as reliable
as in Madachi, the effects of reduced recharge and
rapid declines in groundwater levels will have more
devastating effects.
It is also conceivable that given a dramatic fall in
groundwater recharge, there may be a technological
shift towards deeper tubewells and boreholes for irrigation. Many boreholes in the wetlands are sunk
over 100m deep. In contrast, most of the village wells
and shallow tubewells are less than 10m deep. The
boreholes may, therefore, be sunk in deeper aquifers.
The exact relationship between the alluvial aquifers
and the deeper aquifers of the Chad Formation is not
known and needs to be further investigated. In places
there may be some connection between the two so that
flooding within the wetlands may recharge the deeper
aquifers as well. The move towards deeper boreholes
in some parts of the wetlands appears to be both economically and politically motivated. Irrigation boreholes (sunk to levels greater than 10m depth) will
transform the agriculture in the area and may offset
any impact of falling groundwater levels in the shallow aquifer. However, given the lack of hydrological
information regarding the hydrological pathways between the deeper aquifer and the shallow aquifer, the
question of groundwater mining and hence, potentially

G. Acharya, E.B. Barbier/ Agricultural Economics 22 (2000) 247-259

unsustainable developments within the wetlands, cannot be ruled out. In the face of this uncertainty, the
value of the shallow aquifers in irrigated agriculture,
and consequently the value of the recharge function of
the wetlands, must be recognised by policies affecting
hydrological conditions within the floodplain.

Appendix
Specifically, for each farmer the expression used in
calculating welfare change from (9) is:
(SR 1 ) - (SR0 )

= (P; y 1 -(Pi

i

CxXj- Cw(RJ)W;*(RJ))

+ CxXj + Cw(Ro) W;*(Ro))

We use optimal values for water input levels, evaluated at the different unit costs of pumping CJ and
co, assuming all other inputs remain constant. Optimal levels of output, y 1 and y 0 , are then calculated
for each farmer at the estimated optimal water input
levels. Similarly, we integrate Eq. (8) over R, deriving
the following expression:

dS
dR

=

{(lj2),Bw¢Y R 2a - ,Bwbif>Y R
-((aR- b)Y+ 1 ja(y + l))}ya
[
if>Y
R1=7

-

{(aR!¢)- (b/¢)}Cy+ll
y +1
¢

J
Ro=6

Evaluating for R=[6,7], we derive the following
expression:

dS

{49,Bwcpy a 2y 2 + 49,BwcpY a 2y
-14,Bwb¢Y ay 2 - 14,Bwbcpy aYY2
1
((7a- b)jcp)Y+Icpcpy- 2Y(7a- b)Y+ 1 }

dR

2

(YYI )cp Y

+ 18,BwcpYa2y
-6,Bwbcp Y aY2 - 6,Bwbcp Y aYY2
((6a- b)jcp)Y+ 1cpcpy- Y(6a- b)CYYil}

{18,8wcpYa2y2

(YYI )cp y

where a and bare as defined in (12);

259

= (1/,Bw) -1;

Picx,Bwi Lf3L sf3s sf3s Ff3F

References
Acharya, G., 1998. Hydrological-economic linkages in water
resource management. Ph.D. dissertation, University of York
(unpublished).
Adams, W.M., 1993. Agriculture, grazing and forestry. In:
Hollis, G.E., Adams, W.M., Aminu-Kano, M. (Eds.),
The Hadejia-Nguru Wetlands: Environment, Economy and
Sustainable Development of a Sahelian Floodplain Wetland,
IUCN Gland.
Barbier, E.B., Thompson, J.R., 1998. The value of water: floodplain
versus large-scale irrigation benefits in Northern Nigeria. Ambio
27 (6), 434-443.
Barbier, E.B., 1994. Valuing environmental functions: tropical
wetlands. Land Econ. 70 (2), 155-173.
Barbier, E.B., Adams, W., Kimmage, K., 1993. Economic valuation
of wetland benefits. In: Hollis et a!. (Eds.), The Hadejia-Nguru
Wetlands. IUCN, Gland
CatTuthers, I., Clark, C., 1981. The Economics Of Irrigation.
Liverpool University Press, Liverpool.
DIYAM, 1987. Shallow aquifer study, 3 Volumes. Kano State
Agricultural and Rural Development Authority, Kano.
Ellis, G., Fisher, A., 1987. Valuing the environment as an input.
J. Environ. Manage. (25), 149-156.
Freeman, A.M. 1993. The measurement of environmental and
resource values: theory and methods. Resources for the Future,
Washington DC.
Hexem, R., Heady, E., 1978. Water Production Functions for
Irrigated Agriculture. State University Press, AMES, IO.
HNWCP, 1996. Internal report prepared on the survey of
the Madachi fadama influence area. Hadejia-Nguru Wetlands
Conservation Project, Nguru.
Hollis, G.E., Adams, W.M., Aminu-Kano, M., (Eds.), 1993. The
Hadejia-Nguru Wetlands. IUCN Gland, Cambridge, UK.
Hollis, G.E., Thompson, J.R., 1993. Water resource developments
and their hydrological impacts. In: Hollis, G.E., Adams, W.M.,
Aminu-Kano, M. (Eds.), 1993. The Hadejia-Nguru Wetlands.
IUCN Gland, Cambridge, UK.
Maler, K.G., 1992. Production Function Approach in Developing
Countries in Vincent, J.R., Crawford, E.W., Hoehn, J.P.
(Eds.) Valuing Environmental Benefits in Developing Countries.
Special report 29, Michigan State University, East Lansing.
NEAZDP, 1994. Groundwater report. North East Arid Zone
Development Programme (NEAZDP), Gashua, Nigeria.
Thompson, J.R., Hollis, G., 1995. Hydrological modelling and
the sustainable development of the Hadejia-Nguru Wetlands,
Nigeria. Hydro!. Sci. J. 40, 97-116.
Thompson, J.R., Goes, B., 1997. Inundation and ground water
recharge in the Hadeija-Nguru Wetlands: hydrological analysis.
Wetland Research Unit, University College London.

