AGRICULTURAL
ECONOMICS
ELSEVIER

Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

Population growth, agricultural intensification,
induced innovation and natural resource sustainability:
An application of neoclassical growth theory
John L. Pender*
International Food Policy Research Institute, 2033K St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 20006, USA

Abstract
Using a simple neoclassical type growth model including both man-made and natural capital as inputs to production, the
theoretical basis for aU-shaped relationship between agricultural intensification and farm household investment in renewable
resource capital is established. As development of technology, infrastructure, or markets increase the relative return to
investment in man-made capital over natural capital, resource depletion occurs as man-made capital is substituted for lower
return natural capital. Once returns are equalized, both man-made and natural capital are accumulated. If labor and these forms
of capital are complementary, the output effects outweigh the substitution effects in the long run, leading to net accumulation
of natural as well as man-made capital as a result of such technological or market development. Population growth also
induces investment in both man-made and natural resource capital in the long run by increasing their marginal products.
However, population growth causes declining per capita levels of both natural and man-made capital and production per capita
in the long run, if technology is fixed and decreasing returns to scale. The model thus supports the Boserupian argument of
induced intensification and resource improvement, as well as the Malthusian argument of the impoverishing effects of
population growth. However, population growth may also induce development of infrastructure, markets, and technological or
institutional innovation by reducing the fixed costs per capita of these changes, though these developments may not occur
automatically. Government policies can play a large role in affecting whether these potential benefits of population growth are
realized. In addition, credit policies may reduce resource degradation caused by substitution of man-made for natural capital,
by allowing farmers to accumulate man-made capital (such as fertilizers) without depleting their natural capital. Policies to
internalize the external environmental costs of using man-made capital will reduce both types of capital and production,
indicating a clear trade-off between addressing environmental concerns on the one hand and reducing poverty and promoting
resource conservation investments on the other. By contrast, internalizing the external benefits of investments in resources
increases wealth and production per capita in the long run. The 'intertemporal externality' due to a higher private than social
rate of time preference does not justify interventions to promote investments in resource capital; rather it argues for the
promotion of savings and investment in general. © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Population growth; Agricultural intensification; Induced innovation; Economic growth; Natural resource sustainability

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +202 862 5645; fax: +202 467 4439; e-mail: j.pender@cgnet.com
0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Pll S0169-5150(98)00024-3

100

J.L. Pender I Agricultural Economics 19 ( 1998) 99-112

1. Introduction

The impacts of population growth on agricultural
productivity and the sustainability of natural resources
have been debated, at least since the time of Malthus.
In the past few decades, there has been a resurgence of
pessimism about the impacts of population growth,
particularly in rapidly growing developing countries
(Club of Rome, 1972; Brown, 1974; Ehrlich and
Ehrlich, 1990). Slowing the growth of population in
developing countries is widely regarded as critical to
achieving sustainable development in poor countries
(e.g. World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987).
At the same time, a more optimistic perspective has
emerged. Boserup (1965) and many others have
argued that population pressure induces agricultural
intensification, development of infrastructure and
markets, and technological and/or institutional innovation (Ruthenberg, 1980; Darity, 1980; Pryor and
Maurer, 1982; Robinson and Schutjer, 1984; Hayami
and Ruttan, 1985; Binswanger and Mcintire, 1987;
Salehi-Isfahani, 1988). There has been debate, however, about whether this process improves or reduces
labor productivity and human welfare (e.g. Robinson
and Schutjer vs. Salehi-Isfahani). The impacts on
natural resources and the environment are also debated
(Lele and Stone, 1989; Panayotou, 1993).
The evidence on the impacts of population growth is
mixed. Numerous studies have shown a positive relationship between population densities or growth and
deforestation, overgrazing, soil erosion, declining soil
fertility, and other resource and environmental problems 1. However, there are also many examples showing that population growth and very high population
densities can be consistent with sustainable agricultural practices (Templeton and Scherr, 1997). In an
often cited study of land management in the Machakos
District of Kenya, substantial rehabilitation and
improvement of previously degraded land resources
(including investments in terraces, tree planting, and
adoption of new technologies) was observed to occur
between 1930's and 1990, despite (or perhaps because
of) a five-fold increase in population (Tiffen et al.,
1994).
1See, for example, the studies cited by Panayotou (1993 ), Stem
et al. (1996) and Templeton and Scherr (1997).

Such observations have contributed to the hypothesis of a 'U-curve' type of relationship between
population growth and the condition of natural
resources and the environment in developing countries
(Scherr and Hazell, 1994). Others have postulated an
inverted U-shaped relationship between economic
growth and environmental degradation (World Bank,
1992). Several statistical studies have examined the
relationship between various indicators of environmental or resource degradation (mainly measures of
pollution and deforestation) and economic growth,
and some have found support for an inverted U-shaped
relationship between income per capita and environmental degradation 2 .
The main purpose of this paper is to consider the
theoretical basis for a U-shaped relationship between
the condition of natural resources used in agricultural
production and population or economic growth, and to
consider the implications of this theory. The emphasis
is on productive natural resources rather than amenities; thus, the argument is not based upon assuming a
high income elasticity of demand for environmental
amenities, which may be a dubious assumption 3 .
The argument is a simple application of neoclassical theory. At low levels of population density and
economic development, households are well endowed
with natural resource capital in the form afforests, soil
fertility, etc., relative to their stock of human produced
capital. As economic development proceeds, development of infrastructure, markets and technology tend
to reduce the price and/or increase the marginal value
product of investments in human produced capital.
This induces substitution of human produced capital
for natural capital, resulting in depletion of natural
capital in the near term. Once the rate of return to these
different types of capital have equalized, however,
output effects take over and accumulation of both
natural and man-made capital will occur. If man-made

2 See Stem et al. (1996) for citations. The validity and generality
of these results has been questioned on theoretical and empirical
grounds (Stem et al., 1996; Arrow et al., 1995).
3 0ne recent study found that the income elasticity of demand for
environmental amenities is less than one in several European
countries, contradicting some arguments for the inverted U-curve
hypothesis (Kristrtim and Riera, 1996). Evidence on this issue is
still very limited, however, and virtually non-existent for developing countries.

J.L. Pender/ Agricultural Economics 19 ( 1998) 99-112

capital and natural capital are complementary, output
effects will outweigh substitution effects in the long
run 4 • If labor supply is complementary to both types of
capital, then population growth induces investment in
both types of capital after their rates of return are
equalized.
This argument emphasizes the positive role of
complementarity between renewable natural resource
capital and man-made capital in promoting sustainable development. This contrasts sharply with the
situation for exhaustible resources. Economic growth
is unsustainable, if the elasticity of substitution
between exhaustible resources and reproducible capital is less than unity (Hamilton, 1995). This is because
the rising price of the exhaustible resources over time
reduces use of both resources and man-made capital
due to their complementarity.
The model presented in this paper could be characterized as 'Boserupian' given its optimistic predictions about the impacts of population growth on
investment in renewable resources and other forms
of capital. However, it also shares the Malthusian
pessimism regarding the impacts of population growth
on per capita production and consumption (holding
technology and market development fixed). This is
based on the assumption that agricultural production
technology exhibits constant or decreasing returns to
scale. If there are nonconvexities in the production
function (such as, fixed costs), population growth may
have positive effects on production per capita by
reducing the per capita level of such fixed costs
(Krautkraemer, 1994). However, with imperfect capital markets, the presence of such nonconvexities may
lead to a 'poverty trap', in which poorer households
are 'locked-in' to a low-level equilibrium path (Pender, 1992; Barro and Sala-I-Martin, 1995; Fafchamps
and Pender, 1997).
Similar arguments apply to nonconvexities that
exist more generally in the economy, such as fixed
costs of infrastructure development, technological and
institutional innovation. Population growth reduces
these costs per capita and thus may induce this form

~hese adjustments occur sequentially, rather than instantaneously as in the standard static theory of production, if the
changes involved are large, credit markets are not well functioning,
and natural capital is non-marketable.

101

of development, as argued by Boserup. However, the
ability to take advantage of these declining costs is
not automatic, since it depends on the ability to
achieve collective action (including government
action) to share these costs, or the development of
institutions allowing private agents to internalize the
external benefits of paying these fixed costs. In the
case of collective action, rent seeking and transactions
costs may undermine the ability to achieve collective
action, particularly as population grows. In the case of
private agents, monopoly power can become a constraint to economic efficiency and growth. Thus, the
implications of population growth are more uncertain
when such nonconvexities are taken into account; and
are more strongly conditioned by the cultural norms,
institutions, and government policies that influence
transactions costs and monopoly power.
In addition to the effects of population growth, I
consider the implications of other factors affecting
agricultural intensification, including changes in market prices, technology (whether or not induced by
population growth), the rate of time preference, and
externalities. Reductions in the market price of manmade capital relative to the output price or technological improvement lead to higher long-run levels of
both man-made and resource capital and higher levels
of per capita production and consumption. A lower
rate of time preference has similar qualitative long run
implications, although it does not favor accumulating
more of one type of capital than another. Thus, there is
no rationale for promoting investments in natural
resource capital relative to other investments to
address the so-called 'intertemporal externality' due
to a high private rate of time preference. What is
needed is promotion of savings and investment more
generally. Where environmental externalities exist,
the implications of internalizing them depends upon
whether they are external costs or benefits. For example, internalizing the external costs of water pollution
associated with man-made capital will reduce the long
run level of both man-made and resource capital, and
production and consumption per capita. In contrast,
internalizing the external benefits of planting trees or
other conservation activities will lead to higher long
run levels of resource and man-made capital, production and consumption. Thus, the use of 'stick'
approaches to environmental problems in developing
countries, such as, taxes and regulations, face serious

J.L. Pender/ Agricultural Economics 19 ( 1998) 99-112

102

trade-offs with goals of reducing poverty and even
conserving natural resources; while 'carrot'
approaches such as, subsidies for planting trees,
may serve all of these objectives.

2. Theory and comparative statics
Suppose households seek to maximize the intertemporal utility function
00

j e-Ptu(c

1)

dt

(1)

0

where u() is strictly concave. c 1 is per capita consumption, equal to
0=

F(Lr,Kr,Rr)- PKh,- PRIR,
Lr

m

where F() is the production function, L 1 is the population of the household5 , K1 is the stock of man-made
(marketable) capital, R 1 is the stock of resource (nonmarketable) capital6 , h, is investment in purchased
capital, IR, is investment in resource capital, PK is the
price (in units of the output) of purchased capital, and
PR is a technical coefficient (not a market price)
representing the amount of output used up to increase
the resource stock by 1 unit. For example, PR may
represent the amount of crop residue the farmer would
need to leave on his land to increase soil organic
matter by 1 ton per hectare. Land is taken to be fixed
and tenure secure.
The production function is assumed to be concave,
twice differentiable, and increasing the stock of any
input is assumed not to decrease the marginal product
of other inputs

FLK 2': 0, hR 2': 0, FKR 2': 0

(3)

In the case of a constant elasticity of substitution
production function, these assumptions are met if the
5This assumes that all household members are laborers, in effect
setting the dependency ratio to zero. Nothing in the qualitative
results will be changed if there is a positive dependency ratio, as
long as the ratio stays constant.
6Alternatively, production could be determined by the flow of
services from L, K, and R. If such flows are functions only of these
stocks, there is no loss in generality in writing production as a
function of these stocks.

elasticity of substitution is less than or equal to 1.
Estimates from numerous studies using data from
different countries and different methods suggests
complementarity or unitary elasticity between labor
and capital, labor and fertilizer, or labor and a composite of other inputs (e.g. Ruttan and Hayami, 1988;
Antle and Aitah, 1983; Yotopolous et al., 1976; Binswanger, 1974; Srivistava and Heady, 1973). Of course
there are exceptions to this; e.g. Ray (1982) and
Brown and Christensen (1981) estimated greater than
unitary elasticity between labor and fertilizer using US
data, and Lopez (1980) estimated greater than unitary
elasticity between labor and capital using data from
Canada. Estimates of the complementarity or substitutability between human produced capital and natural
capital are more rare. One study of wheat production
in the Punjab found a positive relationship between
organic soil carbon and labor and fertilizer demand,
suggesting complementarity; though the relationship
was not statistically significant (Sidhu and Baanante,
1981). More research is needed on this issue.
The decision variables at any moment are h, and
IR,· The non-marketability of resource capital implies
the constraint
(4)

Some of the man-made capital and resource
capital are assumed to be consumed in production
in each period. For example, man-made capital may
represent inorganic nutrients and resource capital may
represent organic matter in the soil, both of which are
consumed in crop production. The amount of each
type of capital consumed is assumed to be proportional to production (though the proportionality constants may differ)

= h,- 8KF(Lr,Kr,Rr)

(5)

Rr = IR, - 8RF(Lr, Kr, Rr)

(6)

Kr

Household population grows at an exogenously determined rate n (2':0)
(7)

The maximization of Eq. (1), subject to the nonmarketability constraint on resource capital Eq. (4)
and the equations of motion for the state variables
Eqs. (5)-(7), defines the household's optimization
problem.

103

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

The Appendix shows that, if the non-marketability
constraint is non-binding, two Euler equations must be
satisfied:

-/J,t = p + n - ( 1 - PKDK - PR8R ) -F K

(8)

-/J,t = p + n - ( 1 - PKDK - PRDR ) -FR

(9)

PK

/-lt

PR

1-lt

where p,1 is the marginal utility of consumption at time
t (u'(c1)). Both Eqs. (8) and (9) can be satisfied if and
only if:
FK

FR

PK

PR

If the production function is constant returns to
scale, production per worker (y1) is a concave function
of man-made capital per worker (K/L1=k1) and
resource capital per worker (R/L 1 =r1)
_ F(Lr,Kt,Rr) -j(k
Lr

-

r, Tr

)

(12)

(10)

In words, if the initial rate of return to man-made
capital is higher than the rate of return to resource
capital, resource capital will be depleted until these
rates of return are equalized. The initial disequilibrium
(defined as a violation ofEq. (10)) may be a result of a
technological or market development that significantly increases the marginal return of man-made
capital or reduces its price. If that is the case, this
resource degradation is not 'population induced'
(unless the technological or market changes were
population induced), although it may coincide with
population growth. I consider the comparative statics
of the model and such temporary disequilibria further
below.
Once the returns to marketable and resource capital
are equalized, population growth will induce net
investment in both types of capital. Intuitively, this
is because increasing labor supply increases the marginal return to investment in both types of capital (as a
result of Eq. (3)). I illustrate this and other results
below for two cases: (1) constant returns to scale
is proved in the Appendix.

2.1. Constant returns to scale

Yt -

Eq. (10) is the usual requirement for technical efficiency. It states that the marginal rate of return for
investment in man-made capital must be equal to the
marginal rate of return for investment in natural
capital. In Eq. (10), PR plays the role of a price, even
though it is a technical coefficient. If F KIP K > F RIP R ,
then the non-marketability constraint on resource
capital will be binding (h, =0) 7 and

7 This

technology, and (2) diminishing returns to scale technology.

It is straightforward to show that
(13)

Thus, we can replace F K and FR by A and fr in the
Euler Eqs. (8) and (9). In the steady state, consumption and the marginal utility of consumption are
constant, which implies from Eqs. (8) and (9):
fk(k r)
'

=

pK(p + n)
1 - PK(jK - PR8R

(14)

fr(k, r)

=

PR(P + n)
1 - PKDK - PR(jR

(15)

IfA andfr are greater than these values, c1, k 1 and r1 will
be rising towards their steady-state values, as in the
standard Ramsey growth model with only one capital
stock; conversely, ifA andfr are less than these values,
Cr, kr and r 1 will be falling 8 .
Since K/L1 and R/L1 approach is a steady state, K 1
and R 1 both eventually grow as population grows 9 .
This is population induced intensification. Note that, if
k1 and r1 are initially below their steady- state levels, K1
and R 1 will grow faster than population, until the
steady state is reached. This additional intensification
is induced by the relatively high initial returns to
investment.
8This problem can be readily converted to a growth problem with
a single capital stock. Since the production function is homogeneous, the locus of points satisfying Eq. (10) is a straight line
through the origin in r,k space. Thus r=ak on this locus for some
a>O, and we can define g(k)=(l-pp;{jK-PROR)f(k,ak) as the new
production function. The problem is then a standard Ramsey
growth model, and all of the standard results apply.
9If k, and r, are initially above their steady-state levels, K, and R,
may decline for some time as k, and r1 decline.

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

104

Table I
Comparative statics of the steady state-constant returns to scale
case

Table 2
Comparative statics of the steady state-decreasing returns to scale
case
Endogenous variable

Endogenous variable
Exogenous variable
n
p
PK
PR
OK
OR
A (neutral technical change)
AK (capital augmenting
technical change)
AR (resource augmenting
technical change)

k

r

+

y

+
+

+10

+
+

+10

+

+

The comparative statics of the steady state
are shown in Table 110• Increasing any of the
exogenous factors (p, n, PK• PR• 8K, 8R) increases
fk and fr in the steady state, resulting in lower steady
state k, r, and y. The effect of neutral technical
change can be modeled by replacing f(k 1, r1) by
Af(k1, r1). Then A and fr in Eqs. (14) and (15) are
replaced by AA and Af, implying that an increase
in A leads to a reduction inA andfr in the steady state,
and an increase in steady state k, r, and y. The effect
of capital or resource augmenting technical change
can be modeled using f(Akkr. Arr1) as the production
function. An increase in Ak or Ar also increases steady
state k, r, and y.

2.2. Diminishing returns to scale
It might reasonably be objected that the assumption

of constant returns to scale is highly restrictive and
probably unrealistic in many circumstances. Given the
fact that land area (not quality) is assumed to be fixed
(or the ability to expand area is limited), it may be
more realistic to assume diminishing returns to scale.
In this case, there is no steady-state level of production
or consumption per capita as population grows;
instead these will continually fall as population rises
(unless offset by other changes such as improvements

10The

comparative statics results are derived in the Appendix.

Exogenous variable

K

R

L

+10

+10

+
+

+10

+
+

+10

+

+

p
PK
PR
OK
OR
A (neutral technical change)
AK (capital augmenting
techical change)
AR (resource augmenting
techical change)

+

y

in technology) 11 • This is the classical Malthusian
scenario.
For a steady state to exist in this case, the population
growth rate must be zero. Unlike the constant returns
to scale case, in which only the growth rate and not the
level of population is important, the level of population is a critical factor with diminishing returns to
scale. Thus, I assume that the population growth rate is
zero, but examine the impact of changing the level of
population.
The equations determining the steady state in this
case are very similar to Eqs. (14) and (15)
PKP
8
8
- PK K- PR R
PRP
1 - PK 8K- PR 8R

FK(L,K,R)=1

(16)

FR (L, K, R )

(17)

=

The comparative statics of the steady state are
shown in Table 2. If L increases, this tends to increase
FK and FR, so K and R increase 12 • Thus, population
11 This is most readily seen by considering the case of only one
type of capital and assuming that, the production function F(L,K) is
homogeneous of degree t, where t<l. Then FL, and F K are
homogeneous of degree t-1. Suppose that a steady state did exist
in which production per capita remained constant after population
increased by a factor of x. Then K would have to have increased by
more than x. But that would imply that F K had declined, since this
function is homogeneous to a negative degree. This would cause
Eq. (14) to be violated, contradicting the assumption of a steady
state.
12This result is proved in the Appendix.

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

growth induces investment in both man-made capital
and resources even in the Malthusian scenario with
decreasing returns. This runs counter to the common
perception that a Malthusian perspective implies
resource degradation as population grows. It also
suggests that there is not necessarily a contradiction
between the Malthusian perspective and the Boserupian 'induced intensification' perspective. Consistent
with Boserup's logic, population pressure induces
investments to improve the productivity of the land,
once frontier expansion is no longer an option. But
consistent with Malthus, production and consumption
per capita fall as a result of population growth 13 . Thus,
although population growth may eventually be good
news for resource conservation, it is a bad news for
human welfare.
The other comparative statics results are identical to
those for the constant returns to scale case. This should
not be surprising, since Eqs. (16) and (17) are essentially identical to Eqs. (14) and (15), if Lis constant
(ignoring the population growth rate (n)). The production function F(L,K,R) can be redefined as g(K,R)
(since L is constant), and g has the same properties
as f(k,r) (i.e. concavity, positive cross partial derivatives).

3. Implications
These results imply that the population growth may
not be responsible for resource degradation in developing countries, when degradation is due to substitution of more profitable forms of capital for resource
capital. Indeed, population growth eventually induces
investments in resource improvements, where land is
becoming scarce and tenure is relatively secure.
Nevertheless, reducing the growth of population can
increase (or reduce the decline in) per capita income
and consumption. The case for population control,
13 An argument very similar to that in Footnote II demonstrates
that steady-state capital and resource stocks per capita and
production per capita falls after an increase in population, even
though total capital and resource stocks rise. If the production
function is homogeneous of degree t<i, then increasing or holding
constant KIL and RIL would reduce FK and FR, thus violating
Eqs. (16) and (17). Thus, KIL and R/L fall, implying that F(L,K,R)I
L falls (since decreasing returns would require KIL and RIL to rise
if FIL were to be held constant or increase as L increases).

105

thus, may hinge more on considerations of poverty
than on considerations of resource degradation or
improvement.
Other causal factors demonstrate a complementarity between reducing poverty and improving resource
conditions. For example, technological improvements
(whether neutral or biased towards augmenting one of
the factors of production) tend to increase investments
in both man-made and resource capital and per capita
income. Technological improvements in the production of man-made capital may reduce PK• also increasing resource and other investments and per capita
income in the long run. Improvements in transportation infrastructure or other factors causing an increase
in output relative to input prices also may be reflected
by a reduction in PK·
Although such changes lead to resource improvements in the long run, they cause resource degradation
in the short run by increasing the rate of return to manmade capital relative to resource capital. This process
is illustrated in Fig. 1. An initial steady state at point 0
becomes inefficient after a reduction in PK· which
rotates the efficiency locus clockwise. If resource
stocks were marketable, they would be immediately
sold and converted to man-made capital stocks, until
point Pin Fig. 1 was reached. Given the marketability
constraint, resource depletion will occur more slowly,
as man-made capital is being accumulated, until the
rates of return are equalized at a point like Q in the
figure. After this point, investment in both resources
and man-made capital occur until the new steady state
(S) is reached. The results in Tables 1 and 2 imply that
this new steady state will be at a higher stock of
resources per capita than in the initial steady state.
Because increasing man-made capital increases the
marginal return to resource capital, the output effects
outweigh the substitution effects in the long run.
This example demonstrates that it is important not
to interpret resource depletion per se as a problem.
From the farmer's point of view, the initial depletion
of resources in Fig. 1 represents the most efficient way
to take advantage of the new opportunities afforded by
the reduction in PK• and to increase both man-made
capital and resource stocks in the long run. Policy
makers could try to halt or slow the initial depletion of
resources by promoting investments in resource conservation and improvement, but farmer adoption of
such investments is likely to be low due to their lower

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

106

Locus with
fk
p 0

- - =-k----+
fr

Pr

Locus with
~= Pk'

~~
r

Initial steady
state

Path with credit to
increase k rapidly

~____.____.L____.__.

---+-~~Pathwithl,=O
\\
p

New steady state

R

"

\+--t

I

pI
Slope=-k

Pr

k
Fig. 1. Effect of a reduction in PK·

rate of return than other investments (unless substantial subsidies are provided). For example, it is not
uncommon for returns to capital invested in fertilizers
to exceed 100% in poor countries (e.g. Gandhi et al.,
1995; Larson and Frisvold, 1996), while rates of return
on conservation practices are often much less than this
(Cleaver and Schreiber, 1994; Lutz et al., 1994;
Kumwenda et al., 1996). It is not surprising that
farmers often show little interest in such practices,
even though they may be profitable, if they have other
much more profitable ways to use their scarce labor
and savings.
Some development programs have sought to overcome the reluctance of farmers to invest in lower
return conservation technologies by bundling these
technologies with higher return investments in fertilizer, seeds, etc. Fig. 1 suggests that such an approach
may be most beneficial and successful if it is combined
with sufficient credit to enable the farmer to 'jump' to
a higher level of man-made capital close to the final

steady state (thus equalizing the rates of return at a
point such as R in Fig. 1), rather than tracing out the
entire depletion/accumulation path. Then the farmer
will have incentive to invest immediately in resource
capital as well as man-made capital. Without such an
ability to accumulate capital quickly, the farmer would
be better off shifting his assets towards those having
higher returns initially, and this would enable him
to accumulate savings and approach the ·long run
steady state more quickly. Notice that this is true
even if, as we have assumed, increasing resource
capital increases the marginal product of man-made
capital.
Of course, farmers' optimal decisions may not be
optimal from a social point of view if there are
externalities associated with their decisions. For
example, use of fertilizers or other purchased capital
may generate external costs on others that they do not
take into account, such as water pollution caused by
runoff and leaching of inorganic nutrients, or the

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

contribution of the fertilizer production and transportation system to buildup of carbon dioxide and global
warming 14• If farmers were take these costs into
account, the result would be (not surprisingly), less
investment in fertilizers or other forms of capital
causing external costs, less investment in resource
capital (more surprising), and lower steady-state production and consumption per capita.
To show this result, suppose that each person's
utility is reduced by the per capita use of man-made
capital
u(ct, kt)

= u(ct- akt)

(18)

Then, Eq. (14) is replaced by:

fk(k, r) = PK(P + n) +a
1 - PKDK - PRDR

(19)

while Eq. (15) remains the same. It is straightforward
to show that an increase in a leads to a reduction in the
steady-state level of k, r, andy, similar to the effect of
an increase in p/ 5 . Conversely, if there are external
benefits of investment (e.g. if investing in planting
trees generates external benefits by reducing carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere), the steady-state levels of k,
r, and y would be increased if these benefits were
internalized, similar to the effect of a reduction in PR·
These results suggest that there may be no conflict
among the objectives of increasing agricultural productivity, improving resource conditions, reducing
rural poverty, and addressing environmental concerns,
if subsidies are used to internalize external benefits of
improving resource conditions. On the other hand,
there are clear trade-offs involved if taxes or regulations are used to internalize the external costs associated with agricultural production. Although an
optimal intervention will increase aggregate social
welfare and reduce environmental costs, it will reduce
investment in resource capital as well as other capital,
14This

assumes that market prices of fertilizer do not reflect
these costs, which is likely to be true today, but could be remedied
if a global agreement to limit carbon dioxide emissions is reached
and this leads to higher prices of fossil fuels. This also assumes
that, fertilizer production and use creates a net addition to
atmospheric carbon dioxide. This may not be true however, since
fertilizer use can contribute to the stock of living plant material,
which acts to reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide.
15 The effects are similar in the case of decreasing returns to
scale.

107

reduce agricultural production and income per capita.
There may also be adverse distributional consequences since farmers in poor countries are often
poorer than their urban neighbors (and certainly
poorer than those in advanced countries), who benefit
from reducing the external costs of developing country
agriculture.
Another key issue from the standpoint of social
welfare is the so-called 'intertemporal externality'; i.e.
the fact that decisions made by farmers today affect
the welfare of future generations, which they may not
adequately account for in their decisions 16 . This issue
may be reflected in the private rate of time preference
(p) being greater than the social rate of time preference. If the social rate of time preference were applied
to investment decisions instead of the private rate,
there would be a higher level of all types of capital and
higher per capita incomes in the long run. Note that
this 'externality' affects all types of investments, not
only investments in resource capital, and does not
argue in favor of accepting a lower rate of return on
investments in resource conservation than investments
in other forms of capital. Thus, it does not change the
implication that it can be socially optimal to let
resources degrade in the near term; rather, it changes
the steady state that will be approached after resources
have degraded sufficiently to equalize the rates of
return to different investments.
This issue is sometimes poorly understood in policy
(and even academic) discussions. The 'intertemporal
externality' is sometimes used to justify regulations or
subsidies to prevent resource degradation or increase
investment in resource conservation. As I hope this
discussion makes clear, a high private rate of time
preference does not justify interventions targeted specifically to resources, although it may justify efforts to
promote savings and investment more generally.

4. Extensions
It is important to emphasize the key assumptions
driving these predictions, to avoid over-generalizing
them. Of critical importance are the assumptions that
16! prefer not to refer to this as an externality, because I think it
leads to confusion. As argued by Solow ( 1993 ), this can be seen as
an issue of inter-generational equity.

108

J.L. Pender! Agricultural Economics 19 ( 1998) 99-112

land area is fixed, that land tenure is secure and
private, that the returns to capital increase with labor
supply, and that man-made capital and resource capital are not substitutes. These assumptions imply that
the private returns to investment rise as population
grows, eventually inducing investment in both types of
capital. If land area is not fixed and frontier land is
available at relatively low cost, investment may not be
profitable until available frontier land has been settled.
A great deal of resource degradation, induced or
amplified by population growth, may occur in the
process of clearing and settling frontier land. The
theory presented here does not address this aspect
of the population-resource degradation nexus.
Lack of secure tenure to land also changes the story,
in that the incentive to invest is reduced by insecure
tenure. This does not necessarily change the basic
predictions of the theory, however. Suppose, for example, that there is a given probability of eviction during
each period, that this probability is independent of the
farmer's decisions and statistically independent over
time, and that if evicted the farmer receives his
reservation utility of 0 from then on. The effect of
the probability of eviction can be represented by an
increase in the rate of time preference, and thus,
results in lower investment and income per capita
in the long run 17 . Where the probability of eviction
depends upon the investment behavior of the farmer,
this needs to be modeled explicitly. If resource degrading activities (such as, clearing trees) enhance tenure
security, factors that promote investment (such as,
lower time preference, increasing output prices, land
titling and credit programs) may increase degradation
(Angelsen, 1996). On the other hand, if planting trees
enhances tenure security, more trees will be planted,
though this may not be socially optimal (Otsuka et al.,
1997).
If tenure is secure but communal rather than private,
the model predictions will hold at the community
level, if optimal collective decisions are made by
the community. There is ample evidence that communities have been able to manage common property
productively in many developing country settings

(Baland and Platteau, 1996). However, the ability to
maintain effective collective action may decline as
population grows, because the private benefits from
deviant behavior may rise while the costs of monitoring and enforcement increase. Thus, population
growth may cause resource degradation in the near
term by contributing to the breakdown of traditional
systems of communal resource management.
In the longer term, population growth may contribute to the development of more private and specific
property rights as the benefits of establishing such
rights increases (Boserup, 1965; Demsetz, 1967; Binswanger and Mcintire, 1987). In addition, the per capita
costs of establishing and enforcing private property
rights may fall as population grows, since a substantial
component of these costs may be fixed. However,
whether and how such institutional innovation will
occur in response to changing incentives is more
difficult to predict than the responses of households
under a given institutional framework. Given the
presence of high fixed costs, collective action requirements, and the possibility of coordination failures,
institutional innovation may be a path dependent
process having multiple equilibria, with no assurance
that socially optimal outcomes will occur (North,
1990).
Similar arguments apply to technological innovation. The process of technological innovation typically
involves substantial fixed costs (Romer, 1990), and the
per capita level of these costs are reduced by population growth 18 . In addition, population growth may
increase the returns to innovation, as argued in the
induced innovation literature (Boserup, 1965; Hayami
and Ruttan, 1985). As with institutional innovation,
this process may be path dependent (David, 1985;
Arthur, 1989).
Government policies may have large impacts (for
good or ill) at certain critical times on which path of
institutional or technological change occurs; however,
at other times, the technology or institutional framework may be 'locked-in' and policies relatively ineffective in changing them. Understanding such
pathways of change and the role of government poli-

17 In the context of infinitely repeated games, Kreps (1990),
chapter 14) points out that the commonly used exponential discount
factor may result from a positive probability that the game will not
continue.

18 Romer argued, however, that population growth does not
necessarily induce innovation because he assumed that labor
supply is not an important input in the innovative sector.

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

cies in affecting them is an important area for future
research.
The assumption that man-made and natural capital
are not substitutes (FKR?.O) is a critical one. If they are
substitutes, the prediction that resource capital will
rise in the long run after a reduction in the price of
man-made capital or technological change increasing
the marginal product of man-made capital could be
reversed. Note, however, that the condition F KR?.O is a
sufficient and not a necessary condition for the comparative statics results. The predictions of the theory
will still hold if the degree of substitutability is not too
large.
The model considered here also has the limitation
that risk is not incorporated. Consideration of risk and
risk aversion would qualify the conclusion that households seek to equate marginal rates of return. Instead,
farmers would be expected to hold a diversified portfolio of assets to reduce their exposure to risk, with
some perhaps having lower expected returns. Households also would likely hold precautionary savings as
a hedge against future income shortfalls. These extensions do not alter the basic insight of the deterministic
theory, however; i.e. large changes in prices or technology induce substitution of man-made for natural
capital in the near term and accumulation of both types
of capital in the long term.
It is also important to emphasize what is not
assumed in the theory presented here. I have not
assumed that perfect markets exist, although I assume
the existence of markets for the output and man-made
capital. No land, labor, or credit markets are assumed
to exist. If a perfect set of markets exists within
communities (no transaction costs and property rights
fully specified and enforced) and external markets for
output and man-made capital exist, the theory presented here would apply at the community level. The
functioning of local factor markets (even if not perfect) tends to reduce the impact on production decisions of differences among households in factor
endowments or preferences, since the marginal products of production factors tend to equalize across
households.
However, these markets can also exacerbate distributional differences over time. For example, households with lower rates of time preference will tend to
save and invest more over time, and if land sales
markets are functioning, they will also acquire more

109

land. Local credit markets facilitate this process by
encouraging 'patient' households (those whose rate of
time preference is lower than the local interest rate) to
become net lenders and accumulate assets, while
impatient households become net borrowers and
divest of assets over time 19 . If labor markets are
functioning, these impatient households will become
landless laborers. While this process may be desirable
from the standpoint of efficiency and sustainability
(since the lower rate of time preference of more patient
households will determine the long run level of asset
accumulation), it is not desirable from the standpoint
of eliminating poverty.

5. Conclusion
The theory developed in this paper supports both the
Boserupian optimism about the improvements in
resource management induced by population growth
and the Malthusian pessimism about the impact of
population growth on incomes and welfare. The Malthusian pessimism is mitigated to the extent that
population growth induces infrastructure and market
development, and technological and institutional
innovation. However, these responses are not automatic and likely depend to a substantial extent upon
the initial institutional framework, cultural norms, and
government policies. Thus, governments have a critical role to play in facilitating the process of market
development and technological and institutional innovation.
Governments likely have much less impact on the
long run implications of intensification, given the state
of technology and institutions; although they can
affect the path towards the long run steady state. In
particular, they can accelerate the accumulation of
man-made capital by helping to make credit more
widely available (this does not imply the use of
subsidies), and thus reduce the incentive to deplete
natural resources in the near term. Policies to subsidize the accumulation of natural capital are not
justified simply because people have a short time
perspective; this will simply result in lower production
19 Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995) p. 99) discuss this problem in
open economy growth models with variations in time preference. In
the limit, patient households acquire all of the marketable assets.

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99--112

110

and consumption in the near and long term. However,
if there are external environmental costs associated
with man-made capital accumulation, taxes or regulation can increase aggregate welfare and reduce these
costs, but there will be a trade-off with goals of
reducing poverty and conserving natural resource
capital (if man-made and natural resource capital
are complements). In contrast, if conserving natural
capital has external benefits, subsidies can increase
production and consumption as well as environmental
quality in the long term.
The possibility of jointly serving environmental,
economic, and social objectives by subsidizing investments in resource capital is an attractive prospect. For
example, it suggests that attempts to address global
warming by promoting tree planting (when this is
complementary to income and production objectives)
might involve much fewer trade-offs than more regulatory or tax-based approaches. However, realizing
such a win-win solution depends critically upon
whether natural capital and man-made capital are
complements or substitutes, and this is not yet well
understood. Technical research identifying possible
complementarities between different forms of natural
and man-made capital could thus have a very high
potential payoff.
Appendix

either K orR:

These derivatives represent the marginal benefit (in
utility terms) of an increase in K or R. Since F K and F R
are positive, these will be positive if the term in
parentheses is positive, which can be shown to be
true if (1 - PK8K - PRDR > 0) 20 • The marginal utility
cost of an increase inK is p~'(c 1)/L1 and the marginal
cost of an increase in R is pRu'(c1)/Lt. If the marginal
benefit/cost ratio for investments in R is less than the
marginal benefit cost ratio for investments in K,
investment in R will be zero. Eqs. (A2) and (A3)
imply this if FKIPK>FRIPR· Investment in R will be
zero as long as this holds, causing R to fall Eq. (11)
until FKIPK=FRIPR·
Assume that the rates of return to K and R have
equalized (thus "f=O). Differentiating the Hamiltonian
with respect to h, and IR, and setting these equal to 0,
we obtain
AK =pKu'(ct)
(A4)
Lt

AR =pRu'(cr)
Lt

Derivation of optimal path and comparative
statics results

The costate equations are

A. I Optimal Path

>..K = PAK-

The current value Hamiltonian for the household's
optimization problem is

H

(AS)

[u't)- AK8K- AR8R]FK
(A6)

)..R

= u [F(Lt,Kt,Rt) ~tPKh,- PRIR,]

:~ = PAK-

=PAR-:~= PAR-

[U'i:r)- AK8K- ARDR] FR
(A7)

+ AK[h,- 8KF(Lt,Kt,Rt)]
+ AR[IR,- 8RF(L1,K1,R1)] + ALnL1 +"fiR,

(A1)

where 'Y is the Lagrangian multiplier associated with
the non-marketability constraint of resource capital
Eq. (4).
To show that FKIPK>FRIPR implies that IR=O, use
the envelope theorem to compute the effect on the
value function at timet (V(L1, K 1, R1)) of an increase in

20When the non-marketability constraint is binding, Eq. (AS)
below is replaced by

>..R +'Y =pRu'(c,)
L,

This equation and Eq. (A4) imply that

u'(c
4
- >..K8K 1)

>..R8R =

4u'(c,) (I - PKDK -

PRDR) +"(DR

J.L Pender I Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-112

Defining: f..lr = u'(c1 ), solving Eqs. (A4) and
(A5) for A.K and A.R, and substituting these into
Eqs. (A6) and (A7) and simplifying, we obtain
Eqs. (8) and (9).
5.2. Comparative statics of the steady state (constant
returns case)
Eqs. (14) and (15) are of the form

/k

=A

(A8)

fr =B

(A9)

where both A and B are increasing functions of p, n,
p K• p R• 8K• and 8R· Let z represent any of these
exogenous variables. Applying the implicit function
theorem we obtain

dz

(dA/dz)frr- (dB/dz)fkr
fkdrr - f'/k

(AlO)

dr
dz

(dB/dz)!kk- (dA/dz)fkr
fkdrr - J'/k

(All)

dk

Strict concavity off(k,r) implies that the denominator
in Eqs. (AlO) and (All) are positive, and thatfkk and
frr are negative. By assumption fk,?:_O. These results,
together with the facts that dA/dz and dB/dz are
positive, imply that dkldz<O and dr/dz<O. This in turn
implies that dy/dz<O.

5.3. Comparative statics (decreasing returns case)
I consider only the effect of increasing L. The
effects of the other variables are exactly the same
as in the constant returns to scale case.
We have equations of the form

=c

(Al2)

FR(L,K,R) = D

(A13)

FK(L,K,R)

Applying the implicit function theorem, we obtain
dK

dL

FKLFRR- FRLFKR
FKKFRR -F'k:R

(A14)

dR
dL

FKKFRL- FRKFKL
FKKFRR- F'k:R

(A15)

The strict concavity of the production function and
relations Eq. (3) imply that dK/dL and dRidL?:_O.

Ill

References
Angelsen, A., 1996. Deforestation: Population or market driven?
Christian Michelsen Institute Working Paper WP, 9, Bergen,
Norway.
Antle, J.M., Aitah, A.S., 1983. Rice technology, farmer rationality,
and agricultural policy in Egypt. Am. J. Agric. Econom. 65(4),
667-674.
Arrow, K., Bolin, B., Costanza, R., Dasgupta, P., Falke, C., Holling,
C.S., Jansson, B.O., Levin, S., Maler, K.G., Perrings, C.,
Pimental, D., 1995. Economic growth, carrying capacity, and
the environment. Science 268, 520-521.
Arthur, B., 1989. Competing technologies, increasing returns, and
lock-in by historical events. Econom. J. 99, 116-131.
Baland, J.M., Platteau, J.P., 1996. Halting Degradation of Natural
Resources. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Barra, R.J., Sala-1-Martin, X., 1995. Economic Growth. McGrawHill, New York.
Binswanger, H.P., 1974. A cost function approach to the
measurement of factor demand elasticities and of elasticities
of substitution. Am. J. Agric. Econom. 56(2), 377-386.
Binswanger, H.P., Mcintire, J., 1987. Behavioral and material
determinants of production relations in land abundant tropical
agriculture. Econom. Dev. Cultural Change 36(1), 73-99.
Boserup, E., 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Aldine,
Chicago, Illinois.
Brown, L.R., 1974. In the Human Interest: A Strategy to Stabilize
World Population. Norton, New York.
Brown, R.S., Christensen, L.R., 1981. Estimating elasticities of
substitution in a model of partial static equilibrium: An
application to U.S. agriculture. In: Berndt, E., Field, B.
(Eds.), Modeling and Measuring Natural Resource Substitution.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cleaver, K.M., Schreiber, G.A., 1994. Reversing the spiral: The
population, agriculture, and environment nexus in sub-Saharan
Africa. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Club of Rome, 1972. The Limits to Growth. Universe Books, New
York.
Darity, W.A., 1980. The Boserup theory of agricultural growth: A
model for anthropological economists. J. Dev. Econom. 7, 137157.
David, P.A., 1985. Clio and the economics of Qwerty. Am.
Econom. Rev. 75, 332-337.
Demsetz, H., 1967. Toward a theory of property rights. Am.
Econom. Rev. 62, 347-359.
Ehrlich, P.R., Ehrlich, A.H., 1990. The Population Explosion.
Simon and Schuster, New York.
Fafchamps, M., Pender, J.L., 1997. Precautionary saving, credit
constraints, and irreversible investment: Theory and evidence
from semi-arid India. J. Bus. Econom. Statist. 15(2), 180-194.
Gandhi, V.P., Desai, G.M., Raheja, S.K., Narain, P., 1995. Fertiliser
response function environment and future growth of fertiliser
use on wheat and rice in India. In: Desai, G.M., Vaidyanathan,
A. (Eds.), Strategic Issues in Future Growth of Fertiliser Use in
India. MacMillan, New Delhi.
Hamilton, K., 1995. Sustainable development, the Hartwick rule
and optimal growth. Environ. Res. Econom. 5(4), 393-411.

112

J.L. Pender/Agricultural Economics 19 (1998) 99-l12

Hayami, Y., Ruttan, V.W., 1985. Agricultural Development:
An International Perspective, 2nd ed. Johns Hopkins, Baltimore.
Krautkraemer, J.A., 1994. Population growth, soil fertility, and
agricultural intensification. J. Dev. Econom. 44, 403-428.
Kreps, D.M., 1990. A course in microeconomic theory. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Kristrom, B., Riera, P., 1996. Is the income elasticity of
environmental improvements less than one? Environ. Res.
Econom. 7(1), 45-55.
Kumwenda, J.D.T., Waddington, S.R., Snapp, S.S., Jones, R.B.,
Blackie, M.J., 1996. Soil fertility management research for the
maize cropping systems of smallholders in southern Africa: A
review. NRG Paper 96-02, CIMMYT, Mexico.
Larson, B.A., Frisvold, G.B., 1996. Fertilizers to support
agricultural development in sub-Saharan Africa: What is
needed and why? Food Policy 21(6), 509-525.
Lele, U., Stone, S.W., 1989. Population pressure, the environment
and agricultural intensification in sub-Saharan Africa: Variations on the Boserup hypothesis. MADIA Discussion Paper No.
4, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Lopez, R.E., 1980. The structure of production and the derived
demand for inputs in Canadian agriculture. Am. J. Agric.
Econom. 62(1), 38-45.
Lutz, E., Pagiola, S., Reiche, C., 1994. Lessons from economic and
institutional analyses of soil conservation projects in Central
America and the Caribbean. In: Lutz, E., Pagiola, S., Reiche, C.
(Eds.), Economic and Institutional Analyses of Soil Conservation Projects in Central America and the Caribbean. World
Bank Environment Paper No. 9, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
North, D.C., 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic
Performance. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Otsuka, K., Suyanto, S., Tomich, T.P., 1997. Does land tenure
insecurity discourage tree planting? Evolution of customary
land tenure and agroforestry management in Sumatra. Environment and Production Technology Division Discussion Paper
No. 31, Itemational Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C.
Panayotou, T., 1993. Population, environment, and development
nexus. In: Cassen, R. (Ed.), Population and Development: Old
Debates, New Conclusions. Transaction Publishers, New
Brunswick.
Pender, J.L., 1992. Credit rationing and farmers' irrigation
investments in south India: Theory and evidence. Ph.D.
dissertation, Food Research Institute, Stanford University.
Pryor, F.L., Maurer, S.B., 1982. On induced economic change in
precapitalist societies. J. Dev. Econom. 10, 325-353.

Ray, S.C., 1982. A translog cost function analysis of U.S.
agriculture, 1939-1977. Am. J. Agric. Econom. 64(3), 490-498.
Robinson, W.C., Schutjer, W., 1984. Agricultural development and
demographic change: A generalization of the Boserup model.
Econom. Dev. Cultural Change 32(2), 355-366.
Romer, P., 1990. Endogenous technological change. J. Political
Econom. 98(5), S71-Sl02.
Ruthenberg, H., 1980. Farming Systems in the Tropics. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
Ruttan, V.W., Hayami, Y., 1988. Induced technical change in
agriculture. In: Capalbo, S.M., Antle, J.M. (Eds.), Agricultural
Productivity: Measurement and Explanation, Resources for the
Future, Washington, D.C.
Salehi-Isfahani, D., 1988. Technology and preferences in the
Boserup model of agricultural growth. J. Dev. Econom. 28(2),
175-191.
Scherr, S.J., Hazell, P.B.R., 1994. Sustainable agricultural development strategies in fragile lands. Environment and Production
Technology Division Discussion Paper No. 1, International
Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C.
Sidhu, S.S., Baanante, C.A., 1981. Estimating farm-level demand
and wheat supply in the Indian Punjab. Am. J. Agric. Econom.
63(2), 237-246.
Solow, R.M., 1993. Sustainability: An economist's perspective. In:
Dorfman, R., Dorfman N.S. (Eds.), Economics of the Environment. W.W. Norton and Co., New York.
Srivistava, U.K., Heady, E.O., 1973. Technological change and
relative factor shares in Indian agriculture: An empirical
analyis. Am. J. Agric. Econom. 55(3), 509-514.
Stem, D.I., Common, M.S., Barbier, E.B., 1996. Economic growth
and environmental degradation: The environmental Kuznets
curve and sustainable development. World Dev. 24(7), 11511160.
Templeton, S.R., Scherr, S.J., 1997. Population pressure and the
microeconomy of land management in hills and mountains of
developing countries. Environment and Production Technology
Division Discussion Paper No. 26, International Food Policy
Research Institute, Washington, D.C.
Tiffen, M., Mortimore, M., Gichuki, F., 1994. More People, Less
Erosion: Environmental Recovery in Kenya. Wiley, Chichester,
England.
World Bank, 1992. World Development Report. Washington, D.C.
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987. Our
Common Future. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Yotopolous, P.A., Lau, L.J., Lin, W.-L., 1976. Microeconomic
output supply and factor demand functions in the agriculture of
the province of Taiwan. Am. J. Agric. Econom. 58(2), 333-340.

