 Farming-based Money flow, 7 (1992) 141-153 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam 
 
 141 
 
 (male/female status)ed hits/effects of (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment removal 
 programs in Malawi and Cameroon 
 Christina H. Gladwin 
 Food and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow Department, Institute of Food and Farming-based Sciences, 
 University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA 
 
 (Accepted 27 September 1991) 
 
 ABSTRACT 
 Gladwin, C.H., 1992. (male/female status)ed hits/effects of (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment removal programs in Malawi 
 and Cameroon. Agric. Econ., 7: 141-153. 
 Since the early 1980s, development experts and donor (services businesses/government units) have agreed on the 
 importance of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programs (SAPs) aimed at 'getting prices right'. 
 Adoption of changes were made (things that must exist before other things can happen) for new loans or grants in many sub-Saharan 
 African countries. In both Malawi and Cameroon, one such needed/demanded reform was government's eliminating (material that makes plants grow better) payments to the small farm part/area, (before that/before now) used to increase 
 the money-making ability of intensive farming while keeping food prices (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low. The aim of 
 this ,:&amp;gt;aper is to review (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment removal programs for their hit/effect on farmers, who 
 in sub-Saharan Africa are women. In your mind, SAP programs should benefit women producers, because much focus is placed on renewing farming-based production and matching up/making even 
 farmgate prices with world prices. But in practice, will they benefit? Are SAPs (male/female status)-neutral and affect men and women equally, or only (male/female status)-blind? 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 Since the early 1980s, development experts and donor (services businesses/government units) have 
 agreed on the importance of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programs (SAPs) aimed 
 at 'getting prices right'. Adoption of changes - (reduction of value) of (with a too-high value assigned) 
 types of money, increases in (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low food prices and interest rates, 
 (turning things over from the government to private companies) policies, wage and hiring freezes, removal of payments, and 
 the switching of useful things/valuable supplies from the production of non-tradables to tractabies - were made (things that must exist before other things can happen) for new loans or grants in many subCorrespondence to: C. H. Gladwin, IFAS, Food and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow Department, 
 University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. 
 
 Ol69-5150j92j$05.00 © 1992- Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved 
 
 142 
 
 C.H. GLADWIN 
 
 Saharan African countries. In both Malawi and Cameroon, one such 
 needed/demanded reform was government's eliminating (material that makes plants grow better) payments to the 
 small farm part/area 1 , (before that/before now) used to increase the money-making ability of intensive 
 farming while keeping food prices (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low (Timmer, Falcon and 
 Pearson, p. 288). The argument was that only when total (material that makes plants grow better) use is 
 low and the ratio of (in small steps up) grain yield to (material that makes plants grow better) application is high 
 can such payments be (producing a lot for a given amount of money), relative to higher output prices or 
 greater food imports. 
 The aim of this paper is to review (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment removal programs for 
 their hit/effect on farmers, who in sub-Saharan Africa are women who 
 provide 46% of farming-based labor, on average, and produce most of the 
 food crops (Dixon, 1982). In your mind, SAP programs should benefit women 
 producers, because much focus is placed on renewing farming-based 
 production and matching up/making even farmgate prices with world prices. But in practice, 
 will they benefit? The question is: are SAPs (male/female status)-neutral (i.e., affecting 
 men and women equally), or only (male/female status)-blind (i.e., ignoring the hits/effects 
 on women and assuming them to be the same as on men)? 
 Elson (1991) claims there is a male bias in the macroeconomic thinking 
 behind SAPs because the focus on money-based groups hides a  hidden set 
 of ideas (you think are true) concerning (workers in general/hiring, training, and firing department) and their portion to production. (workers in general/hiring, training, and firing department) are treated as if they were costlessly move (from one place to another)able 
 between different activities and different crops. This ignores the sexual 
 division of labor which decides/figures out that some sorts of work are good for 
 women but no good for men, expressed in rules which require African 
 women to provision the household with food while men control export crop 
 production. This can present a (blocking thing) to SAP goals of reallocating useful things/valuable supplies - women's labor and land in Africa - from the production of 
 non-tradable survival/income crops to tradable export crops. To the extent that 
 SAPS are successful in switching useful things/valuable supplies from non-tradables to trad- 
 
 1 In Malawi, USAID (worked to reach agreement/got through) a 1985 Money-based Policy Reform Program (EPRP) with two 
 changes (helping payment removal and substitution of high analysis for low analysis (material that makes plants grow better)s) and 
 $15 million to be paid over three years (USAID, 1990). After at first cutting the 
 helping payment from 29% to 17%, in 1987/88 the government refused to cut the helping payment further, 
 claiming that transportation cost increases, the mix of hungry Mozambique runaways, 
 and falling behind maize production needed/demanded an increase in helping payment to medium-level (material that makes plants grow better) price 
 increases. USAID then cancelled the EPRP without releasing $5 million. (after that), the 
 price of (material that makes plants grow better) has increased 50%, although the helping payment has remained at 24% of delivered 
 cost. Cameroon started a (material that makes plants grow better) Subsector Removal Program (FSSRP) in 1988, when the 
 helping payment was cut from 65 to 45%, decreasing government expenses from 6 to 2.4 billion 
 (10 9 ) CFA. It was projected that the helping payment would decrease to 30% in 1989, 10% in 1990, 
 and 0 in 1991. Because it takes a while for (material that makes plants grow better) to filter down to the farmer, however, 
 (material that makes plants grow better) price increases had not yet happened in December 1989, when this study started. 
 
 143 
 
 FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON 
 
 ables, women lose out as more powerful men control the (money made/good things received) that result 
 from the added (rewards or reasons for doing something) to produce tradables or export crops. 
 If this is true, then what macroeconomic policies and SAP changes 
 should be changed? In this paper, I argue against the removal of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 payments, at least for women farmers growing food crops. Section 1 shows 
 that even with (material that makes plants grow better) payments, (material that makes plants grow better) use is very low and women are 
 just starting to use it on food crops in Malawi and Cameroon. A further 
 decrease of the (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment would eliminate its use on food crops, 
 because lack of cash and (not totally pure/not totally correct) credit markets are the main restrictions 
 limiting women farmers' use of chemical (material that makes plants grow better). Section 2 explores 
 government's other options to allow women access to (material that makes plants grow better), e.g., an 
 increase in food product prices to offset the increased price of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 after helping payment removal andjor an (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of women's credit clubs; and 
 finds that women farmers, especially female headed families, are often 
 net buyers of food and too poor to want credit. Section 3 ends/decides that 
 these options, while desirable in the long run, are not substitutes for 
 making (material that makes plants grow better) cheaper now via a helping payment targeted at women. If government wants to preserve food security and encourage more (material that makes plants grow better) use on 
 food crops, then it should target (material that makes plants grow better) payments at women farmers who 
 produce food crops. 
 1. CONSTRAINTS TO FERTILIZER USE 
 
 Data on (material that makes plants grow better) use from both Malawi and Cameroon show that it is 
 very low: on average one 50-kg bag per hectare is applied. Malawi data in 
 Table 1 from 501 families show that female-headed families use 
 much less (material that makes plants grow better) (34.4 vs. 51.3 kgjha) and have smaller farm size 
 (0.8 vs. 1.33 ha) than male-headed families. Data personally collected 
 from 36 families in English speaker and Francophone Cameroon agree: 
 average (material that makes plants grow better) use is 52 kgjha, still lower on maize (30 kgjha), because 
 
 TABLE 1 
 Differences between male and female-headed families, Blantyre, Lilongwe, and Kasungu 
 Districts, 1986 j87 
 
 Number farmers 
 Total (material that makes plants grow better) (kg) 
 (material that makes plants grow better) use (kgjha) 
 Landholding size (ha) 
 
 Male 
 HjHeads 
 
 Female 
 HjHeads 
 
 349 
 72.41 
 51.28 
 1.33 
 
 152 
 30.24 
 34.41 
 0.80 
 
 Source: Malawi Fast (material that makes plants grow better) Survey, 1987. 
 
 t value 
 
 Prob. 
 
 5.18 
 2.29 
 
 0.0001 
 0.011 
 0.0001 
 
 7.84 
 
 144 
 
 C.H. GLADWIN 
 
 two-thirds of the women interviewed (in the English speaker North-West 
 area of control/area of land) use no (material that makes plants grow better) at all. 
 One reason farmers apply such low levels of (material that makes plants grow better) is that they 
 increase its use until the ratio of the not important product of (material that makes plants grow better) to its 
 real price ( Pfert!Pmaize) is not 1 but greater than or equal to 2 (Timmer, 
 1974, p. 200). The ratio is usually 2 or more because farmers cannot base 
 their decisions to use or increase (material that makes plants grow better) on the judging requirement of profit 
 (biggest increase/best possible extent) alone. They also face restrictions such as lack of cash, credit, 
 knowledge of how to apply (material that makes plants grow better), and risk. Another reason comes from/is caused by 
 the nature of the sexual division of farming-based labor in the African 
 household (Gladwin and McMillan, 1989). Although portion of labor 
 rules change/differ  across areas, even within the same country, in Malawi and 
 North-West Cameroon women produce the survival/income crop maize, and 
 men produce a cash crop: tobacco and combination maize in Malawi, and coffee 
 and cocoa in Cameroon. In Malawi, women produce 'local' maize which is 
 90% of total maize production and groundnuts as a cash crop; in Cameroon, 
 women produce only the food crops of maize, yams and beans. The very 
 nature of this division of labor often leaves women without any cash with 
 which to buy (material that makes plants grow better) for survival/income maize. Either they are dependent on 
 their husbands or sons to buy (material that makes plants grow better) for them, or they must take some 
 food away from the family to sell, to buy (material that makes plants grow better) for the next season. This 
 is very hard for women to do; it is impossible in a maize-shortage household, 
 (in other words) one which regularly produces less maize than it uses/eats. The result is 
 that men buy (material that makes plants grow better) for women's maize if they have the money after 
 buying (material that makes plants grow better) for their own cash crop, and women apply little or no 
 (material that makes plants grow better) on survival/income maize. 
 Restrictions limiting (material that makes plants grow better) use 
 
 It is necessary to show a link between (not totally pure/not totally correct) credit markets and 
 women farmers' low use of (material that makes plants grow better). Multiple moving backward analysis, with 
 results shown in Table 2, shows the link between smallholders' lack of cash 
 and/or credit and their individual (material that makes plants grow better) use. The data set was from 
 Malawi's Fast (material that makes plants grow better) Survey of 1986/87, carried out as a add to/addition 
 to the Once-a-year Survey of Farming, and consisted of individual (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) data from 185 Blantyre farmers, 145 Lilongwe farmers, and 196 
 Kasungu farmers. The data set has the advantage that all fields were 
 measured by experienced technicians, and is representative of districts with 
 the biggest farmers (Lilongwe, Kasungu) and smallest farmers (Blantyre). 
 Moving backward analysis is not used here to show (things causing other things to happen), but only the 
 link between the amount of (material that makes plants grow better), CFERT (or amount per hectare, 
 CFHA) and five (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)). These include: the amount of land 
 
 FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON 
 
 145 
 
 TABLE 2 
 Moving backward on amount of (material that makes plants grow better) per hectare (CFHA), Blantyre, Lilongwe and Kasungu, 
 1986/87 
 Independant 
 (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 B 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 AREA 
 CURCLUB1 
 NO CASH 
 GENDER 
 CMANURE 
 
 100.97 
 -0.19 
 36.33 
 -85.99 
 0.73 
 21.25 
 
 N 
 F 
 
 R square 
 Signif. F 
 
 ?-value 
 12.37 
 -5.25 
 4.50 
 -12.33 
 0.11 
 2.45 
 
 0.0001 
 0.0001 
 0.0001 
 0.0001 
 0.91 
 0.0146 
 
 498 
 57.79 
 0.369 
 0.0001 
 
 Source: Fast (material that makes plants grow better) Survey, 1987. 
 
 helped grow (AREA), a dummy (number or thing that changes) representing the farmer's participation 
 in a credit club described in the next section (cuRcLuBl ), a dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 which equals 1 if the farmer said his reason for nonuse of (material that makes plants grow better) was 
 'Insufficient money' (NOCASH), a dummy (number or thing that changes) representing the (male/female status) 
 of the farmer which is 1 if the farmer is male and 0 if female, and a changeable 
 CMANURE representing application of poop/fertilizer I (apply fertilizer) which may either 
 be a substitute or complement for chemical (material that makes plants grow better). The price paid by 
 farmers for (material that makes plants grow better) is left-out because it is constant across Malawi, due to 
 the monopsonistic control of ADMARC, the parastatal marketing board. 
 In fact, previous studies that tested for a price response have shown no 
 significant effect of (material that makes plants grow better) price on amount demanded and even found 
 the wrong sign (Nyondo, 1987, pp. 116-126). 
 Results in Table 2 show that, as expected, access to credit has a very 
 significant and positive effect on the amount of (material that makes plants grow better) applied by an 
 individual smallholder. The signs on the significant (numbers that change/things that change) say that the 
 cash restriction decreases (material that makes plants grow better) use significantly, but membership in a 
 farmers' credit club increases it significantly. Also, the positive sign 
 on poop/fertilizer (online or paper form that asks for a job, money, admission, etc.) shows it is a complement to chemical (material that makes plants grow better) in 
 Malawi, probably for two reasons. First, richer smallholders can afford 
 to buy chemical (material that makes plants grow better) and also enough animals to make poop/fertilizer. 
 Second, farmers report that their soils need both chemical and organic 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s: chemical to provide nitrogen and organic to help soil structure. 
 The amount of land helped grow is linked positively with the total amount of 
 (material that makes plants grow better) (cFERT ); while it is linked negatively with the amount of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 
 146 
 
 C.H. GLADWIN 
 
 per hectare (cFHA). This is because the smaller the area helped grow, the 
 more (material that makes plants grow better) is poured on- holding other (numbers that change/things that change) (access to cashjcredit) 
 constant. The last thing just mentioned result is not a surprise when (material that makes plants grow better) comes as an 
 not dividable input of 50-kg bags to most smallholders. An different explanation for this result is that farmers try to overcome smaller (areas of owned land) 
 by using more (material that makes plants grow better), given they can overcome the NOCASH restriction. 
 Note that all (numbers that change/things that change) except (male/female status) are highly significant (P = 0.0001). 
 Then why have we included (male/female status) as an (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score))? Just to 
 show it has no direct effect on (material that makes plants grow better) use: although women household 
 heads apply completely less (material that makes plants grow better) per hectare than men heads, (male/female status) 
 does not matter when one holds constant access to credit and cash. But 
 without access to credit or cash, women household heads apply less 
 (material that makes plants grow better) than men, and get lower produces and incomes as a result (Due, 
 1991). 
 2. ALTERNATIVE POLICIES TO A FERTILIZER SUBSIDY: WILL THEY WORK 
 FOR WOMEN? 
 
 With (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment removal, there will be little or no (material that makes plants grow better) bought 
 by women farmers who are the smallest of the smallholders, because lack 
 of cash and credit are the main restrictions limiting their use of chemical 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s. Women's lack of (material that makes plants grow better) use means they cannot now strengthen 
 survival/income maize production and raise factor working well; in the future, 
 this may endanger the high level of food independence usually/(in the past) 
 enjoyed in both Malawi and Cameroon (Goheen, 1991). Government will 
 then have to import maize, the main survival/income crop, or suffer greater 
 levels of (bad food quality), and the cost of importing maize may be greater than 
 the cost of giving money to (material that makes plants grow better). 
 But, counter the helping payment removal advocates- usually found in the World 
 Bank, USAID, and Ministries of Finance - one way to offset the rising 
 price of (material that makes plants grow better) after helping payment removal is to increase producer prices of 
 food and cash crops which are kept (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low. It is true that producer 
 prices are kept (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low: in Malawi in 1986/87, maize prices had 
 been low relative to other cash crops, e.g., tobacco, cotton, groundnuts. In 
 Cameroon in 1989, farmgate prices of coffee, used by smallholders to buy 
 (material that makes plants grow better) for maize and coffee, were one-third to one-half of world coffee 
 prices. 
 Unfortunately, governments are more likely to decrease (material that makes plants grow better) payments than to increase (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low producer prices, because since colonial 
 times, paying farmers less than the world price has been the way African 
 governments tax farmers (Bates, 1981). In 1989, for example, the Cameroon 
 government was in the 2nd year of a (material that makes plants grow better) Subsector Helping payment Removal 
 
 FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON 
 
 147 
 
 Program, but it also cut farmgate coffee prices in half in December, to 
 keep them at one-third the world price. So farmers were faced with a 
 double whammy: a 100% decrease in producer prices and a 50% increase 
 in the price of (material that makes plants grow better). 
 Even when government does increase producer prices, as the Malawi 
 government has done with maize prices since 1987, increasing the price of 
 maize cannot by itself substitute for keeping the price of (material that makes plants grow better) low, as 
 most smallholders do not sell maize and are in fact net buyers of maize. 
 Peters and Herrera (1988) claim that less than 15% of Malawi's smallholders are fully independent in maize production. Lele (1989, p. 16) terms the 
 structure of Malawi's farming a "(existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things)-within-(existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things)" structure, 
 within which/by which the small farm part/area is clear/separate from the large "estate" part/area and 
 smallholders are split into two groups: a minority who have a farm size 
 large enough "to produce a marketable extra and capable of taking risks 
 and a common majority experiencing spoiling or near money-based 
 (state of being unable to move)." Increasing the producer price of maize will this way be harmful 
 not only to the city-based  poor but also to the (away from cities) majority who buy maize. 
 According to Harrigan (1987), the only hope of increasing their incomes is 
 to encourage their use of (material that makes plants grow better) on survival/income (local) maize varieties, so 
 that more of their land can be taken out of survival/income and planted to cash 
 crops. Is this being done? No, 1984-1990 data show hectarage is stable in 
 local maize varieties and the supply inelastic (0.07) (USAID, 1990). For 
 farmers unable to "withdraw" into independence or an "(process of people making, selling, and buying things) of feeling of love," 
 higher food prices can hurt (Hyden and Peters, 1991). 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of credit facilities: a policy other choice? 
 (in almost the same way), government's (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of credit facilities, desirable in the 
 long run, is not a good policy other choice to a (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment targeted at 
 women in the short run. Why not? To answer this question, smallholders' 
 decisions to join a credit club were modeled with separate, pre-decided 
 'decision tree models' after personal interviews with 39 farmers in Malawi 
 in 1987 (Figs. 1 and 2) and 36 farmers in Cameroon in 1989 (Fig. 3) 2 . The 
 tree model is a (not numbers-based) research method which combines in a logical 
 order the reasons - decision judging requirements ( &amp;lt; ) ) - why some farmers choose one 
 The samples personally interviewed in both countries were chosen by snowball sampling 
 and are fairly representative. In Lilongwe, Kasungu and Salima districts, Malawi, 33 of 40 
 were household heads, 26 farmers were credit club members, and 14 were not; 22 farmers 
 got credit for (material that makes plants grow better) in 1986/87, while 18 did not; 17 farmers were women household 
 heads, 20 were male heads, and three were couples interviewed together. The Cameroon 
 sample included 21 women, 14 men, and 1 couple in both English speaker (Kom area) and 
 Francophone (Dschang area) Cameroon. 
 2 
 
 148 
 
 C. H. GLADWIN 
 
 3'1 e.ases 
 I 
 
 (Get Credit for Some (material that makes plants grow better); Don't) 
 .j. 
 
 1Is there a club in the area 
 Don't 
 you have asked to join and been- No -7 Get . 
 denied entrance by the club club 
 Cred1t 
 (group that decides or promotes something) or local leader? 
 7'- ea.s 
 I 
 
 e5 
 
 Yes, club exists 
 
 "' 
 
 2 Are you too old, poor, and 
 have too small a garden and/or too -yes""""""? Don't 
 many (money owed) to be admitted to a 
 ask to 
 farmers or women's club? 
 join 
 no 
 .j, 
 3 If 
 
 no: 
 
 (;&amp;lt;./ 
 
 &amp;lt;!a. ses 
 
 a woman: are you married 
 to a man· who is or will be a member of 
 a farmers' club and has he agreed 
 to get (material that makes plants grow better) for you? 
 }- yes 
 
 : 
 
 'i cases 
 
 5 Can 
 
 you join a 
 Women's Club?&#126; 
 yes 
 
 &mdash;--_::::1 
 
 19 ca s;es 
 
 yes&#126; : 
 
 I 
 
 &#126; 
 
 CQ S 
 
 eS 
 
 left&#126;&#126;e &#126;&#126;rmers' 
 f- 
 
 club or has it 
 defaulted? 
 no 
 
 \ 
 
 no - - - 7 Don't Join; 
 No Credit 
 
 6 Are you so afraid of the 
 amount of the problems that may happen next if 
 you don't repay (because you've never had a 
 loan before or someone close to you has had- yes 
 a bad experience with repayment) that you 
 can't take the risk of not repaying? 
 
 no : :::&amp;lt;. """f 
 
 9 
 
 4 
 
 &#126;itS E?S 
 
 l 
 . 
 
 No Credlt 
 
 3 c.ce.se s 
 
 7 Has your club as a whole 
 defaulted on a previous loan 
 yes --7 No Credit 
 so that in 1986/87 they allowed you no credit? 
 eA. 
 I 
 no: &#126;3 c.zses 
 
 Lf 
 
 ses 
 
 ... 
 
 Go to figure 2 
 
 Fig. 1. Malawi farmer's decision to get credit for some (material that makes plants grow better). 
 
 different, e.g. [get credit for (material that makes plants grow better)], while others decide to "go down 
 another path" and choose another result, e.g. [buy it with cash] (Gladwin, 1989). Because the decision judging requirements are brought-out from farmers in 
 open-ended interviews, they can be used to identify farmers' restrictions as 
 perceived by the farmers themselves. A test of the model is given by 
 comparing the result ([_( ]_)) chosen by the farmer with the result that 
 the model sends himjher to, based on hisjher responses to the questions 
 in the judging requirements. 
 The first seven judging requirements in the tree in Fig. 1 are 'elimination-by-aspects' 
 judging requirements that quickly eliminate a farmer from getting credit via a farmers' 
 
 FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON 
 
 0&amp;lt;3 
 
 149 
 
 cases 
 
 8 Cost 
 
 of Buying &amp;lt;C...&amp;lt;.. Cost of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 Fert. thru ADMARC 
 on Credit? 
 
 &#126; 
 
 I 
 
 no&#126; 
 
 yes: Ol.O 
 
 j 
 
 3 
 
 Qa :;;es 
 
 9 HaveJ. you the cash 
 to buy all of the fertilize 
 you need? 
 I 
 '-..._ 
 yes:3 
 no:/7-c:&amp;gt;t:tses 
 
 I 
 10 Have 
 
 other pressing 
 needs for this cash, and can 
 you make more money by investing 
 it on other activities than 
 
 ;::''"' ''"iliw-? \ _____ 
 BUY FERTILIZER 
 WITH CASH 
 
 yi 
 
 GETSOME CREDIT 
 FOR FERTILIZER 
 
 10 cases 
 
 3 C!Clses 
 
 llis there a risk 
 of your not being able 
 to pay back the loan? 
 
 7 
 
 of L&amp;lt;. Risk of 
 Not repaying 
 Inviting Hunger 
 the loan 
 Now 
 
 12Risk 
 
 yt: 
 
 no \ E T CREDIT 
 FOR FERTILIZER 
 
 &#126;0 
 
 r CaGes 
 
 BUY FERTILIZER 
 WITH CASH 
 
 'f Qases 
 (.;;(. e.vrors) 
 
 Fig. 2. Stage 2 of Malawi farmer's decision to get credit. 
 
 club which reach. 25% of Malawi's farmers, or a women's club, organized 
 by the Women's Programme. They include conditions such as: the farmer is 
 rejected for (act of letting someone enter/speaking the truth about something bad) to a farmers' club by other club members (judging requirement 
 1); the farmer is so hopelessly poor that hejshe expects to be denied 
 entrance to the credit club so won't even try to join (judging requirement 2); the 
 (woman) farmer is married to a member of a farmers' club and he by law 
 must get the (material that makes plants grow better) on credit for her (judging requirement 3), unless he (or his 
 whole club) has defaulted on a previous loan and now cannot receive credit 
 (judging requirement 4); there is no women's club in the area which gives credit for 
 (material that makes plants grow better) directly to the women (judging requirement 5); women lack confidence in or 
 (state of knowing someone or something well) with credit clubs so that they won't take the risk of not repaying 
 the loan (judging requirement 6); the farmer or hisjher whole club cannot now receive 
 
 150 
 
 C. H. GLADWIN 
 
 1Are you or wife a member 
 of a MIDENO (women's) club 
 and are they giving (material that makes plants grow better) 
 / on credit to you t&#126;is &#126;? 
 
 'f cczse.s 
 
 yes : 
 / 
 
 GET CREDIT &#126;&amp;lt;&mdash;-' 
 'f c_ a. s es 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Are you or your husband 
 a member of Coffee Cooperative? 
 
 I 
 
 (;z f) 
 
 no : 3&#126; C! ctses 
 
 2 
 
 yes : ;&amp;lt;. 3 
 
 \ 
 
 ca. ses 
 
 enough coffee last 
 year to buy this year's 
 (material that makes plants grow better) out of last 
 year's coffee? 
 yes: 
 
 13/ 
 j 
 
 13 
 
 ct&amp;lt;.ses 
 
 'Are you a member of the 
 Credit Union, so that you 
 can borrow up to the amount 
 you have saved with them? 
 
 \no: /0yes: 
 
 (5 -¥) 
 
 6 Have 
 
 G 
 
 other, more important uses for 
 Credit Union money (e.g. school fees, 
 books, sickness, clothing) than 
 (material that makes plants grow better)? 
 \ 
 no: J. 
 
 j 
 
 - 
 
 S' ca.se..s: yes 
 
 GET CREDIT for (material that makes plants grow better) 
 from Credit Union; pay 
 interest rate 
 
 I reduce. 
 
 no : 
 
 5 Belong to a n jangi, 
 and have saved up enough 
 to cover (material that makes plants grow better) loan? 
 
 I 
 
 \ 
 
 1/ 
 
 7- 
 
 no: 
 
 7 Have other, J!!Q!Sl child!rtant uses 
 for njangi money than (material that makes plants grow better)? 
 
 f 
 
 /3 cases 
 
 r--&#126; 
 yes: 
 
 /o: 
 GET CREDIT for (material that makes plants grow better) 
 from njangi; pay interest 
 
 \ 
 
 / 
 
 I 
 
 GET FERTILIZER 
 FROM COFFEE COOP 
 (Cash Transaction) 
 
 no ' 
 
 /&amp;lt;t Qcvses 
 
 -13 Sell 
 
 cases 
 
 \ 
 
 &#126;: 1c:&amp;gt;&#126;5 
 DON'T GET CREDIT 
 FOR FERTILIZER 
 
 J'f cc1ses 
 
 ( // ¥ ) 
 Fig. 3. Cameroon farmer's decision to get credit for (material that makes plants grow better). 
 
 credit due to a previous default on their part (judging requirement 7). If any of these 
 conditions holds, credit as an option is eliminated for the farmer. 
 If the farmer 'passes' these restrictions successfully, he or she passes to 
 the 'ordering aspect' in judging requirement 8, on which he or she (not numbers-based) 
 (makes small) the cost of owning (material that makes plants grow better). The tree model is this way a separate 
 version of 'maximization subject to restrictions', the common choice princi- 
 
 FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON 
 
 151 
 
 ple of micro-money flow/money-based studies. If the cost of buying (material that makes plants grow better) is much less than the 
 cost of getting it on credit, the farmer 'goes down' the left hand path of the 
 tree. The farmer then buys (material that makes plants grow better) if: hejshe has enough cash to buy all 
 the (material that makes plants grow better) needed (judging requirement 9) and he/she hasn't other more pressing 
 needs for the cash such as school fees, clothing, etc. (judging requirement 10); or 
 hejshe has other uses for the cash so needs the credit, but thinks there's a 
 risk of not being able to pay back the loan (judging requirement 11), and this risk of 
 non-repayment is greater than the risk of 'inviting hunger' if you grow 
 maize varieties (local or combination) without (material that makes plants grow better) (judging requirement 12). Why is not 
 repaying a credit loan so risky? Farmers in default report that club 
 members and extension agents steal their animals, oxcarts, and even the 
 doors and roofs to their houses to hold until the farmer or a family member 
 repays the loan. 
 On the other hand, the farmer 'goes down' the right hand branch of the 
 tree and gets the credit for at least some of the needed (material that makes plants grow better) if he 1she 
 thinks there is little difference in the costs of owning (material that makes plants grow better) or he j she 
 does not have all the cash needed to buy it or has other more pressing 
 needs for this cash and can also pass the risk. restrictions. The farmer will 
 take the risks of credit, (in other words), of not being able to pay back the loan, if hejshe 
 thinks "you invite hunger if you grow local maize without (material that makes plants grow better)", and 
 judges the danger of hunger to be greater than the danger of not being able 
 to pay back the loan (judging requirement 12). 
 Of what use is the model? By illustrating the thinking farmers use to 
 make this decision, the model identifies the main factors limiting credit 
 use, and for the purposes of this paper, the major restrictions limiting 
 women's credit use. In this sample, these are: lack of a credit club in the 
 village (4 women), fear of not being able to pay back the loan (3 women); and 
 being too old or poor to want credit (2 women). Half of the women in the 
 sample this way eliminate the credit option quickly, in the first stage of the 
 decision process, without (thinking about/when one thinks about) parts of cost or riskiness. I decide that there are too many restrictions on women farmers for much 
 credit (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) to be (able to be done) in the short run. Although desirable in the 
 long run, it is not a good policy substitute for a (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment targeted at 
 women in the short run. 
 
 'Credit' decision in the Cameroon 
 Cameroon farmers do not process the same decision judging requirements as do 
 Malawians, when deciding whether or not to get credit, because there are 
 practically no credit clubs in Cameroon. Of 36 farmers interviewed, 32 say 
 no to judging requirement 1, "Is there a club in your area that you can join," in the 
 information-processing model of Fig. 3. Only four farmers interviewed in 
 
 152 
 
 C.H. GLADWIN 
 
 Cameroon reported receiving MIDENO government credit; two of them 
 belonged to a MIDENO women's club. In 1989, they had received their 
 first credit for (material that makes plants grow better). 
 But there are other options called credit, supplied through the local 
 coffee cooperative (judging requirement 2, figure 3), the local credit union (judging requirement 4), 
 or the native (to) njangi or tontin systems of saving (judging requirement 5), to which 
 almost every Cameroonian belongs. Members of the local coffee cooperative sell their collected coffee in January and receive their next year's 
 (material that makes plants grow better) at the same time, to be applied in February thru April to both 
 coffee and maize (judging requirement 3). This is called 'credit' but strictly speaking, 
 this is a cash transaction, and the cooperative does not give more (material that makes plants grow better) 
 than can be paid for with last year's coffee. Members of local credit unions 
 save on a monthly basis for a year and borrow against that money during 
 the second year; but they cannot borrow more than what they have saved. 
 Members of an njangi can do the same, (in other words), build up their money to 
 borrow during the 2nd year, or put money into a common pot every month 
 to receive twelve times that amount once a year. With these sources of 
 'credit', more men get credit from the coffee cooperative (8 of a total 13), 
 and more women do not get credit (11 of a total 14). This is because 
 women in some areas (the Northwest) are not allowed to raise coffee for 
 sale, and so do not have a cash crop to save up enough njangi money to 
 cover a (material that makes plants grow better) loan. 
 3. CONCLUSION 
 
 Policy options are limited for African governments trying to juggle SAP 
 needed things with women farmers' demands for low-priced (material that makes plants grow better) as a 
 way to strengthen food production. This paper has shown that policy options 
 that work for men farmers - an increase in producer prices, an (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) 
 of credit - do not often work for women farmers, because they tend to be 
 net buyers of food who suffer when food prices rise, producers of survival/income and not cash crops, and too poor to want credit. To the extent that 
 SAPs are successful in switching more useful things/valuable supplies from non-tradables to 
 tradables, women will be unable to get access to (material that makes plants grow better) to grow their 
 non-tradable crops more intensively. Is there a solution to this two-headed problem? 
 One solution is to target (material that makes plants grow better) payments at women farmers for food 
 production. This can be done via women's credit clubs, like those of 
 MIDENO in Cameroon and the Women's Programme in Malawi. Government can strengthen each women's club's 'revolving credit fund', used to 
 bail out individual defaulting members, by giving the club a small amount 
 when a club member supervises the use of paid-for (material that makes plants grow better) on 
 another's farm. Credit clubs can this way serve not only to expand credit but 
 
 FERTILIZER SUBSIDY REMOVAL PROGRAMS IN MALAWI AND CAMEROON 
 
 153 
 
 also to supervise the proper use of paid-for (material that makes plants grow better) bought with cash. 
 Will there be too much leakage of this helping payment from women's food crops to 
 men's cash crops? The answer comes from one Cameroonian who allows 
 his wife to fertilize her maize while he neglects to fertilize his coffee: "I 
 don't like to be hungry." 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
 The author is thankful to Mark Malin and Mercedes Rosalsky for 
 computer work, and farmers interviewed in Malawi and Cameroon for 
 hospitality. 
 REFERENCES 
 Bates, R., 1981. Markets and states in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Africa. University of California, Berkeley, 
 CA. 
 Dixon, R., 1982. Women in Farming: Counting the Labor Force in Dev.eloping Countries. Pop. Dev. Rev., 8: 558-559. 
 Due, J.M., 1991. Policies to overcome the negative effects of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programs 
 on African female-headed families. In: C. Gladwin (Editor), (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 and African Women Farmers. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, FL, pp. 103-127. 
 Elson, D., 1991. Male bias in macro-money flow/money-based studies: the case of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something). In: D. 
 Elson (Editor), Male Bias in the Development Process. Manchester University Press, 
 Manchester, pp. 164-190. 
 Gladwin, C., 1989. (having to do with writing about people) Decision Tree Modeling. Smart, Newbury Park, CA. 
 Gladwin, C. and McMillan, D., 1989. Is a turnaround in Africa possible without helping 
 African women to farm? Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 37: 345-69. 
 Goheen, M., 1991. The belief systems and political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of (male/female status): Women and land in Nso, 
 Cameroon. In: C. Gladwin (Editor), (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) and African Women Farmers. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, FL, pp. 239-256. 
 Harrigan, J., 1987. Price Policy in Malawi. Mimeo, Ministry of Farming, Lilongwe, 
 Malawi. 
 Hyden, G. and Peters, P., 1991. Debate on the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of feeling of love: is it a useful tool for 
 (male/female status) analysis? In: C. Gladwin (Editor), (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) and African Women 
 Farmers. University of Florida Press, Gainesville, FL, pp. 301-336. 
 Lele, U., 1989. (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something), farming-based development and the poor: some lessons 
 from the Malawian experience. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
 Nyondo, F., 1987. Price (quality of quickly responding to things) of producers of basic food crops in Malawi. M.S. 
 statement/book, Food and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL. 
 Peters, P.E. and Herrera, M.G., 1989. Cash cropping, food security and nutrition: the 
 effects of farming-based (making something available for lots of people to buy) among smallholders in Malawi. Mimeo, Harvard Institute of International Development. 
 Timmer, C.P., 1974. The demand for (material that makes plants grow better) in developing countries. Food Res. Inst. 
 Stud., 13: 197-224. 
 Timmer, C.P., Falcon, W. and Pearson, S., 1983. Food Policy Analysis. World Bank, 
 Washington, DC. 
 USAID, 1990. The Malawi (material that makes plants grow better) Helping payment Reduction Program. USAID, Washington, 
 DC. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
