JOURNAL 
 
 OF ENVIRONMENTAL. 
 
 Bidding 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 AND 
 
 MANAGEMENT 
 
 1, 132-149 
 
 (19%) 
 
 Games for (putting a value on something) 
 of Beauty-related 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 Improvements1 
 ALAN RANDALL 
 
 Department 
 
 of Farming-based 
 Lexington, 
 
 Money flow, 
 Kentucky 
 
 University 
 40506 
 
 of Kentucky, 
 
 AND 
 BERRY IVES AND CLYDE EASTMAN 
 Department 
 of Farming-based 
 Money flow 
 and Farming-based 
 Business, 
 New Mexico 
 State University, 
 Las Cruces, 
 New Mexico:88003 
 
 Received March 19, 1974 
 An scientific case study of the benefits of stopping of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage 
 connected with the Four Corners power plant and Navajo mine using the payment-related game 
 way of doing things is presented. Bidding games were carefully designed to avoid the potential 
 problems built into that way of doing things. The results point to/show the existence of big benefits from stopping of this beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage. Group bid curves, not important 
 bid curves, and guesses of the income ability to stretch of bid are presented. The effectiveness of 
 the payment-related game way of doing things is discussed. 
 
 It has proved a hard  and often forbidding job  to credit money-based values to 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. Yet, clear and (based on knowledge and learning) social decision making 
 needs/demands, among other things, an important thing to think about of the money-based costs and benefits of 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. The (problems, delays, etc.) in money-based test are compounded 
 in the case of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements of an beauty-related nature. This article discusses 
 the problems built into the (putting a value on something) of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements and 
 presents a case study in which offering to pay games were used as the (putting a value on something) way of doing things. 
 THE THEORY 
 Beauty-related damage to an outdoor (surrounding conditions), to the extent that it reduces the 
 utility of some people, is a discommodity and its stopping is a valuable thing. 
 Stopping of this kind of external diseconomy is both a nonmarket good, since it is 
 (other people can do it, too), and a public good in the sense of Davis and Whinston [S], since it is 
 unlimited at least over a very big range. That is, added/more people of 
 this kind of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvement can be added without reducing 
 the visibility or beautiful beauty available to each (at least, until crowding happens). Added/more users can be added at near zero not important cost, over a big range. 
 Bradford [2] has presented a possible (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for the (putting a value on something) of public 
 products (that are bought and sold). Traditional demand curves are inappropriate for the analysis of demand for 
 r Journal Article 506, New Mexico State University, Farming-based Experiment Station, Las Cruce 6. 
 The authors are thankful for helpful comments from Ralph d'Arge a nd tuo ancnyrrous reviewers. 
 132 
 Copyright 
 All rights 
 
 0 1974 by School-related Press, Inc. 
 of reproduction 
 in any form reserved. 
 
 BIDDING 
 
 133 
 
 GAMES 
 
 TOTAL 
 
 COSTS 
 
 3 
 
 MARGINAL COSTS 
 
 MARGINAL AGGREGATE BID 
 
 QUANTITY 
 
 FIG. 1. Total optimization 
 
 OF PUBLIC GOOD 
 
 of the amount of public good gave/given. 
 
 public products (that are bought and sold), since the situation is not one of people responding to a parametric 
 price per unit by choosing the right/the proper number of units. Rather, the individual 
 directly arrives at the total value to himself of different given packages. In the case of 
 a public good, the person is unable to exercise any choice over the amount gave/given him, except as a member of the total which makes a total choice. 
 Further, the nature of a public good such as beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements 
 is such that increases in the amount gave/given are not purely (numbers-based) increases, 
 but are more in the nature of improvements in quality. So, the individual values 
 other choice packages of a public good, which may differ in amount and quality. 
 Bradford proposes the idea  of an group bid curve for public products (that are bought and sold). Individual bid curves are simply (not caring) curves passing through a given initial state, 
 with the numeraire good (which can be dollars) on the up-and-down axis and the public 
 good on the flat/left-and-right axis.2 The group bid curve is the math-related (or up-and-down, in 
 diagrammatic analyses) summary of individual bids over the (connected/related) population. 
 The group bid curve is an group benefit curve, as it measures exactly what 
 an correct benefit-cost analysis of provision of a public good would measure as 
 benefits. Using the approach of methodological (the idea that the needs of all people are more important than the needs of a single person), (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the provision of a public good can be (accomplished or gained) by making the most of the excess of group bid 
 over total cost, or equating the first almost the same as group bid (i.e., not important bid) 
 4 If different packages of a public good represented continuous (numbers-based) increases, the individual bid curve would be smooth and would show decreasing not important utility of increasing amounts 
 of the public good. However, Bradford's idea  of different packages different in amount and 
 quality intelligently hints that individual bid curves need be neither smooth nor of constantly decreasing slope. Bradford insists that, (based on knowledge and not what was seen), nothing can be said about the slope of the "demand," or 
 not important bid curve, for a public good of this nature. 
 
 134 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 IVES AND 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 with the not important cost of provision. 3 Figure 1 shows the (producing a lot with very little waste) level of provision 
 of a public good.4 
 THE BIDDING 
 
 GAME 
 
 TECHNIQUE 
 
 It is possible to imagine a.number of ways of doing things for guessing the group bid 
 curve for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. Two general classes of ways of doing things, direct 
 costing ways of doing things and showed/told about demand ways of doing things, have been suggested in the books and applied in scientific studies. Each of these has its (problems, delays, etc.), especially when 
 changed for (putting a value on something) of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. These ways of doing things 
 will be briefly discussed below. Then, a third type of way of doing things, offering to pay games, will 
 be proposed. Payment-related game ways of doing things are themselves not without (problems, delays, etc.), but 
 we will argue that there may be applications for which they are the better or even 
 the only (able to be done) method for scientific studies. Methods of making the most of the reliability 
 of payment-related games will be discussed and an scientific study using offering to pay games will 
 be presented. 
 Direct costing methods. Understood in the idea  of a "not important value of damage 
 avoided by stopping" curve, as proposed by Kneese and Leafy house [12], is the idea of 
 guessing the benefits of stopping of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage by directly guessing 
 the costs (named after/discovered by/caused by) that damage. A few workers have made progress along these 
 lines. For example, Wash  and Seskin [_( 131 have had some success in relating the costs 
 of weakness of human health to levels of air pollution. If all (connected/related) costs of a 
 particular (number of times something happens) of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage can be identified, tested and 
 summed, a curve relating the value of damage avoided to levels of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 improvements can be fitted. The first almost the same as this curve is the "M.V.D.A." 
 curve 
 of Kneese and Leafy house [12]. 
 These costing ways of doing things are possibly sound and may often be (able to be done) in 
 practice. However, (problems, delays, etc.) may be introduced by the unavailability of information 
 and the pricing and accounting problems built into this type of analysis. These 
 ways of doing things will have limited application in (putting a value on something) of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements, since the costs of beauty-related damages may almost never be directly reflected 
 in the market. 
 Showed/told about demand ways of doing things. Showed/told about demand ways of doing things have been widely used for 
 guess of the demand for outdoor recreation, often a nomnarket good.5 A number 
 of applications to (putting a value on something) of the benefits of air pollution stopping have been 
 made [_( 1, 11, 14, 16, IS]. The way of thinking/basic truth/rule is as follows. The benefits of provision of a 
 nonmarket good are guessed from the showed/told about demand for some good substitute. In 
 the case of air pollution stopping, the showed/told about demand for (where there are lots of homes) land is related 
 by moving backward analysis to air pollution concentrations. In city-based areas, it is 
 possible to get information on the concentration of clearly stated/particular air (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) in different parts of the city. If all other (numbers that change/things that change) clearly connected with or related to the (putting a value on something) of city-based  (where there are lots of homes) land can be identified6 and measured, it should be possible to decide/figure out by 
 3 In the approach of methodological (desire to do things for yourself), Pareto-(wasting very little while working or producing something) is still not (accomplished or gained) since the 
 price to the individual cannot equal the not important cost to the individual (which is zero) and allow 
 collection of (good) enough money to cover the total cost of provision. 
 4 In Fig. 1, the group and not important bid curves are drawn as smooth curves agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with 
 reducing not important utility. As pointed out in note 2, this need not be even the typical case. 
 5 See [4]. 
 6Some appropriate (numbers that change/things that change) are size and value of structures on the land, distance from places 
 where services and employment opportunities are focused/mainly located, proportion of park land and open 
 space in the neighborhood, density of population, proportion of different racial and (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minorities 
 in the immediate area, and the (number of times something happens) of violent crimes. 
 
 BIDDING 
 
 GAMES 
 
 135 
 
 moving backward analysis the extent to which air pollution concentrations affect watched/followed 
 land values. In this way, a (substitute-related) measure of the benefits of air pollution stopping is 
 received/got. 
 There are some (problems, delays, etc.) with this type of analysis. Since the value credited 
 to air pollution control is received/made from directly from the moving backward coefficient of the pollution concentration (number or thing that changes), correct results require perfect and complete (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 of the moving backward equation. In an interesting recent study, Wieand [17] claims that 
 when such moving backward models are completelyispecified, the moving backward coefficient of the 
 pollution concentration (number or thing that changes) may not be-significantly different from zero. Another 
 difficulty, (people who work to find information) in the field agree, lies in (understanding/ explanation) of the results. Are all of 
 the benefits of air pollution stopping (taken/took control of) in (where there are lots of homes) land values'? Most 
 think not. For our purposes, the other side of that coin is of interest: Surely some 
 benefits in addition-to the beauty-related benefits are (now under different control). Which added/more benefits? 
 In the case study reported below, the (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) area affected by (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 damage includes city-based  areas, but also (away from cities) and farming-based areas, and big 
 areas of Indian reservation and National Park, Monument, and Forest lands (which 
 are usually not swapped/switched in the market). So, those showed/told about demand ways of doing things 
 now available would seem to be unrelated to the situation faced in our study. 
 Bidding games. In analysis of the demand for outdoor recreation, Davis [7] 
 first discovered/used in the use of payment-related games. During personal interviews, the enumerator 
 follows on repeating/repetitive questioning procedure to bring out responses which enable the fitting 
 of a demand curve for the services offered by a recreation area. People who responded are asked 
 to answer "yes" or "no" to the question: Would you continue to use this recreation 
 area if the cost to you was to increase by X dollars? The amount is varied up or down 
 in repeating questions, and the highest positive response is recorded. Individual responses may then be grouped to create a demand curve for the recreation services 
 given by the area. 
 It seems reasonable that offering to pay games may be changed to fit the guess of the 
 benefits from provision of an unlimited nonmarket good such as stopping 01 
 beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage. Payment-related games would seem to be the most direct 
 method of guessing Bradford's grouplbenefit curve, which is taken from up-and-down 
 summary of individual bid curves. The (problems, delays, etc.) of (understanding/ explanation) which are built into the showed/told about demand ways of doing things developed so far do not happen when the 
 payment-related game way of doing things is used. The data received/got with payment-related games are not cost 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) but people' perceptions of value. So, offering to pay games can be used 
 as it wasations where direct costing ways of doing things are ineffective for lack of data. These 
 advantages of payment-related games over showed/told about demand and direct costing ways of doing things seem 
 (good) enough to permit tries to change the offering to pay game way of doing things for use in (putting a value on something) 
 of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. 
 Some General (things to carefully think about) in the Design 
 
 of Bidding Games 
 
 Bidding games are designed to bring out information on the possible behavior of 
 people who responded when faced with possible situations. In the case study presented 
 below, the purpose of payment-related games is to provide a measure of the benefits of beauty-related 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements by measuring the desire of a sample of people who responded 
 to pay for such improvements. The ehicacy of payment-related games used for this purpose 
 depends on the reliability with which stated possible behavior is converted to 
 action, should the possible situation suggested/said in the game arise really. 
 
 136 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 IVES AND 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 Desire to pay is the behavioral dimension of an hidden (under) attitude: concern 
 for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) quality.' Scientists and public opinion (people who work to find information) have built 
 up a big body of books which thinks about/believes ways in which survey ways of doing things of 
 measuring attitudes and their behavioral part can be made as reliable as 
 possible. Some desirable (features/ qualities/ traits) of such surveys have been identified [S, 91. 
 The possible situation presented should be realistic and believable to people who responded. 
 Interest in what's lifelike and real and believability can be (accomplished or gained) by making happy the following judging requirements for survey 
 instrument design: Test items must have properties like those in the actual situation; situations suggested/said must be concrete rather than symbolic; and test items should 
 involve (put into a hospital)/(made a behavior acceptable) or routinized behavior, where role expectations of people who responded are well defined. Where the behavioral strong need under study are affected 
 by attitudes about some different things, the test test/list of questions must be designed 
 to focus upon those attitudes which are (connected/related). An example may be helpful. In the 
 case study reported here, desire to pay added/more taxes to (accomplish or gain with effort) beauty-related 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvement is affected by attitudes toward (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) quality, 
 but also by attitudes toward the current tax money and attitudes toward the idea of 
 receptors of (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) paying to get stopping of (things sent out or given off). If the survey is 
 carried out for the purpose of measuring the benefits of stopping, the test instrument 
 must be designed to take understanding of the different (many different kinds of people or things) attitudes which affect 
 desire to pay and to allow alone of the (connected/related) attitude-related dimensions. 
 Since stopping of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage is an unlimited, public 
 good, offering to pay games meant to provide data for (putting a value on something) of that good must be 
 designed to avoid the effects of the person (who takes advantage of kind people without repaying them) problem, which encourages nonrevelation of preferences. One method would be to design games in which each person who responded 
 is told that all people of the good would pay for it on a almost the same  basis, this way eliminating the possibility of (taking advantage of kind people without repaying them). 
 With careful design of payment-related games to make sure that the responses recorded are 
 (describe the future)ive of behavior, it should be possible to use the payment-related way of doing things to guess 
 the benefits of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements with reasonable (quality of being very close to the truth or true number). 
 AN EMPIRICAL 
 
 APPLICATION: 
 
 ESTIMATION 
 OF THE BENEFITS OF ABATEMENT 
 OF 
 AESTHETIC ENVIRONMENTAL 
 DAMAGES ASSOCIATED 
 WITH THE FOUR CORNERS STEAM ELECTRIC 
 GENERATING 
 PLANT 
 At New Mexico State University, research is under way to examine the (how money affects people's lives) hits/effects of development of the quickly expanding coal strip-mining and 
 steam electric generation industry in the Four Corners Area (southwestern United 
 States), and to (describe the future) the hits/effects of other choice policies with respect to (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 management and money-based development, as such policies would affect the industry. 
 One part/face  of this research needed/demanded guess of the benefits of stopping of beauty-related 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage connected with the Four Corners power plant at Fruitland, 
 NM, and the Navajo mine which provides its raw energy source-low energy, low 
 sulfur, high ash, sub-bituminous coa1.8 
 'i Three dimensions of attitudes are recognized [S]: (1) a thinking-related dimension, (2) an affectual 
 dimension, and (3) a behavioral dimension. 
 8 The following facts may provide some idea of the importance of this operation and its related 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) problems. In 1970, the power plant had a ability (to hold or do something) of 2,080 MW. The mine provides 
 
 BIDDING 
 
 GAMES 
 
 137 
 
 The mineepower plant complex causes a few kinds of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 damage. (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.)s, sulfur oxides and nitrous oxides are given off into the air. The 
 bad effects of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) on visibility is carefully thought about/believed the most important 
 beauty-related hit/effect of the complex. The strip-mining process will create some beauty-related 
 damage. Although the soil banks will be leveled, reclamation in the sense of reestablishing a doable/possible plant and animal eco-system is uncertain. Transmission lines 
 radiate from the plant in a few directions, passing through the Navajo Reservation 
 and bringing the assorted stuff of development to a (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) which is in some places 
 very beautiful and otherwise untouched.g 
 &amp;It was decided t o use offering to pay games to measure the benefits of stopping of the 
 beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage connected with the Four Corners power plant and the 
 Navajo mine."' (large/relatively large) attention was loyal to/was dedicated to the design and development of 
 payment-related games which provide a reliable estimator of these benefits. 
 Questiontzaire 
 
 Design 
 
 The payment-related games were part of prepared schedules designed for use in a personal 
 interview survey of samples of users of the Four Corners Interstate Air Quality 
 Control Area (surrounding conditions) (i.e., residents and recreational visitors to the area). 
 In preparation for the payment-related games, people who responded were asked a series of questions 
 about (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) matters, to focus their attention on that topic. Then, the subject 
 of the coal-electricity complex in the Four Corners area was clearly raised. The 
 people who responded were shown three sets of photographs showing three levels of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage around the Four Corners Power Plant, near Fruitland, NM. 
 Set A showed the plant about 1969, before installation of some added/more (things sent out or given off) control equipment, producing its historical maximum (things sent out or given off) of air (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.). Another photograph showed the spoil banks as they appear following stripmining, but before leveling. A third photograph showed electricity transmission lines 
 marking the (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land). Set A showed the highest level of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth)damage, 
 and 
 correctly represented the actual situation in the early years of operation of the plant. 
 Set B showed an (between beginner and expert) level of damage. One photograph showed the plant 
 about 1972, after added/more controls had reduced (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things sent out or given off) (i.e., the type of 
 (things sent out or given off) most destructive of visibility). Another showed the spoil banks leveled but 
 not revegetated; a third showed the transmission lines placed less annoyingly (i.e., 
 at some distance from major roads). 
 Set C was meant to show a situation where the businesses continued to operate, 
 coal at a rate of 8.5 millions tons every year. Over the 40 year projected life span of the mine, 31.000 
 areas of land will be stripped. In 1970, about 550 people were employed in the mine and power 
 plant, total value of sales of electricity was $146 million, and 96,000 tons of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.)s, 73,000 tons 
 of sulfur oxides and 66,000 tons of nitrous oxides were given off every year. 
 J To place this beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage in (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), it may be useful to point out that 
 the Four Corners lnterstate Air Quality Control Area includes the greatest concentration of National 
 Parks and Monuments in the United States and some Indian reservations, the largest of which 
 are the Navajo and Hopi reservations. The value of the area for tourism and recreation depends 
 mostly on its weird and unusual (wide views of nature scenes/wide areas of beautiful land), the enjoyment of which needs/demands excellent long distance 
 visibility and depth and color perception. There exists a big minority of "traditional" 
 Native 
 Americans who have strong religious and cultural attachments to nature, and who dislike the air 
 pollution, strip-mining, and transmission lines; witness the lengthy lawsuits about location of the 
 'Tucson Gas and Electric Company transmission line from the San Juan power plant, which is under 
 construction about 9 miles from the Four Corners plant. 
 lo In that part of the overall study which deals with nonaesthetic (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage, direct 
 costing ways of doing things are used. 
 
 138 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 IVES AND 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 but with (almost nothing/very little) (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage. One photograph showed the plant with 
 visible (things sent out or given off) reduced to zero .I1 A second photograph showed a section of dry 
 land in its natural state; it was meant to show a situation where the transmission 
 lines were placed underground and the strip-mined land completely reclaimed. 
 The interviewers pointed out the important features of each set of photographs to each 
 person who responded. For most of the people who responded (with the exception of many recreationists), 
 the situations came from real experience: the residents of the area were familiar 
 with the plant and mine, and their operation for the previous eight years. Most 
 remembered situation A well, for that was exactly how it was only a few years earlier. 
 Situation B was a fairly good guess of the real situation at the time of the 
 interviews. With the help of the photographs, situation C would be easily saw (in your mind). 
 Since the fitting of bid or benefit curves needs/demands an expression of desire to pay 
 for stopping of beauty-related damages, it was necessary to design games based upon 
 appropriate vehicles of payment. The vehicles for payment were chosen to (make as big as possible) the interest in what's lifelike and real and believability of the possible situation suggested/said to people who responded. 
 As will be discussed below, it was necessary to design and use a series of payment-related games, 
 because no one vehicle of payment was appropriate for use with all of the subpopulations sampled. First, the general format related to all games is discussed. Then, 
 the particular games used for particular subpopulations are discussed. 
 For each payment-related game played, people who responded were asked to think about  situation A, the 
 highest level of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage, as the starting point. The payment-related games were 
 designed to bring out the highest amount of money which the person who responded, an adult speaking 
 for his or her household, was willing to pay in order to improve the beauty-related (surrounding conditions) to situation C, and to situation B. Answers were brought out in terms of "yes" or 
 "no" to questions expressed in the form "would you pay amount X . , . ?" A "yes" 
 answer would lead the enumerator to raise the amount and repeat the question, maybe 
 a few times, until a "no" answer was gotten. A "no" answer would lead the enumerator to reduce the amount until a "yes" answer was gotten. The amount which 
 brought out thelhighest i'yes" answer was recorded as the amount the person who responded was 
 willing to pay. 
 It was repeated that the person who responded was to assume that the vehicle for payment 
 used in a particular game was the only possible way in which (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements could be gotten. This condition was designed to (make small) the (number of times something happens) of 
 zero bids as protests against either the zero (related to something you owe) rule understood in "desire to 
 pay" games or the particular method of payment used in a particular game. If a 
 person who responded pointed to/showed that he was willing to pay nothing at all, he was asked a series 
 of questions to find out why. A person who responded pointing to/showing that he did not think about/believe his 
 household to be harmed in any way by (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions)al damage and, therefore, saw 
 no reason to pay for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements was recorded as payment-related zero. If a 
 person who responded pointed to/showed that his zero bid was in protest against the game, his answer was 
 carefully studied as a nonresponse to the payment-related game, since he had refused to play the game 
 by the stated rules.12 
 I1 This feat was good by photographing the plant on a day when all units were shut down. 
 I2 For the purpose of guessing the benefits of stopping, the treatment of "protest bids" as nonresponses is legal/real. By definition, a "protest bid" recognizes that positive benefits from stopping 
 exist, but registers a protest against a particular method of financing stopping. We recognize that 
 the elimination of "protest bids" from analyses aimed at guessing the benefits of stopping fails 
 to remove all downward bias from the responses to particular games: some people who responded may bid low 
 (i.e., underestimate the benefits to themselves of stopping) in conscious or subconscious protest 
 against the method of financing assumed in a game. 
 
 BIDDING 
 
 GAMES 
 
 139 
 
 The selection of appropriate vehicles for payment gave/given a challenge. People are 
 not comfortable with paying for stopping of air pollution and strip-mining damage. 
 However, they are comfortable with paying for many other types of useful products (that are bought and sold)  and 
 services, many of which, such as parks and highway (process of making something much prettier), have beauty-related or 
 "quality of life" parts/pieces. So selection of realistic vehicles for payment was not 
 impossible. However, the blended nature of the affected population meant that 
 no single vehicle was good for data collection among all groups. In the Four 
 Corners Area, the affected population can be divided into three broad groups: (1) 
 the residents of Indian reservations, mostly Navajos, but also including members of 
 a few other tribes; (2) the residents of the nonreservation sections of the area, 
 mostly American-Americans, 
 but with a sprinkling of Spanish-Americans, Native 
 Americans living off the reservations, and other minorities; and (3) the tourists and 
 recreationists who visit the area to enjoy its (like nothing else) natural, historical and cultural 
 attractions. Different versions of the list of questions, using offering to pay games based on 
 different vehicles for payment, were built for use with the three different subpopulations of the affected population. 
 The particular payment-related games used are described below. 
 The sales tax game. Members of all three subpopulations are familiar with the practice of paying sales taxes. For most, this is a frequent event. It is also understood 
 by most that income collected in sales taxes is used to provide useful public services. 
 It does not require much imagination to imagine a public (service business/government unit/power/functioning) collecting a sales 
 tax from residents of the affected area and using the income to finance (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 improvements. 
 The sales tax offering to pay game was used for both the resident samples. It was not used 
 with the recreationist sample, since that group often (bought something for money) only a few items in the 
 area, bringing most of their equipment and supplies with them. This would make a 
 (related to a large area) sales tax mostly not related for that group. 
 People who responded were asked to assume that a (related to a large area) sales tax was collected on all 
 (instances of buying things for money) in the Four Corners Interstate Air Quality Control Area for the purpose 
 of financing (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. I3 All money/money income from the added/more tax 
 would be used for stopping of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage connected with the 
 power plant and mine, and all people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) would be needed/demanded to pay the tax. Recreational 
 visitors to the area would add/give to (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvement through payment of added/more users fees for facilities. 
 The electricity bill game. The monthly electricity bill seemed to be a good vehicle 
 for measurement of desire to pay. It is the production of electricity which causes 
 (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions)al damage, and most people can easily understand that reduction 
 of the damage may raise the cost of operating the industry and that passing these 
 added/more costs on to people of electricity is a not unlikely result. For the 
 residents of those sections of the area outside the Indian reservations, payment of 
 a monthly electricity bill is a routinized behavior. Therefore, a payment-related game based upon 
 the monthly electricity bill was played with the nonreservation resident sample. 
 This game was no good for use with the other two samples. Many residents of 
 "Protest bids" were recorded and used in some other types of analyses. For example, the (number of times something happens) 
 of "protest bids" is an indicator of the relative political (how appropriate (or good), or how inappropriate (or bad) something is) of different methods of financing 
 stopping. 
 IJ The (related to a large area) sales tax would be added/more to current state and local sales taxes and would he 
 charged on all valuable things subject to existing state and local sales taxes. 
 
 140 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 IVES AND 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 Indian reservations do not have electricity available in their homes. Recreation&amp;s do 
 not pay monthly electricity bills while vacationing away from home. 
 The person who responded was first asked the amount of his monthly household electricity 
 bill. He was then asked to imagine that an added charge was added to his electricity 
 bill, and the electricity bills of everyone who uses electricity produced in the Four 
 Corners Area, even people as far away as southern California. All of the added/more 
 money collected would be used to repair the beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage caused 
 as a result of electricity production and transmission in the Four Corners area. 
 The userfees game. Measuring recreationists' desire to pay for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 improvements raised problems which prevented use of the electricity bill and sales 
 tax games. For the recreationists, a acceptable game would need to focus upon (1) the 
 activities connected with vacationing, and (2) the collection of payments while they 
 are in the area and using the (related to a large area) (surrounding conditions). The payment of user fees for 
 recreation services (i.e., campsite, utilities hook-up, boat launching), seemed to be a 
 promising vehicle for a payment-related game for the recreationists. If visitors were concerned 
 about (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) quality in the places where they vacation, the payment of an 
 added/more sum along with their usual daily user fees would provide a good way to 
 express that concern. 
 A sample of recreationists in the national parks, monuments and forests and state 
 parks in the area played a payment-related game based on user fees. Only recreationists who 
 were not residents of the area were included. They were first asked the total sum of 
 user fees they paid daily. They were then asked to suppose user fees in all the recreation 
 areas in the Four Corners area were increased. All the added/more money collected 
 would be spent on (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements. All recreators would pay and the 
 year-round residents would pay, too, through added/more (related to a large area) sales taxes. 
 The Conduct of the Survey 
 
 The payment-related games, as described above, were included in prepared schedules which 
 also served as the test/list of questions for collection of data for (how money affects people's lives) analysis of 
 person (who lawfully lives in a country, state, etc.) (concern about the health of the Earth). Personal interviews were managed and did/done by enumerators 
 who were closely supervised and who had been carefully trained in formal sessions and 
 in two separate field pre-tests of the list of questions. Interviews were managed and did/done during 
 the summer of 1972. 
 Usable lists of questions were completed by 526 residents of nonreservation sections 
 of the Four Corners Interstate Air Quality Control Area, 71 residents of Indian 
 reservations and 150 recreators and tourists from outside the area who were using 
 recreation places/locations within the area. The ratio of reservation residents to nonreservation 
 residents sampled was (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) their total numbers in the (related to a large area) population; 
 the size of the recreationist sample was chosen randomly. People who responded from each 
 subpopulation were selected by layered random sampling. Separation (into layers) was based 
 on concentration of air (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) above the person who responded's home or recreation site, as 
 guessed by an air-related diffusion model developed as part of the larger research 
 project. The population in higher pollution concentration zones waslsampled more 
 heavily. 
 Analysis and Results 
 
 For the desire/decision of three points on the group bid curve, going along with/matching up to the 
 situations, A, B, and C, the payment-related game results were grouped by methods appro- 
 
 BlDDING 
 TABLE 
 
 GAMES 
 
 141 
 
 I 
 
 AGGREGATE 
 BIDS FOR ABATEMENT OF AESTHETIC ENVIRONMENTAL 
 DAMAGE 
 ASSOCIATED 
 WITH THE FOUR CORNERS POWER PLANT, 
 1972 
 
 -.. 
 
 Item 
 -&#126;__&#126;&#126;- 
 
 Situation 
 -..-. &mdash;_: 
 
 (things sent out or given off)(tons of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.)s per year) 
 Level of stopping (tons of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.)s per year) 
 Estimatedregional groupbid ($_$ millions per year) 
 Standard error ($_$ millions per year) 
 95"; Confidence limits ($_$ millions per year) 
 Estimatedconsumer groupbid ($_$ millions per year) 
 Standard error ($_$ millions per year) 
 95"; Confidencelimits ($_$ millions per year) 
 
 A 
 96,CKMI 
 
 0 
 0 
 
 0 
 
 B 
 
 C 
 
 26,000 
 70,oou 
 
 0 
 96:OOO 
 
 15.54 
 1.24 
 f 2.43 
 
 24.57 
 1.52 
 f2.97 
 
 11.25 
 0.68 
 
 19.51 
 0.98 
 f 1.92 
 
 +I.33 
 
 priate to the layered random sampling way of doing things used, to provide guesses of the 
 total bid for the (connected/related) population. Two methods of grouping were used, to 
 create two different group bid curves. 
 (1) The results of the sales tax game with area residents (reservation and nonreservation) were added to the results of user fee games played by recreators to guess 
 a total (related to a large area) desire to pay for three levels of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvement. 
 (2) The results of the electricity bill game were predicted over all people of 
 power from the Four Corners plant to guess personal desire to pay. This latter 
 procedure involved the good reason that, since the production of electricity causes 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage, all people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) who consume Four Corners power should be 
 willing to pay as much in added/more electricity charges for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements as those who live in the area which suffers the damage. However appealing 
 this good reason may be, our survey did not include people outside the area. This way 
 the personal bid cannot be understood/explained as an guess of true "desire to 
 pay." It would be interesting to extend this research to include offering to pay games for 
 these people of Four Corners electricity who do not live or recreate in the affected 
 (surrounding conditions). 
 While both the (related to a large area) and personal group bids are of interest, the authors 
 believe that more faith may be placed in the (related to a large area) bid since that bid was received/made from 
 from samples of all pieces/parts of its (connected/related) population. 
 
 Table I presents the guessed group bids, standard errors, and 95% confidence 
 limits at points A, B, and C. (related to a large area) and person bids are presented. 
 Using the guessed group bids (Table I), a (related to a large area) group hid curve and a 
 COIIS&#126;&#126;&#126;I' 
 group bid curve were fitted. To fit two-dimensional group bid curves, 
 it was necessary to select a single (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)) to serve as a substitute for the total 
 package of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements (being thought about carefully). Situations 
 A, B, and C were defined so that all three forms of beauty-related damage (air pollution, 
 strip-mining, and transmission lines) were (one after the other) reduced together from their 
 most annoying as it wasation A to virtual elimination in C. Of the three forms of damage, 
 reduced visibility due to (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) air pollution was carefully thought about/believed by people who responded to be 
 far and away the most serious. So, stopping of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) air (something that dirties the air, oceans, etc.) (things sent out or given off) 
 (measured as the difference, in tons per year, between the level at A and the levels at 
 
 142 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 IVES 
 TABLE 
 
 TESTS OF HYFOTHESFS 
 
 AND 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 II 
 
 THE SLOPES OF THE AGGREGATE 
 
 CONCERNING 
 
 Guess 
 
 BID CURVES 
 
 Confidence of rejecting HO 
 (related to a large area) Person 
 group group 
 bid curve bid curve 
 
 1. The group bid curve is of linear positive slopen 
 2. The group bid for situation B is one half of that for Cb 
 
 (%I 
 
 70) 
 
 99.9 
 99.9 
 
 99.9 
 94.5 
 
 0 Rejection hints that the group bid curve is of increasing positive slope. 
 b Rejection hints that the group bid for B goes beyond one half of that for C. 
 
 B and C, (match up each pair of items in order)) was randomly chosen to serve as a single (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)) 
 for graphical analyses.14 
 The form of the curve needs/demands some discussion. It has already been noted [footnote 
 21 that the usual handcuffs, etc. placed on the slope of demand curves are inappropriate for 
 the first derivatives of group bid curves for public products (that are bought and sold), due to the (event that can never happen) 
 of separating amount and quality factors. Here we have a case in point. It seems 
 resonable that "people" of stopping of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things sent out or given off) desire the attribute, 
 visibility. Given the reasonable idea (you think is true) that not important utility of added/more 
 visibility is reducing, one would expect the first almost the same as the group bid 
 curve for visibility to be of negative slope. 
 Scientists have established that an inverse relationship exists between visibility and concentration of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.). Visibility increases at an increasing 
 rate as (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) pollution (measured in terms of weight) is stopped [3, lo]. Therefore, 
 the slope of the not important group bid curve for stopping of (things sent out or given off) (in tons per 
 year) is good  unpredictable, since the reducing not important utility of visibility and 
 the increasing not important visibility resulting from added/more stopping influence that 
 slope in opposite ways. 
 In terms of visibility, the group bid curve form which gave/given the best fit of 
 the three data points was 
 B = c In (v), 
 
 where B = group bid in dollars, c = a constant, and v = visibility. 
 In terms of stopping of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) air (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) (measured in tons per year), the 
 appropriate curve form was 
 B(q) = c In - 
 
 c If* 
 
 k 
 
 -+ Lt k - 4' 
 
 14In the case study (nearby/ close/ currently important), we recognize the inelegance introduced by this procedure. We do not 
 believe it does serious violence to the truth, since most of the beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage happening is, in fact, due to (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) air (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.). We focus on, however, that this problem should 
 not usually happen in the use of group bid way(s) of doing things and offering to pay game ways of doing things. Rather, its 
 event here was a special case and is because of our need to value a package of different 
 beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements within the following restrictions: (1) a limited research budget, 
 which (proved something wrong) us to one personal interview survey, and (2) the need to limit the length of each interview, to avoid exhausting the patience of people who responded. 
 
 BIDDING 
 
 GAMES 
 
 40 
 
 60 
 
 143 
 
 5 
 
 0 
 A3ATEMENT 
 
 20 
 (TONS 
 
 OF PARTICULATE 
 
 80 
 EMISSIONS/YEAR 
 
 96 
 X 1000) 
 
 FIG. 2. Guessed group bid curves for stopping of aestheticenvironmental damage, Four 
 Corners power plant, 1972. BR, (related to a large area) group bid; BC, Person groupbid. 
 
 where k = a limit/guideline relating visibility to (things sent out or given off), which is serious and stubborn behaviorally, and 4 = tons of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things sent out or given off) stopped every year. 
 The group bid curve fitted using this equation form passes through the origin, 
 as intelligently it must, given that clear people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) would bid zero for zero stopping. The 
 first almost the same as the group bid curve is of positive slope.'" (related to studying numbers) tests (Table 
 II) resulted in rejection of the guesses (1) that the group bid curve was linear, 
 or of decreasing positive slope, and (2) that the group bid at point B was simply 
 one-half of that at C. (related to a large area) and person group bid curves are presented 
 (Fig. 2). 
 I5 It must be given special attentionthat the curve form used gave/given the best tit, given the three data points 
 It would have been desirableto have collectedinformation (good) enough to create more data 
 points. The decision to collect data for only three points was made in recognition of limits to the 
 patience of people who responded. The multipurpose schedule was already quite long, given the need to 
 collect data clearly connected with or related to the situation of the person who responded, play the payment-related games, and collect socio- 
 
 available. 
 
 money-based, people-based and attitude-related data. 
 It is recognized that, if more data points had been available, a different curve form may have been 
 appropriate. The possibility of a sigmoid group bid curve is intelligently appealing. Such a curve 
 would have a part of increasing slope, where the increasing not important visibility from (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) 
 stopping rules the decreasing not important utility of added/more visibility then, as complete stopping is approached (i.e., somewhere to the right of our point B), the slope may become decreasing 
 as the reducing not important utility of visibility becomes most in control/most common. Such a curve form would be agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with possible (things to carefully think about) and with the three data points available. 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 144 
 
 IVES AND 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 The fitted group bid curves were: 
 B, = $29,175,840 In 
 
 B, = $15,396,7OOln 
 
 168,890 
 168,890 - 4' 
 
 for the (related to a large area) group bid curve, and 
 
 134,490 
 134,490 - q' 
 
 for the person group bid curve. 
 
 Not important group bid curves, or price curves, were created by taking the first 
 derivatives of the group bid curves (Fig. 3). The received/made from price curves were: 
 
 P, = $_$ 
 
 29,175,840 
 168,890 - q' 
 
 came/coming from the (related to a large area) group bid curve, and 
 
 15,396,700 
 PO = $_$ 
 
 134,490 - 4' 
 
 came/coming from the person group bid curve. 
 
 These received/made from price curves are very useful for public policy analyses with respect 
 to best (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) management policies. In Fig. 4, a possible received/made from price 
 curve is presented, along with a possible not important cost of stopping curve. In this 
 possible example, the best level of stopping is S. A standard allowing maxi- 
 
 500 
 
 400 
 
 200 
 
 100 
 
 0 
 
 20 
 
 ABATEMENT 
 
 40 
 
 60 
 
 (TONS OF PARTICULATE 
 
 80 
 EMISSIONSIYEAR 
 
 96 
 X 1000) 
 
 FIG. 3. Received/made from price curves for stopping of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage, Four Corners 
 power plant, 1972. PR, price curve came/coming from (related to a large area) group bid; PC, price curve received/made from-from 
 person group bid. 
 
 I 
 
 1 
 !I 
 -i 
 
 I 
 
 0 
 ABATEMENT 
 
 1 
 T 
 
 s 
 (TONS 
 
 OF PARTICULATE 
 
 EMISSIONS/YEAR 
 
 X 
 
 1000) 
 
 FIG. 4. Best standards, penalties and per unit taxes on (things sent out or given off), given possible 
 cost and price curves. 
 
 not important 
 
 mum once-a-year (things sent out or given off) of (T-S) tons of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.)s would be appropriate, and the 
 penalty for violation of that standard should be set (good or well enough) high that the (make dirty)r's 
 expected penalty per ton of (things sent out or given off) more than the standard would be at least P. 
 An other choice institutional (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) would call for a fine or tax per ton of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things sent out or given off). The fine should be set at least as high as P per ton. At the level P, 
 the best level of stopping would be (accomplished or gained). A fixed fine per ton of remaining 
 (things sent out or given off) would result in collection of the amount XMTS. However, since the received/made from 
 price curve is of positive slope, the sum of the fines collected would be not enough to 
 pay the receptors of the (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) for their loss in welfare. The necessary 
 amount would be XNTS. This amount could be collected, if full payment were 
 the accepted policy, I6 by using a sliding scale of fines, ranging from P' for the first 
 ton of (things sent out or given off) down to P for all (things sent out or given off) more than T-S. 
 If the not important costs of stopping of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage connected 
 with the Four Corners power plant were known, Ii the received/made from price curves presented 
 I6 Under a full payment policy, a received/made from price curve created from payment-related games based on 
 the idea  of desire to pay (which completely/in a hinting way places the (something you owe/something you're responsible for/disadvantage) with the receptor of damages) 
 would underestimate both the best level of stopping and the appropriate level of fines or taxes. 
 Randall [15] and others have (showed/shown or proved) that the demand for stopping of an external diseconomy 
 is greater in the full (related to something you owe) situation than in the zero (related to something you owe) situation understood in desire to 
 pay games. 
 Ii We are not yet in a position to present a complete benefit/cost analysis of the stopping of the 
 beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage connected with the Four Corners power plant and Navajo mine. 
 Early/incomplete and uncertain/not definite calculations point to/show that, (four urtrihufion 
 of most of the benrfir.s reported 
 IICW to stopmetzt 
 qfparriculate 
 air pollutum 
 is r&#126;&#126;asonubl&#126;&#126;, 99.7: ; stopping of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) (things sent out or given off) 
 (the current New Mexico standard for 1975) is (money-based)/cheaply gave a reason for on the basis of beauty-related (things to carefully think about) alone. Some added/more stopping beyond the 1975 standard may be reasonable. The money-based benefits from that stopping which has already happened appear to far go beyond the costs. 
 
 146 
 
 RANDALL, 
 
 IVES AND 
 TABLE 
 
 EASTMAN 
 
 III 
 
 INCOME ELA.STICITY 
 OF BID FOR ABATEMENT 
 ASTOCIATED 
 WITH THE FOUR CORNERS 
 
 Subpopulation 
 
 DAMAGES 
 
 1972 
 
 Level of 
 stopping 
 
 Income 
 ability to stretch 
 of bid 
 
 Standard 
 error 
 
 Significantly 
 greater than 
 zero" ? 
 
 Sales tax 
 
 B 
 C 
 
 0.65 
 0.65 
 
 0.10 
 0.08 
 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 
 Reservation residents 
 
 Sales tax 
 
 B 
 C 
 
 0.23 
 0.24 
 
 Nonreservation 
 
 Electricity bill 
 
 B 
 C 
 B 
 C 
 
 0.54 
 0.39 
 
 0.18 
 0.18 
 0.09 
 0.06 
 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 
 0.09 
 0.16 
 
 0.15 
 0.11 
 
 No 
 No 
 
 Nonreservation 
 
 residents 
 
 residents 
 
 Recreators 
 
 Game 
 
 OF AESTHETIC 
 POWER PLANT, 
 
 Users fees 
 
 Q At the 95y0 level of confidence. 
 
 in Fig. 3 could be used to perform policy analyses like those in the possible 
 example above. 
 The relationship between desire to pay and household income is of interest. 
 However, the idea  of income ability to stretch of demand is inappropriate to the public 
 good under study. The calculation of an income ability to stretch of amount of stopping 
 demanded would require (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of the relationship between income and amount of (group of things that are all pretty much the same) units of stopping demanded at a constant price per unit. However, in this study there were no clear unit prices for stopping; neither were there 
 individual differences/different versions in amount of stopping demanded, as the amounts were:fixed 
 as defined as it wasations A, B, and C. These conditions result from the built-in (other people can do it, too) nature of stopping of beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage: Everyone gets 
 the same amount and there is no clear price. This situation is the inverse of the 
 market situation for private goods; dollar bids are the response to a amount which 
 is given. 
 Since there existed no market price at which to calculate the income ability to stretch of 
 demand, an "income ability to stretch of bid" was guessed. The income ability to stretch of bid 
 was defined as: 
 dBY 
 Y 
 ey=--=bldYB 
 B' 
 where Y = household income, and B = the person's total once-a-year bid. A linear 
 moving backward model was used to decide/figure out the statistic bl. The mean value of Y and B 
 were used, and the calculation was made at each level of stopping. 
 Calculated income elasticities of bid for the different subpopulations and offering to pay 
 games are presented in Table III. In all cases, income ability to stretch of bid was greater than 
 zero, pointing to/showing that higher income families were willing to pay a greater amount 
 than lower income families to (accomplish or gain with effort) the same level of stopping of beauty-related 
 damages. For the non-reservation residents, calculated income ability to stretch of bid 
 This end/end result is very uncertain/not definite and subject to rewriting/redoing. It is presented in this note (at 
 the request of an unnamed reviewer) to provide a "ball park" indication of the ends/end results which 
 may arise from our research. 
 
 BIDDING 
 
 GAMES 
 
 147 
 
 ranged from 0.39 to 0.65, depending on the game and the level of stopping. Income 
 ability to stretch of bid was significantly greater than zero at the 95% level of confidence. For 
 the residents of Indian reservations and the recreational visitors to the area, lower 
 positive income elasticities were recorded. These were not significantly greater than 
 zero, at the 95% level of confidence.18 
 It was also found that desire to pay an added charge in the electricity bill 
 for a particular level of stopping increased as the size of the electricity bill increased. 
 Electric bill ability to stretch of bid, as defined as 
 dB Bill 
 eb=--.-dBil1 B ' 
 
 was calculated (for the nonreservation resident sample) to be 0.30 for situation B and 
 0.25 for situation C; at both points, it was significantly greater than zero at the 95%: 
 level of confidence. These guesses point to/show that desire to pay for a given level 
 of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) improvements increased as the size of the electricity bill increased, 
 but at a lesser rate. 
 The Reliability of the Results 
 
 In the (related to studying numbers) sense, our guesses of the group benefits from stopping of 
 beauty-related (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage would seem to be of a high order of reliability. The 
 95% confidence limits of the group bids are quite narrow, compared with the size 
 of the guessed group bids. (related to studying numbers) guesses of the confidence which may be 
 placed in these guessed group bids are based upon the variance of the responses 
 of the samples, and point to/show the confidence with which sample results may be predicted to the whole population. These statistics, (by itself/in and of itself), are unable to give any indication 
 of the reliability with which strong needs to behave, as measured by the payment-related 
 games, would be transmitted to actions should the possible situation arise. 
 We argue, anyway, that our guesses of the benefits of stopping of beauty-related 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damages connected with the Four Corners power plant are of a reasonable (at least ten times as much/less than 1/10th as much) and, if anything, conservative. (1) We believe the design of 
 the payment-related games allows confidence in their effectiveness. (2) The individual household 
 bid for stopping, on average, is of the same (at least ten times as much/less than 1/10th as much) as the guesses of 
 the value of (related to tiny particles of dust, etc.) pollution stopping received/got in showed/told about demand studies 
 [_( 11, when the last thing just mentioned are converted to a similar basis. Mean individual household 
 desire to pay for stopping, measured by the sales tax game played with the 
 nonreservation resident sample, was about $50 every year to (accomplish or gain with effort) situation B and 
 $85 every year to (accomplish or gain with effort) situation C. (3) The guessed group bids for stopping 
 are (compared to other things) small given the scale of the operation at Four Corners, as pointed to/showed by 
 its 1970 (things sent out or given off) rate and its total once-a-year sales of $146 million [footnote 51. (4) 
 Possible analyses point to/show that the demand for stopping of an externality will 
 lEThe estima<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
