 Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 
 The adoption of intensive monocrop (the study of plants) 
 in southern Cameroon 
 James Gockowski a,aˆ-- , Michel Ndoumbe b 
 a 
 
 IITA-Cameroon, c/o L.W. Lambourn &amp; Co., Carolyn House, 26 Dingwall Road, Croydon CR9 3EE, UK 
 b Institut de Interesting Agricole pour le Developpement, P.O. Box 2067, IRAD, Yaounde, Cameroon 
 Received 27 February 2001; received in changed form 16 August 2002; accepted 6 November 2002 
 
 Abstract 
 Results from a 1997 survey of 208 families in the humid forest zone of southern Cameroon point to/show that African policy 
 makers trying to strengthen farming-based production should focus attention on the (plant-related) sub-part/area. The survey, which 
 gathered information on (plant-related) production practices, found that the average expense on agro-chemical inputs by 
 (plant-related) producers using monocrop production systems was 190 US$/ha, which greatly goes beyond the FAO reported national average expense of 6.50 US$/ha. A logit model of monocrop adoption pointed to/showed that the size of land holding per 
 household had a negative effect on adoption, matching with population-driven technical change and that increases in unit 
 transportation costs significantly decreased the chance of adoption. These studies suggest that policy makers should 
 target (plant-related) (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) in areas of higher population density and (help increase/show in a good way) investment in (away from cities) roads. The age of 
 the household head had a significant negative and elastic effect on adoption, which in combination with an increase in the 
 group of younger farmers in the (away from cities) population caused by macro-money-based events added/gave to the spread of stronger 
 (the study of plants). In the study area, roughly two-thirds of (away from cities) families also produce cocoa and the amount of cocoa produced 
 was positively connected with adoption of intensive (plant-related) systems suggesting that export crop promotion indirectly 
 helped (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) of farming. Women's participation in intensive monocrop production was limited and efforts to 
 (help increase/show in a good way) their greater involvement are recommended. 
 Â© 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V. 
 JEL classification: D21; O33; Q12 
 Keywords: Logit; Monocrop; Farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse); Cash crop cooperation 
 
 1. Introduction 
 (away from cities) poorness remains a pressing problem in Africa 
 (IFAD, 2001). To meet quickly growing food demand and raise (away from cities) income, it is widely believed 
 aˆ-- Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-237-223-7434; 
 fax: +44-217-223-7437. 
 E-mail address: j.gockowski@cgiar.org (J. Gockowski). 
 
 0169-5150/$ - see front matter Â© 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V. 
 doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2002.11.002 
 
 that African farmers must strengthen their crop production systems by increasing the amount of inputs 
 used per unit area of farming-based land. The use of 
 (not living) and organic fertiliser, improved seed, crop-watering/rinsing with water and bug-killers by farmers in sub-Saharan 
 Africa is among the lowest in poor countries. 
 In Cameroon the mean expense per ha of fertilisers and bug-killers in 2000 is guessed by FAO 
 at 6.50 US$/ha with most of these expenses 
 
 196 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 
 Retail Price (FCFA/kg) 
 
 600 
 500 
 400 
 300 
 200 
 100 
 0 
 1 
 
 2 
 
 3 
 
 4 
 
 5 
 
 6 
 
 7 
 
 8 
 
 9 
 
 10 
 
 11 
 
 12 
 
 Month 
 Tomato 
 
 Cocoyam 
 
 Cassava 
 
 Fig. 1. Average (in name only/very small amount) monthly retail prices of tomato, cocoyam and cassava in Yaounde, December 1993 to July 2001. Source: Gockowski 
 and Ndoumbe, monthly prices given by the Direction de Statistiques et ComptabilitÂ´e Nationale, Ministery of Planning and Land-based 
 Management. 
 
 got/caused in the export crop part/area (coffee, cocoa and 
 oil palm). 
 Low levels of farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) have 
 been linked to the non-suitability of farming-based 
 lands, inappropriate farming-based policies, (not existing at all) 
 agro-chemical production ability (to hold or do something), poor (set of machines), weak research and extension institutions, and 
 the low prices of staple valuable things (Reardon et 
 al., 1997; Zeller et al., 1999). (not well developed) (away from cities) 
 credit markets also limit farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) 
 and working well growth that depends on the increased use of (bought) inputs (von Braun et al., 
 1993; Poulton et al., 1998). (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) is also 
 valuable thing-specific with (plant-related) crops often 
 among the most intensively produced. The higher 
 value of (plant-related) crops relative to staple foods is 
 a key factor. A comparison of mean monthly tomato 
 and staple food prices in the Yaounde market in recent 
 years illustrates the 'high value' nature of (plant-related) crops common to many African food markets 
 (Fig. 1). 
 To help farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) in Africa, 
 better understanding is needed of those examples 
 where the process has already taken hold. Adding/giving towards that end, this paper examines the adoption 
 of stronger monocrop systems of (plant-related) production among smallholders in southern Cameroon. 
 A logit moving backward of the adoption (things that decide other things) is 
 
 developed and the elasticities of adoption for certain 
 policy (numbers that change/things that change) guessed. 
 
 2. Area description, survey way(s) of doing things and 
 adoption model 
 The study area in southern Cameroon was selected 
 based on (probably true) (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) of the growing importance of strengthened/got worse (plant-related) production in this area (Fig. 2). (away from cities) densities lie between 36 and 70 
 people per km2 although denser pockets more than 
 150 people are common (RGPH, 1993; Santoir, 
 1995). Population pressures are usually higher than 
 in most other areas of central Africa, yet lower than 
 in much of humid west Africa. The climax green plants 
 is semi-(dropping leaves every autumn) moist (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forest. Mean once-a-year 
 rainfall ranges from 1350 to 1700 mm distributed in a 
 bimodal pattern which permits two rain-fed cropping 
 seasons: the first, from March to June and the second, 
 from August to November. 25% of (away from cities) families 
 also crop during the dry season from December to 
 February in inland valley bottoms using hand crop-watering/rinsing with water or water from hydro-morphic soils (IITA unpublished data). 
 Up until the spread of monocrop systems of (plant-related) production beginning in the 1970s, the three 
 cropping systems which ruled in the farming 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 Sanaga R. 
 
 STUDY 
 AREA 
 
 Yaounde 
 
 Nyong R. 
 
 Mbalmayo 
 
 Ebolowa 
 
 Fig. 2. Location of study area relative to forest margins (large area of land)al test result of southern Cameroon. Sources: Gockowski and 
 Ndoumbe. 
 
 systems of the study area were the melon seed field, 
 the mixed food crop field and the cocoa agroforest. 
 The first two are once-a-year crop systems that are rotated 
 with a unplanted period in order to restore soil life-creating ability. 
 As (away from cities) (groups of people/animals/things) have grown, unplanted periods have 
 declined and differences in land holdings have become more drew attention to. For families with limited 
 land holdings, the melon seed field, which needs/demands 
 long unplanted periods of 10-15 years, has dropped out 
 of the farming system. The mixed food crop system 
 is managed by women and has remained an important 
 part of the farming system since pre-colonial times 
 (Guyer, 1984). This cropping system provides the 
 bulk of household food supply as well as marketed 
 (more than what's needed) of food crops. Most families helped grow 
 the field twice in the first and second rainy season 
 on different places/locations. With rare exception agro-chemicals 
 are not applied. (producing crops/helping something grow) of cocoa in small agroforests is an important money/money income source for about two-thirds of families in the area and accounts for about one-third of total money/money income 
 in these families (IITA unpublished household 
 data). 
 (plant-related) crops are marketed from (more than what's needed) coming from the mixed crop field and from (made to do one thing very well) 
 monocrop systems of (plant-related) production helped grow by men. The last thing just mentioned system is a (compared to other things) recent 
 
 197 
 
 incorporation, first described in the mid-1970s (Guyer, 
 1984). Discussions with village older (people) confirm this as 
 the period in which commercial (plant-related) production began to develop. An important (feature/ quality/ trait) of 
 the monocrop system is a high level of agro-chemical 
 use. 
 A randomised two-stage group-related sample of (away from cities) 
 families was done in July of 1997 to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the importance of (plant-related) cash crops in 
 (away from cities) jobs. The study area was divided into 
 eight squares of 18 km Ã-- 18 km and groups (villages) 
 nearest the (land-area-based/location) centre of each square selected 
 from two layers: (i) those villages lying on all-weather 
 roads and (ii) those on seasonal roads as pointed to/showed 
 on 1:200,000 topographic maps. Within villages, the 
 survey team selected families randomly by choosing every nth household. The sampling period of time (or space) n was 
 equal to N/13, where N was the counted total number 
 of families in the village and 13 the desired sample size for each village. A local guide helped in the 
 list of families. In all, 16 villages were 
 sampled and a total of 208 families interviewed 
 using a structured list of questions given/gave in the 
 local Beti language. The list of questions gathered described/explained 
 production information on the two most important 
 commercial crops produced by the household. The 
 survey data were used to describe practices in 
 (the study of plants) production, and to model the adoption of 
 intensive monocrop systems. 
 The adoption of intensive monocrop production systems was modelled using the logit separate binary 
 moving backward model (Maddala, 1983; Amemiya, 1985). 
 The model assumes an hidden (under) hidden/covered up adoption changeable yiaˆ-- defined by the relationship: 
 yiaˆ-- = Î² xik + ui 
 where we assume that ui are IN(0, Ïƒ 2 ). 
 However, in practice we watch/notice y defined by 
 yi = 1, 
 
 if yiaˆ-- &amp;gt; 0, y = 0 otherwise 
 
 The chance function of the logit model is 
 Prob[Yi = 1] = 
 
 exp[xi Î²] 
 1{ + exp[xi Î²]} 
 
 If we let xik equal the kth element of the vector 
 of explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) xi and Î²k the kth element 
 of Î², then the expression for the derivatives of the 
 
 198 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 
 chances given by the logit model is 
 exp(xi Î²) 
 aˆ‚ 
 L(xi Î²) = 
 Î²k 
 aˆ‚xik 
 [1 + exp(xi Î²)]2 
 
 (1) 
 
 And the elasticities of the chance of belonging to 
 the group of adopters is given by 
 (aˆ‚L/aˆ‚xik )xik 
 Îµ(xik ) = 
 (2) 
 exp(xi Î²)/[1 + exp(xi Î²)]_) 
 The model focus is on the (things that decide other things) of the adoption of intensive monocrop production systems. The 
 reduced form of the model is 
 ADOPT = Î±0 + Î²1 MEN + Î²2 WOMEN + Î²3 CHILD 
 + Î²4 AGE + Î²5 EDUC + Î²6 MELON 
 + Î²7 MFOOD + Î²8 COCOA + Î²9 WPROD 
 + Î²10 COSTKM, 
 where the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) (ADOPT) equals one, 
 if the production system used by the household to 
 produce its most commercially important (plant-related) 
 crop was a monocrop, and otherwise equals zero. 
 The household gift of family labour is 
 expected to positively affect the chance of adoption, given the labour-intensive nature of commercial 
 (the study of plants) production and (compared to other things) undeveloped 
 local labour markets. Labour (numbers that change/things that change) in the model 
 include the number of adult males (MEN), adult females (WOMEN), and children under 16 years of 
 age (CHILD). The age of household heads (AGE) 
 and their educational accomplishment (EDUC) capture 
 differences in the quality of management. 
 Land gifts play an important role in the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) process (Boserup, 1965; Binswanger and 
 McIntire, 1987). In southern Cameroon, the institution 
 of patrilineal (something valuable you get when older relatives die) with an equal division of land 
 holdings along with very limited land sales and fast 
 population growth has resulted in less the average land holding per farm household. Matching with 
 Boserup's population-driven view of technical change, 
 this should increase the chance of strengthened/got worse (plant-related) production. Correct measures of farm size 
 were hard to get through farmer interview, as 
 land had not been surveyed and local area measures 
 do not exist. To deal with this measurement issue, the 
 number of melon seed fields cropped in the last 12 
 months (MELON), was used as an instrumental (number or thing that changes). The 10-15 year unplanted needed thing for this field 
 
 hints that only families with large (areas of owned land) 
 can still maintain this system. To test whether intensive (the study of plants) is replacing (producing crops/helping something grow) of the usual mixed crop field, a count of the number of these 
 fields cropped in the last 12 months (MFOOD) was 
 included in the model. 
 Research in other places (Govereh and Jayne, 1999; 
 Strasberg et al., 1999) has written about cooperation between cash crop and food crop (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) due in 
 part to the help of liquidity restrictions when 
 credit markets are missing. To test the guess 
 that cocoa money/money income provide liquidity that increases 
 the chance of stronger moncrop (plant-related) 
 production, the level of cocoa production (COCOA) 
 in the 12 months before the interview was included. 
 Women's participation in the process of technical change is often held back by information gaps 
 and weakened access to productive useful things/valuable supplies (Bzugu 
 and Kwaghe, 1997; Orr, 2000). A dummy (number or thing that changes) (WPROD), pointing to/showing cases where the principal 
 decision-maker was a women, tests for (male/female status) differences in the participation in intensive monocrop 
 production. 
 The condition of (away from cities) roads and the amount of cars and trucks affect market access and search and information costs, which have been shown to influence 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) processes (Odhiambo, 1998; Zang and 
 Fan, 2001). Although the 16 villages in the sample 
 are within 100 km of Yaounde, local differences in 
 road quality and the amount of cars and trucks can 
 be significant. The per kilometre cost of personal bush 
 taxi transport to Yaounde (COSTKM) provides an instrumental measure of these differences and is expected to worsens/decreases the chance of 
 adoption. 
 
 3. Results 
 All of the 208 families had marketed at least 
 one (plant-related) crop in the 12 months before the 
 interview. A amazing (many different kinds of people or things) of crops was marketed with the mean household selling nearly 18 
 different crops. Overall, families identified 34 different crops as among their principal (first and second 
 rank in importance) sources of (plant-related) money/money income. 
 Tomato, dessert bananas and green maize were referred to/were given a ticket 
 most often (Table 1). 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 Table 1 
 Frequency of production as 'most important' or 'second 
 most important' commercial (plant-related) crop among southern 
 Cameroon families (n = 208) 
 Crop species 
 
 Frequency 
 (percent of families) 
 
 Tomato 
 Bananas 
 Green maize 
 Okra 
 Leafy green (Solanum scabrum) 
 Hot peppers 
 Citrus 
 Cassava leaf 
 African plum (Dacryodes edulis) 
 Green fruit/dark green 
 
 35.6 
 29.3 
 23.6 
 17.8 
 12.0 
 11.1 
 7.7 
 6.7 
 5.8 
 4.8 
 
 Fifty-seven percent of the families produced 
 their most important market crop using an intensive 
 (plant-related) monocrop system, while 43% used the 
 traditional mixed food crop field to produce market 
 (more than what's needed). Producers using monocrop systems re- 
 
 199 
 
 ported expenses on fertilisers and bug-killers of 
 190 US$/ha (against/compared to/or 6.50 US$/ha for all farming-based 
 lands in Cameroon) beginning and building on the monocrop (plant-related) system as among the most input-intensive 
 crop systems in Cameroon. Monocrop producers were 
 more likely to use fertilisers, bug-killers, changed soil 
 land and improved seeds to produce (plant-related) 
 crops than were producers using the usual mixed 
 food crop field (Table 2). They were also on average ten years younger, better educated, and produced 
 more cocoa than producers using traditional mixed 
 crop technology (Table 3). 
 For the adoption model, 170 producer records were 
 used to analyse the (described the future) model effects; 38 of the 
 families visited were unable to supply complete 
 data for all eleven (numbers that change/things that change) in the model and had to be 
 dropped from the logit analysis. All the (numbers that change/things that change) except WOMEN had the (not numbers-based) effects (described the future), 5 
 of the 10 (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) affected the chance of adoption at (meaningful numbers) levels (P &amp;lt; 
 
 Table 2 
 Frequency of management practices among monocrop against/compared to/or mixed food crop systems 
 Management practice 
 
 (plant-related) cropping system 
 
 fertilisersaˆ--aˆ-- 
 
 Application of (not living) 
 Application of organic fertilisersaˆ--aˆ-- 
 Application of bug-killersaˆ--aˆ-- 
 Planting of improved seedaˆ--aˆ-- 
 Soil mounding at weedingaˆ--aˆ-- 
 Raised bed/ridge landaˆ--aˆ-- 
 aˆ--aˆ-- 
 
 Monocrop (percent of families pointing to/showing) 
 
 Mixed food (percent of families pointing to/showing) 
 
 62 
 19 
 80 
 68 
 66 
 52 
 
 6 
 4 
 11 
 15 
 31 
 19 
 
 P &amp;lt; 0.05 (test of independence: Ï‡2 (1) = 3.841). 
 
 Table 3 
 Descriptive statistics of logit model (numbers that change/things that change) by adopter (n = 97) vs. non-adopter (n = 73) groups 
 (number or thing that changes) description 
 
 AGE of household head (years) 
 EDUC educational accomplishments of household head (1-9) 
 MEN adult men living in household (no.) 
 WOMEN adult women living in household (no.) 
 CHILD children (&amp;lt;15 years) in household (no.) 
 COCOA 75 kg bags of cocoa produced (no.) 
 WPROD proportion of women decision makers 
 MELON melonseed fields (no.) 
 MFOOD mixed crop fields (no.) 
 COSTKM transport cost to Yaounde (FCFA/km) 
 
 Mean averages 
 
 Standard moving away 
 
 Adopter 
 
 Non-adopter 
 
 Overall 
 
 42.2 
 4.10 
 2.04 
 1.75 
 1.64 
 7.27 
 0.02 
 0.18 
 2.37 
 13.2 
 
 52.5 
 3.42 
 1.99 
 1.93 
 1.23 
 3.25 
 0.26 
 0.64 
 2.31 
 14.8 
 
 46.5 
 3.81 
 2.02 
 1.83 
 1.46 
 5.55 
 0.12 
 0.38 
 2.35 
 13.9 
 
 13.7 
 1.72 
 1.84 
 1.27 
 1.90 
 8.18 
 0.33 
 0.85 
 1.64 
 2.79 
 
 200 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 
 Table 4 
 Logit adoption model results 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 Constant 
 AGEaˆ--aˆ--aˆ-- 
 EDUC 
 MENaˆ-- 
 WOMEN 
 CHILDaˆ--aˆ-- 
 COCOAaˆ-- 
 WPRODaˆ--aˆ--aˆ-- 
 MELONaˆ--aˆ--aˆ-- 
 MFOOD 
 COSTKMaˆ--aˆ-- 
 
 Coefficient 
 5.070 
 aˆ'0.052 
 0.055 
 0.242 
 aˆ'0.284 
 0.264 
 0.065 
 aˆ'3.015 
 aˆ'0.852 
 aˆ'0.049 
 aˆ'0.184 
 
 McFadden R2 
 Actual 
 
 Standard 
 error 
 0.017 
 0.127 
 0.137 
 0.215 
 0.119 
 0.034 
 0.882 
 0.281 
 0.145 
 0.083 
 
 aˆ'2.979 
 0.435 
 1.770 
 aˆ'1.318 
 2.220 
 1.907 
 aˆ'3.420 
 aˆ'3.029 
 aˆ'0.339 
 aˆ'2.213 
 
 0.319 
 (described the future) 
 0 
 
 Total 
 1 
 
 Frequencies of actual and (described the future) results 
 0 
 51 
 22 
 1 
 12 
 85 
 Total 
 
 Asymptotic 
 t-ratios 
 
 63 
 
 107 
 
 73 
 97 
 170 
 
 Two-tail tests. 
 aˆ-- P &amp;lt; 0.10. 
 aˆ--aˆ-- P &amp;lt; 0.05. 
 aˆ--aˆ--aˆ-- P &amp;lt; 0.01. 
 Table 5 
 Ability to stretch of the chance of adoption of intensive monocrop with 
 respect to three policy-related (numbers that change/things that change) (guessed at the means) 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Ability to stretch of chance Îµ(xik ) 
 
 AGE 
 COCOA 
 COSTKM 
 
 aˆ'1.055 
 0.160 
 aˆ'1.123 
 
 0.05), and the model correctly classified 80% of the 
 families (Table 4). 
 Using Eqs. (1) and (2), the calculated elasticities 
 of adoption were elastic for AGE and COSTKM and 
 inelastic for COCOA, the only policy (numbers that change/things that change) whose 
 not important effects were very different from zero 
 (Table 5). 
 
 4. Discussion of results 
 The positive effects of the number of men (MEN) 
 and the number of children (CHILD) hints that 
 
 family labour is (ready for action) among adopters, although 
 the issue is not completely clear for child labour. If 
 the decision-maker views children's education as an 
 investment good, an increase in the number of children would increase the decision maker's demand 
 for his/her children's education which could provide an other choice to the labour demand guess 
 for the positive coefficient on CHILD. Further (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) of intra-household money/money income distribution, 
 labour portion, and household expense must resolve this issue. The number of women 
 in the household (WOMEN) and the educational 
 accomplishment of the household head (EDUC) did not 
 influence the chance of adoption, although there 
 was a significantly greater educational accomplishment 
 (Student's t = 2.59, P = 0.01) among adopters 
 (Table 3). 
 When women were the principal agent in management decisions (WPROD), there was a lower chance of adoption. Women's wide range of responsibilities in village (community of people/all good people in the world) limits their ability (to hold or do something) for adopting 
 labour-intensive technology systems. In the few cases 
 where women were using monocrop systems they 
 were mainly producing traditional African leafy vegetables in the dry season when other labour demands 
 are reduced. 
 The negative effect of MELON, a (substitute-related) measure 
 of land availability, points to/shows that increasing land restrictions positively influence the adoption of commercial (plant-related) production systems. This suggests 
 that, ceteris paribus, efforts to (help increase/show in a good way) (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) 
 of (the study of plants) production should target areas of (compared to other things) high population pressure. 
 The number of survival/income-oriented mixed food 
 crop fields, MFOOD, did not influence the adoption 
 of monocrop (the study of plants). Production from this field 
 system remains an important household goal for 
 both adopters and non-adopters alike. Many adopting families have included the monocrop field on 
 the front end of the mixed food crop/fallow rotation 
 by that/in that way economising on labour for unplanted clearing 
 while maintaining the survival/income (thing that's given/work that's done) of the 
 mixed food crop field. The important cultural role attached to the (producing crops/helping something grow) of the mixed food crop field 
 by the women of southern Cameroon (Guyer, 1984) 
 and the limited access of most families to (away from cities) 
 food markets also add/give to its toughness among 
 adopting families. 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 
 The cash needed things for intensive (the study of plants) 
 production combined with the failure of formal (away from cities) 
 credit institutions present a restriction to adoption 
 especially for useful thing/valuable supply-poor families. (money-related) 
 demands of intensive production likely underlie the 
 positive effect of cocoa money/money income (COCOA) on adoption. Mean cocoa sales among adopters during the 
 survey were more than double those of non-adopters; 
 the injection of cocoa money/money income guessed at more 
 than 500 US$_$ into the household (process of people making, selling, and buying things) helped (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into other businesses/projects. Almost the same  effects between coffee and intensive (the study of plants) have also been noted in the western area of 
 Cameroon (Temple and Fadani, 1997). This hints that past policies in Cameroon supporting small 
 holder tree crop production improved/increased 
 the adoption of strengthened/got worse commercial (the study of plants) 
 production, although the effect is (compared to other things) inelastic 
 (Table 5). 
 The age of the household head was negatively connected with the chance of adoption. Younger farmers were more likely to adopt and the effect of age 
 on the chance of adoption was elastic (Table 5) 
 suggesting that policies, which impact (information about people/combinations of different kinds of people) 
 and traveling patterns would also affect the chance of adoption. Macroeconomic events beginning in 
 the late 1980s may have slowed (away from cities)-city-based  traveling 
 and increased the group of young farmers in the (away from cities) 
 population (Gockowski and Ndoumbe, 1999). 
 The instrumental (number or thing that changes) for (away from cities) road (set of machines) and communications, COSTKM, also had significant and elastic effect on the chance of intensive 
 (the study of plants) production. Ability to stretch at the sample mean 
 (maximum) is aˆ'1.12 (aˆ'2.59), which highlights the 
 importance of public investments in (away from cities) transportation (set of machines) in the process of farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). 
 
 5. Ends/end results 
 (the study of plants) is providing a pathway for (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) among smallholders in southern Cameroon driven 
 by growth in city-based  what people want to buy and high relative 
 prices. Its use in the usual farming system 
 enables the money-saving use of soil changes that 
 provide a means for facing the pressing issue of 
 soil nutrient (everything is gone). 
 
 201 
 
 (changes in people) have played a big part in 
 the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of (plant-related) production. Fast 
 rates of urbanisation, which in Cameroon averaged 
 over 7% in the 1970s and 1980s, have resulted in big demand growth in the city-based  markets of West 
 and central Africa. A slowing of (away from cities)-to-city-based  traveling in the 1990s connected with macroeconomic 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) changes/recalculations including the 1994 currency 
 (reduction of value) appears to have increased the group of 
 younger farmers in the study area. Younger farmers were much more likely to adopt intensive 
 monocrop systems. This is an example of the important second-order effects of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) changes/recalculations that 
 often escape the written statement/attention of policy makers. 
 Marketing costs have a significant and elastic effect on the adoption of intensive (the study of plants) systems. 
 Greater public investment in (away from cities) roads and a downward (change to make better/related to changing something) of taxes/import taxes now going beyond 100% 
 on new transport vehicles would help lower marketing costs. The diffusion of information on input and 
 crop prices, and quality differentials for these (compared to other things) dangerous markets is another public helping action 
 which would lower market search costs and improve 
 market (wasting very little while working or producing something). Local language radio broadcasts are 
 among the most (producing a lot for a given amount of money) methods of information 
 provision (Robbins, 2000). 
 The combined influence of transport cost and increasing land (not enough of something) on the adoption of stronger 
 production systems suggests targeting development efforts in areas of higher population densities with better 
 road (set of machines). For central Africa, areas away from cities in 
 the edge/edges of city-based  centres are the most likely domains for (plant-related) (process by which something becomes stronger or worse), rather than the 
 country seen as poorly developed transport (set of machines) and thinly distributed (groups of people/animals/things). Appropriate domains in west Africa are likely to be larger than 
 in central Africa due to higher overall population densities and better (away from cities) (set of machines). 
 The cooperation between cocoa production and (the study of plants) (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) hints that promotion of 
 traditional export crops has added/has given to the (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) of farming-based systems in the study area. 
 Whether almost the same  processes of (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) and (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) have happened among the cocoa and 
 coffee producers of Cote d'Ivoire, Nigeria and Ghana 
 warrants further study. 
 Women producers were not participating in intensive monocrop production. Efforts to deal with this 
 
 202 
 
 J. Gockowski, M. NdoumbÂ´e / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 195-202 
 
 situation should think about/believe the promotion of dry season 
 production of African traditional leafy vegetables, 
 when women's labour demands are lower, and when 
 the price of these valuable things rises two- to three-fold. 
 The importance of intensive (plant-related) production will continue to grow, especially if fast urbanisation continues. As the conditions adding/giving to 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) in southern Cameroon may not be the 
 same in other parts of West and central Africa, further 
 (acts of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) of these processes across the area are 
 needed. 
 
 Responses 
 Money-based help by the Rockefeller Foundation is 
 thankfully admitted/recognized. 
 References 
 Amemiya, T., 1985. Advanced Econometrics. Harvard University 
 Press, Cambridge, p. 521. 
 Binswanger, H., McIntire, J., 1987. Behavioral and material 
 (things that decide other things) of production relations in land-plentiful (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) 
 farming. Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change 35, 73-99. 
 Boserup, E., 1965. The Conditions of Farming-based Growth. Aldine 
 Publishing Co., Chicago, p. 124. 
 Bzugu, P., Kwaghe, P., 1997. Restrictions to farm useful thing/valuable supply 
 purchase/getting/learning by women farmers in Konduga local government 
 area of Borno state. J. (away from cities) Dev. Management 29, 27-36. 
 Gockowski, J., Ndoumbe, M., 1999. An analysis of (plant-related) 
 production and marketing systems in the forest margins 
 (large area of land)al test result of southern Cameroon. useful thing/valuable supply and 
 Crop Management Research Monograph 27, International 
 Institute of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Farming, Ibadan, Nigeria. 
 Govereh, J., Jayne, T., 1999. Effects of cash crop production on 
 food crop working well in Zimbabwe: tradeoffs or cooperation. 
 Working Paper No. 74, Michigan State University, Department 
 of Farming-based Money flow, East Lansing. 
 Guyer, J., 1984. Family and farm in southern Cameroon. African 
 Research Studies No. 15, African Studies Center, Boston 
 University, Boston. 
 IFAD (International Fund for Farming-based Development), 2001. 
 (away from cities) poorness report 2001: the challenge of ending (away from cities) poorness. 
 Rome, Italy, http://www.ifad.org/poverty/index.htm. 
 
 Maddala, G.S., 1983. Limited-Dependent and (not numbers-based) (numbers that change/things that change) 
 in Econometrics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
 p. 401. 
 Odhiambo, W., 1998. The adoption of market oriented crop-mix 
 pattern in making money from farming-based systems in Kenya: 
 effects of internal and external factors. Q. J. Int. Agric. 37, 
 150-162. 
 Orr, A., 2000. 'Green gold'?: burley tobacco, smallholder 
 farming, and poorness help in Malawi. World Dev. 28, 
 347-363. 
 Poulton, C., Dorward, A., Kydd, J., Thirtle, C., 1998. The (coming back to life or popularity after a long time) 
 of smallholder cash crops in Africa: public and private roles in 
 the provision of finance. J. Int. Dev. 10, 85-103. 
 Reardon, T., Kelly, V., Crawford, E., Diagana, B., Savadogo, K., 
 Boughton, D., 1997. (helping increase/showing in a good way) (able to last/helping the planet) (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) and 
 working well growth in Sahel farming after macroeconomic 
 policy reform. Food Policy 22, 317-327. 
 RGPH (Recensement general de la population et de l'habitat), 
 1993. Direction Nationale du Deuxieme Recensement General 
 de la Population et de l"Home, Yaounde, Cameroun. 
 Robbins, P., 2000. Review of market information systems in 
 Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana and Zimbabwe. Study report. The 
 Technical Center for Farming-based and (away from cities) Cooperation (CTA), 
 Wageningen, The Netherlands. 
 Santoir, C., 1995. La population. In: Santoir, S., Bopda, A. (Eds.), 
 Atlas (related to a large area) Sud-Cameroun. Editions de l'ORSTOM, Paris. 
 Strasberg, P., Jayne, T., Yamano, T., Karanja, D., Nyoro, J., 
 1999. Effects of farming-based (making something available for lots of people to buy) on food crop 
 input use and working well in Kenya. International Development 
 Working Paper No. 71, Michigan State University, Department 
 of Farming-based Money flow, East Lansing. 
 Temple, L., Fadani, A., 1997. Cultures d'exportation et cultures 
 vivrieres au_pair Cameroun: l'eclairage d'une controverse par 
 une analyse micro-economique. Economie (away from cities)e 239, 40- 
 48. 
 von Braun, J., Malik, S., Zeller, M., 1993. Credit markets, input 
 support policies, and the poor: ideas from Africa and Asia. 
 In: (series of events) of the 1993 AAEA Pre-Conference Workshop 
 on Post Green Revolution Farming-based Development Plans 
 in the Third World: What Next?, Orlando, Florida. 
 Zang, X., Fan, S., 2001. How productive is (set of machines)? New 
 approach and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from (away from cities) India. (surrounding conditions) and 
 Production Technology Discussion Paper No. 84, International 
 Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC. 
 Zeller, M., Lapenu, C., Minten, B., Ralison, E., Randrianaivo, D., 
 Randrianarisoa, C., 1999. Pathways of (away from cities) development in 
 Madagascar: an scientific (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) of the critical triangle 
 between (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). Q. J. Int. Agric. 38, 105- 
 127. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
