AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ElSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 Sources of farming-based working well growth and spoiling 
 in sub-Saharan Africa 1 
 George Frisvold * , Kevin Ingram 
 Money-based Research Service, US Department of Farming, 1301 New York Avenue, Washington, DC 20005-4788, USA 
 Accepted 12 November 1994 
 
 Abstract 
 
 This paper examines sources of farming-based growth in sub-Saharan Africa. Growth in the stock of traditional 
 inputs (land, labor, animals) remains the most in control/most common source of output growth. Growth in modern input use was of 
 secondary importance, but still accounted for a 0.2-0.4% once-a-year growth rate in three of four sub-areas. 
 Econometric results support earlier studies that suggest that land (oversupply/large quantity) may be a restriction on land 
 working well growth. Growth in farming-based exports and historic calorie availability had good effects on 
 working well. These latter results suggest that positive (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) effects exist between export performance and food 
 security on one hand and farming-based working well on the other. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 Many econometric studies have examined farming-based working well differences among countries 
 (e.g. Nguyen, 1979; Mundlak and Hellinghausen, 
 1982; Antle, 1983; Hayami and Ruttan, 1985; Lau 
 and Yotopolous, 1989; Haley, 1991; Ghura and 
 Just, 1992). These studies, which guess group farming-based production functions from international data, have been important in numbering 
 the relative importance of such factors as modern 
 input use, research, (set of machines), and capital 
 collection on farming-based growth. Of these, 
 only the studies by Haley (1991) and by Ghura 
 
 Corresponding author. 
 The views expressed are the authors' and are not necessarily those of USDA. 
 * 
 
 1 
 
 and Just (1992) pay particular attention to countries in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). 
 This lack of attention is upsetting for two reasons. First, farming-based working well has been (compared to other things) spoiled in much of SSA. In the last 30 
 years, both land and labor working well have (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) in many SSA countries. Food production 
 per person overall has (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) and the number of 
 very much/very badly (not given enough food) people in SSA has increased by over 20 million (Rao and Caballero, 
 1990). 
 There is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of significant working well 
 growth in some countries (Thirtle et al., 1993). 
 These exceptions to the general pattern of spoiling beg the question of how such success 
 might be copied in other places in SSA. 
 Farming-based spoiling has obvious and disturbing (for only a short time) results for the poor in 
 SSA. SSA's poor farming-based performance has a 
 
 0169-5150/95/$09.50 © 1995 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
 SSDI 0169-5150(95)01143-9 
 
 52 
 
 G. Frisvold, K Ingram/ Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 second, negative hint/result/effect for longer term industrial and general money-based growth. Scientific 
 studies have found a significant relationship between farming-based and overall money-based development (Singer, 1984). As Rao and Caballero (1990) 
 note, "very few countries have managed to maintain high rates of overall income or employment 
 growth without also (accomplishing or gaining) high rates of farming-based growth". 
 This paper examines sources of farming-based 
 working well differences among 28 SSA countries. 
 These sources include land quality, modern input 
 use, public investment in farming-based research, 
 historic calorie availability, farming-based export 
 growth, and farming-based export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong). Obviously, one can see how farming-based working well 
 growth could improve nutrition and farming-based 
 trade performance. The paper's results, however, 
 suggest that this relationship is not simply a unidirectional one from working well to performance. 
 Rather, in the long run, there are important 
 positive (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) effects between calorie availability and trade performance on one hand and 
 working well on the other. 
 The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
 presents the moving backward equation (detailed description of exactly what is required) and 
 discusses the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) used in our 
 analysis. Section 3 discusses the moving backward results. In Section 4, the relative (thing that's given/work that's done) of 
 traditional inputs, modern inputs and 'non-ordinary' inputs to farming-based output and working well growth are tested for four major 
 agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) areas of SSA. 
 
 country in year t. The (numbers that change/things that change) X 1 , X 2 , X 3 , and 
 X 4 are measures of labor, (material that makes plants grow better), tractor, and 
 animals inputs (match up each pair of items in order). The remaining Z 
 terms are 'non-ordinary' inputs guessed 
 to affect a country's total factor working well. The 
 3j{ and 'Yk terms are limits/guidelines to be guessed 
 and uit is an error term. 
 The random errors, uit have the rotting 
 
 (2) 
 where error terms ei, Tfp and Ein are independently distributed with zero means and positive 
 variances. The part-related ei is the random disturbance describing the ith country and is 
 constant through time. The part-related Tfn is the 
 random part describing year t and is 
 constant across countries. Eq. (1) is this way a two-way 
 random effects (error parts/pieces) model and is 
 guessed using the method described by Fuller 
 and Battese (1974). 
 Farming-based output was defined as the total 
 value of current output in 1979-1981 international dollars. The international dollar is a unit 
 value developed by the Food and Farming 
 Organization (FAO) to avoid the use of exchange 
 rates in getting/taking production groups. Each 
 valuable thing is assigned a single world price. Production is then weighted by the 1979-1981 average of world prices. Output was measured on a 
 per hectare basis to avoid problems of heteroscedasticity. Farming-based land includes plantable 
 and permanent cropland and permanent (areas of grassy land). Data come from the F AO Production 
 Yearbook computer tape. 
 
 2. Methods and (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 2.1. Ordinary inputs 
 An group farming-based production function 
 was guessed from thin slice, time-series data 
 for 28 sub-Saharan Mrican countries for the years 
 1973-1985. Countries in the sample are listed in 
 the Add on. The production function was specified as 
 4 
 
 lit= f3o 
 
 + 
 
 6 
 
 .E f3jXjit + .E 'Ykzkit + uit 
 j=l 
 
 (1) 
 
 k=l 
 
 where lit is the log of group farming-based 
 output per hectare of farming-based land for the ith 
 
 Four ordinary inputs were included in the 
 moving backward equation. Labor strength, X 1 , is defined as the log of the ratio of people (money-based)/cheaply active in farming to farming-based land. 
 Previous studies of farming-based working well have 
 included only male labor as an input. Failing to 
 include female labor is a serious problem, especially in SSA where women perform much of the 
 farming-based work. In a perfect world, one would want a measure of the flow of labor services rather than the 
 
 G. Frisvold, K IngramjAgricultural Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 number of people (money-based)/cheaply active in farming which is a stock measure of labor input. 
 Unfortunately, complete thin slice time 
 series data for the flow of labor services are not 
 available. The use of a labor stock (number or thing that changes) of the 
 type employed here could significantly overestimate the amount of actual labor input used by 
 farming. Such overestimation can bias downward guesses of labor working well as will be 
 discussed later. 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s, X 2 , is the log of the amount of 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s used per hectare of plantable and permanent cropland. (material that makes plants grow better)s are nitrogen, phosphates and potash ate/destroyed (kg). Tractor use 
 strength, X 3 , is measured as the log of tractors in 
 service per hectare of plantable and permanent 
 cropland. The stock of animals, X 4 , was calculated from FAO data using the same grouping 
 big plan/layout/dishonest plan employed by Hayami and Ruttan (1985). 
 A few studies have included a measure of animals as a productive input (Nguyen, 1979; Mundlak and Hellinghausen, 1982; Antle, 1983; Hayami 
 and Ruttan, 1985). 
 2.2. Non-ordinary inputs 
 
 Following the tradition of Hayami and Ruttan 
 (1985) and others, the total factor working well 
 level of each country is measured as a function of 
 non-ordinary inputs. These inputs are nonconventional in the sense that they (take control of) the 
 hit/effect of macroeconomic factors, public investment, agroecological level of detail, and other factors 
 which affect farming-based working well but which 
 are not traditional choice (numbers that change/things that change) in farmers' 
 production decisions. These (numbers that change/things that change) are defined 
 as follows. 
 2.2.1. Land quality (Z) 
 A static land quality index for each country 
 was gotten from Peterson (1987) which measures land quality as a function of historic (rain, snow, etc.) and the percentage of area gave/reserved to 
 (areas of grassy land), watered crops, and non-watered crops. 
 2.2.2. Crop-watering/rinsing with water (Z 2 ) 
 The level of crop-watering/rinsing with water technology and (set of machines) is measured by the percentage of agricul- 
 
 53 
 
 tural cropland which the FAO selects/names as 'purposely gave/given with water'. Although the static 
 land quality index accounts for the extent of 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water at a single point in time, the crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 (number or thing that changes) also accounts for changes in crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 over time. 
 2.2.3. Farming-based research (Z 3 ) 
 An farming-based research strength index was 
 calculated as the log of the research stock per 
 hectare of farming-based land. Data on country 
 public research investment come from the International Service for National Farming-based Research (ISNAR) Farming-based Research Indicator 
 Series reported in Pardoy et al. (1989). The research stock measure is an guess of total 
 research investment over the previous 8 years. 
 Pardey et al. report 5 year averages of research 
 expenses from 1960 to 1985. In building 
 the research stock (number or thing that changes), it was assumed that 
 expenses where constant over each 5 year 
 period. 
 2.2.4. Calorie availability (Z 4 ) 
 Some household level studies have 
 found that farming-based labor working well improves with historic nutrient intake of laborers 
 (see Behrman et al., 1988 for a recent survey). 
 Far fewer studies have examined the hit/effect of 
 nutrient intake at more group levels. Two 
 exceptions are papers by Correa (1970) and 
 Wheeler (1980) which found a strong and significant positive relationship between money-based 
 growth and nutrient intake in LDCs. Changes in 
 calorie availability seem likely to have important 
 working well effects in SSA where 26% of the 
 population is lacking in calories for maintenance and 44% are lacking in calories for work 
 (Kates and Haarmann, 1992). 
 (number or thing that changes) Z 4 is the log of the ratio of daily 
 calorie supply per person to daily calorie needed thing per person. The use of calorie availability as 
 an explanatory (number or thing that changes) raises questions about 
 (things causing other things to happen). Does better nutrition lead to increased 
 labor working well or is more food available in 
 areas that are more productive? Or, are both 
 effects operative? To account for potential (happening at the same time) bias, the calorie availability (number or thing that changes) used 
 
 54 
 
 G. Frisuold, K. Ingram/ Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 in moving backward analysis is a fell behind 5 year average of 
 years t- 1 to t- 5. The fell behind average was used 
 for two reasons. First, the direction of (things causing other things to happen) 
 from past consumption to current farming-based 
 production is more clearly unidirectional. Second, 
 a 5 year average better reflects historical nutrient 
 availability. 
 Guesses for both calorie supply and needed things are from the FAO. Calorie supplies are 
 calorie equals of a country's food supplies. 
 Food supplies contain domestic production, net 
 imports, and changes in stocks. Daily calorie needed things are guesses of calories needed to 
 sustain a person at (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) levels of activity and 
 health. Needed things for each country differ taking account of age and sex distributions, average 
 body weights, and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) temperatures. 
 The calorie availability (number or thing that changes) may also be 
 thought of as a measure of food security, although a 
 (compared to other things) (very simple/rough and rude) one. The (number or thing that changes) says nothing 
 about the distribution of food availability within a 
 country. However, it seems reasonable to expect 
 that as group food availability declines long-lasting 
 food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) increases. Long-lasting food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) 
 represents a country's longer term (problems, delays, etc.) in 
 meeting basic (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) needed things. Food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) may negatively/badly produce farming-based working well for another reason besides its more direct 
 effect on labor working well. In areas of long-lasting 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) farming-based producers are likely to 
 adopt risk-reducing rather than yield-increasing 
 production plans (Roumasset, 1976). 
 2.2.5. Farming-based export growth (Z 5 ) 
 The role of export growth in stimulating overall money-based development (Fosu, 1990; GyimahBrempong, 1991; Edwards, 1993) and part/areaal 
 total factor working well growth (Tybout, 1992; 
 Edwards, 1993) has received much attention in 
 the books. 
 Export development has been guessed to 
 stimulate working well growth in some ways. 
 First, countries benefit from basic (serving to compare two or more things) 
 advantages and more fast learning-by-doing 
 from (focusing on doing one thing very well). Second, (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) into (stores around the world) allows the export part/area to benefit from scale (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). Third, the pressures of 
 international competition are thought to force 
 
 countries to put into use modern technologies and (producing a lot with very little waste) methods of production more quickly. Fourth, 
 exports form an important source of foreign exchange necessary for importation of modern inputs and (transfer of money from individuals to businesses). Finally, export levies 
 are an important source of government money/money income 
 in many SSA countries. Changes in export earnings, therefore, affect the level of public money 
 available to finance crop-watering/rinsing with water projects, road construction, and other working well-improving public investments. 
 Studies of the hit/effect of export growth on 
 output growth have generally examined the relationship between export growth and gross domestic product (GDP) growth, but have not specifically examined the hit/effect of farming-based export 
 growth on farming-based working well. Mundlak et 
 al. (1989) guessed farming-based working well as a 
 function of past farming-based export prices rather 
 than past export earnings. Although earnings and 
 prices are not the same, the results of Mundlak et 
 al. do suggest a relationship between international market behavior and domestic working well. 
 Growth of farming-based export earnings is likely to 
 have a 'demand-pull' effect on inventions in the farming-based export part/area. 
 The following moving backward equation was guessed to construct and export growth and export 
 (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) changeable 
 ln(Eit) =a 0 +a 1ln(t) +a 2 [ln(t)]_) 2 +vit 
 
 (3) 
 
 where Eit is the value of farming-based exports in 
 constant dollars. Separate moving backward equations 
 were guessed for each country. The log 
 quadratic (detailed description of exactly what is required) of moving backward equation (3) 
 fit the data very well with (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R 2 values 
 over 0.90 for all countries in the sample. The log 
 quadratic (detailed description of exactly what is required) also fit the data better 
 than simple quadratic of semi-log (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required). 
 The (described the future) values of exports for country i in 
 year t from Eq. (3) are given by Eit· The export 
 growth (number or thing that changes) is 
 
 ( 4) 
 and reflects the growth (popular thing/general way things are going) in exports in a 
 country over the previous 5 years. 
 Including export performance as an explanatory (number or thing that changes) again raises issues of (things causing other things to happen). Ed- 
 
 G. Frisvold, K. Ingram 1 Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 wards (1993) provides more discussion of problems of deciding/figuring out (things causing other things to happen) between export 
 growth and other measures of money-based performance such as GDP and working well growth. As 
 with calorie intake, this was accounted for by 
 using past values of performance as an explanatory (number or thing that changes). Fig. 1 shows the long-term relationship between farming-based working well and performance. Current working well has more immediate 
 hits/effects on current food security and export performance. In the longer run, we guess that 
 food security and export performance affect future working well. There is this way a positive (when information about something is constantly returned to help improve it) over time between working well and 
 performance. 
 
 2.2.6. Farming-based export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) (Z 6 ) 
 We also test the guess that farming-based 
 export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) could worsens/decreases 
 working well. Ups and downs in foreign exchange came/coming from export earnings may negatively/badly affect 
 the timing and availability of modern imported 
 inputs (Love, 1989a). Also, ups and downs in foreign 
 exchange may reduce the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of public 
 investments to raise farming-based working well 
 (Love, 1989b). Development projects may go ahead in an weird and halting manner. Fosu 
 (1992), however, found little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) to support 
 the guess that export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) worsened/decreased GDP growth in SSA. 
 The (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) of farming-based exports was built as follows 
 Z 6 =In( 
 
 _t vi&#126;r-j)) 
 
 (5) 
 
 J=l 
 
 where 
 
 vit 
 
 are the extras/payments from Eq. (3). The 
 
 Current 
 Farming-based 
 Working well 
 
 (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) index takes by force/takes control of the effects of mistakes 
 from (popular thing/general way things are going) in export growth over the previous 5 
 years, placing (compared to other things) more weight on more 
 extreme mistakes from (popular thing/general way things are going). This (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 is just like those employed (before that/before now) in the 
 books (Fosu, 1990; Gyimah-Brempong, 1991). 
 3. Moving backward results 
 
 Moving backward results are presented in Table 1. 
 The Fuller-Battese method (variance parts/pieces model) is used. Moving backward equation (1) is a 
 land working well equation, given that the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) is farming-based output per 
 hectare. Column 1 reports results from the general (detailed description of exactly what is required) of Eq. (1). Column 2 leaves out/keeps out 
 (numbers that change/things that change) found to be unimportant in the general 
 moving backward. Results from Column 1 are discussed 
 in this section while the results from Column 2 
 are used in the following section on growth accounting. 
 The model fits the data well. The R 2 between 
 watched/followed and (described the future) values of the dependent 
 (number or thing that changes) is over 0.94 for both models. The explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) generally show a high level of 
 (meaningful numbers) and are (money-based)/cheaply reasonable. The random part (variance part) describing unknown country effects is 
 the largest part of/amount of the error in the model. 
 The output ability to stretch of labor is about 0.59 
 which is very high relative to those of other 
 ordinary inputs. Haley received/got almost the same  results in his study of farming-based production in 
 SSA. Again, we should caution that the explanatory (number or thing that changes) is the stock of labor (people (money-based)/cheaply active in farming) rather than the 
 
 Current Farming-based 
 
 - 
 
 55 
 
 ' - 
 
 Performance 
 
 Future 
 Farming-based 
 Working well 
 
 Calorie Availability 
 
 Export Performance 
 
 Fig. 1. Long-term relationship between farming-based working well and performance. 
 
 56 
 
 G. Frisvold, K Ingram I Farming-based Money flow !3 (1995) 51-61 
 
 Table 1 
 Guess results 1973-1985 (dependent (number or thing that changes): Jog of farming-based output per hectare) 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 l..og(iaborlagriculturalland) 
 l..og(iivestockl farming-based land) 
 Log((material that makes plants grow better)sI cropland) 
 Log( tractors 1cropland) 
 Land quality index 
 Percent of cropland watered 
 l..og(research stock) 
 Export growth 
 Export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) index 
 l..og(calorie availability) 
 Variance part for cross sections 
 Variance part for time series 
 Variance part for error 
 R 2 between watched/followed and (described the future) 
 Number of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 Moving backward Moving backward 
 coefficient coefficient 
 (t-statistic) (t-statistic) 
 (1) 
 
 (2) 
 
 4.500 
 (15.610) 
 0.5894 
 (10.224) 
 0.1788 
 (4.882) 
 0.0218 
 (2.127) 
 0.0418 
 (2.454) 
 0.8866 
 (5.299) 
 0.4510 
 (0.819) 
 0.0848 
 (1.440) 
 0.0245 
 (3.204) 
 0.0004 
 (0.025) 
 0.3479 
 (2.815) 
 
 4.393 
 (16.674) 
 0.6000 
 (10.674) 
 0.1864 
 (5.170) 
 0.0256 
 (2.571) 
 0.0470 
 (2.817) 
 0.9144 
 (5.646) 
 
 0.0817 
 0.0006 
 0.0081 
 
 0.0771 
 0.0006 
 0.0081 
 
 0.95 
 364 
 
 0.0244 
 (3.231) 
 
 0.3498 
 (2.867) 
 
 0.95 
 364 
 
 flow of labor services. The labor (number or thing that changes) used 
 here is really a measure of (away from cities) population density, or inversely, land (not enough of something). Binswanger and 
 Pingali (1988) have described on the earlier work 
 of Boserup (1965) which thought about/believed the hits/effects 
 of population pressure on land working well. They 
 argue that land (not enough of something) causes institutional and 
 inventionss which raise land working well and that the relative land (oversupply/large quantity) in 
 many parts of SSA are (blocking things) to land working well growth. So, the (compared to other things) large moving backward 
 coefficient on the labor stock per hectare (number or thing that changes) 
 may be reflecting this 'Boserup effect'. 
 The output elasticities for traditional inputs 
 labor and animals are higher than those of 
 'modern' inputs, (material that makes plants grow better)s and tractors. The pas- 
 
 itive and (meaningful numbers) coefficient for 
 tractor strength is fighting with a more described/explained 
 study by Pingali et al. (1987) which found that 
 tractors did not increase yields in 10 out of 14 
 cases of tractor adoption in SSA countries. However, the results are agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the thin slice, time-series guesses received/got by Ghura and 
 Just (1992) for East Mrica. The land quality 
 index was highly significant while the crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 (number or thing that changes) was not. This may be because 
 Peterson's (1987) land quality index completely/in a hinting way accounts for the extent of crop-watering/rinsing with water in calculation 
 of land quality. 
 The guessed ability to stretch of land working well 
 with respect to the research stock was low (less 
 than 0.05) and (meaningful numbers) only at the 
 10% level for a one-tailed t-test. This hints that 
 research has yet to create broad part/areaal working well growth in SSA farming. We experimented with guessing different hits/effects of research across sub-areas and with interacting 
 research with measures of quality of national 
 research programs reported in Knife (1993). In 
 neither case did research prove to be significant. 
 This could be for some reasons. First, the 
 time falls behind  for research hits/effects may stretch back 
 farther than the data available to construct the 
 research stock (number or thing that changes). Other possible reasons 
 discussed in the books include lack of critical 
 mass of (people who work to find information), lack of spending per (person who works to find information), lack research (in the past) in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) and 
 desert zones, and lack of congruence between 
 output and research mix (Lipton, 1988; Eicher, 
 1990). 
 The output ability to stretch of historic calorie intake 
 is quite high, over 0.34. This is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with 
 results received/got by Correa (1970) and Wheeler 
 (1980) who found a strong (quality of quickly responding to things) of money-based growth to improvements in nutrition. Guessing a (happening together) model of basic needs provision and money-based growth, Wheeler found that 
 the ability to stretch of money-based growth with respect to 
 improved nutrition was nearly 2.0 in very poor 
 less developed countries (LDCs). The very high 
 elasticities of both labor input and calorie intake 
 suggest that improved labor working well through 
 provision of basic nutrition needed things is a 
 possibly great source of farming-based growth. 
 
 G. Frisvold, K. Ingram I Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 The results relating past trade performance to 
 working well are mixed. The coefficient on farming-based export growth was positive and significant at the 1% level (from a two-tailed t-test). 
 We found no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that past export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) 
 affected working well. These two results for the 
 farming-based part/area in SSA match those received/got 
 by Fosu (1990, 1992) (related to/looking at/thinking about) trade performance and overall Republican(s) growth. 
 
 57 
 
 of output between time t and some base period, 
 time 0, Qit - Q;o, can be written as 
 
 (6) 
 In other words, output growth is the sum of 
 land working well growth and the rate of land 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). 
 The moving backward results received/got from guessing Eq. (1) can be used to express land working well growth as a function in changes in ordinary and non-ordinary inputs 
 
 4. Accounting for farming-based growth 
 
 4 
 
 This section presents results of a simple accounting exercise which measures the relative 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) of production inputs and other (numbers that change/things that change) to growth in farming-based output and land 
 working well. Farming-based output growth can be 
 written as a function of farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) (an increase in output per hectare) and extensification ((act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of farming-based land). Let 
 Q be the log of output, A the log of farming-based 
 land area, and Y the log of land working well 
 (output per hectare). The continuous growth rate 
 
 y;t- Y;o = 
 
 L f3&#126;( xjit- Xj;o) 
 j=l 
 
 12 
 
 + 
 
 E ·h( zkit- Zk;o) + (uit- uw) 
 k=l 
 
 (7) 
 where ¥; 1 - ¥; 0 is the continuous growth rate of 
 land working well. The first expression on the 
 right hand side of Eq. (7) is a weighted group of input strengths. The weights are simply 
 the moving backward guesses of the limits/guidelines f3j and 
 
 Table 2 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) of explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) to output and land working well growth, 1973-1975 to 1983-1985 
 SemiArid 
 Tropics 
 
 SubHumid 
 Tropics 
 
 Lowland 
 Humid 
 Tropics 
 
 Humid 
 Tropics 
 
 2.07 
 
 1.15 
 
 1.86 
 
 Farming-based output growth 
 
 1.64 
 
 Explained by changes in 
 Farming-based land 
 Land working well 
 
 0.16 
 1.48 
 
 0.27 
 1.80 
 
 0.53 
 0.62 
 
 0.26 
 1.60 
 
 Change in land working well 
 explained by changes in 
 Ordinary inputs 
 Labor 
 Animals 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s 
 Tractors 
 
 0.97 
 0.31 
 0.10 
 0.14 
 
 1.25 
 0.34 
 0.11 
 0.07 
 
 0.44 
 -0.23 
 0.01 
 0.03 
 
 0.79 
 0.37 
 0.11 
 0.30 
 
 Non-ordinary inputs 
 Export growth 
 Calorie availability 
 Land quality 
 
 O.Ql 
 0.16 
 -0.06 
 
 -0.08 
 0.12 
 0.00 
 
 -0.07 
 0.32 
 -0.06 
 
 -0.12 
 0.03 
 0.02 
 
 Leftover/extra 
 
 -0.15 
 
 -0.01 
 
 0.18 
 
 0.10 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 b 
 
 a 
 
 Figures are output-weighted geometric averages of sample countries in each agro-(related to the Earth's weather) zone. 
 Actual change minus explained change. 
 
 G. Frisuold, K lngramjAgricultural Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 58 
 
 of output-weighted geometric averages of sample 
 countries in each zone. Output growth over this 
 period ranged from 1.15 to 2.07%. This rate does 
 not keep pace with the 2.8% rate of population 
 growth over the same period. Output growth came 
 mostly from land working well growth. 
 Land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), however, remains an important 
 source of output growth, accounting for 0.160.53% increases in once-a-year output growth. Growth 
 (named after/discovered by/caused by) land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) relative to overall 
 growth was higher in more humid areas of SSA 
 but is (compared to other things) less important in semiarid and 
 sub-humid zones. Land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) was especially important in Burundi, Cameroon, Ivory 
 Coast, Madagascar and Sierra Leone. In the 
 Semi-Dry Tropics and Lowland Humid Tropics, 
 production moved/changed toward countries with lower 
 land quality reducing the weighted average (related to a large area) growth - 0.06% per year. 
 Growth in land working well came mostly 
 from growth of ordinary inputs. The major 
 source of land working well growth was the increase in the number of (money-based)/cheaply active people in farming per hectare of farming-based 
 land. This result is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with arguments put 
 forward  in Binswanger and Pingali (1988) that land 
 (oversupply/large quantity) in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) countries, especially SSA, 
 
 Land working well growth is this way a rotting of growth in ordinary and non-ordinary inputs. The restricted moving backward (Table 1, 
 Column 2) was used in the growth accounting 
 exercise. 
 Sample countries were classified into four 
 agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) zones based on Oram et al. (1990). 
 The Semi-Dry (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Rainfall Zone is seen as a 75-150 day growing season with 
 major crops being millet, (grass grown for food) and groundnuts. The Sub-humid (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Summer Rainfall 
 Zone has 150-210 day growing seasons and cropping patterns are heavily dependent on height. 
 The major crop in this area is maize. Only two 
 countries in our sample, Madagascar and Mauritius lie in the Lowland Humid (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Zone 
 which has a growing season of 180-365 days. 
 Most in control/most common crops are rice, sugar, roots and tubers, 
 and coffee. In the Humid (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Zone, the 
 growing season increases from north to south in 
 West Africa. Major valuable things are roots and 
 tubers. Sample countries are listed by agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) zone in the Add on. 
 Table 2 shows the rotting of farming-based output and land working well growth rates 
 for the four agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) zones between 19731975 and 1983-1985. Table 2 reports growth rates 
 Yk· 
 
 1.5 
 Q) 
 
 Ol 
 
 c 
 co 
 
 .r::. 
 
 (.) 
 
 oR 
 0.5 
 
 0 
 
 ·0.5 
 Output 
 
 Modern inputs 
 Trade performance 
 Calories available 
 Land quality 
 Tradtional inputs 
 
 &#126;':J Semi-Dry Tropics 
 - 
 
 Low-Land Humid Tropics 
 
 - 
 
 Leftover/extra 
 
 Sub-Humid Tropics 
 Humid Tropics 
 
 Fig. 2. Output growth rotten into (thing that's given/work that's done) of traditional, modern, and non-ordinary inputs. 
 
 G. Frisvold, K. Ingram j Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 reduce (rewards or reasons for doing something) for farmers to put into use yield-increasing technologies. Big increases in 
 land working well should not be expected until 
 land becomes scarce. 
 We should repeat that growth in the stock of 
 the farming-based labor force is not the same as 
 changes in the flow of labor services. For example, the F AO data suggest that the stock of labor 
 per hectare in Zimbabwe has been rising. Here, 
 the stock refers to the number of (money-based)/cheaply 
 active people in farming. However, the more 
 described/explained country level study of Thirtle eta!. (1993), 
 based on built Divisia indexes points to/shows 
 that on-farm labor strength has been (lowering in number/getting worse). 
 So, the F AO data may be underestimating 
 growth rates of labor working well, while (recording on a camera or computer) working well benefits caused by growing land 
 (not enough of something). 
 Improvements in historic calorie availability 
 added/gave more positively to output growth than 
 increases in (material that makes plants grow better) use in all areas except the 
 Humid Tropics. It should be noted that the base 
 period is the early 1970s, when many areas were 
 suffering from extreme drought. Recovery from 
 the drought conditions of this period may have 
 added/gave to longer term working well growth, 
 especially in the Sahel area. The results are 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with those of Wheeler (1980) and Correa (1970) who found that improved calorie intake made significant (things that are given/work that's done) to long-term 
 money-based growth in LDCs. The results also provide some support to the 'basic needs' plans 
 of development (Wheeler, 1980). 
 Fig. 2 shows the relative (thing that's given/work that's done) of different factors to farming-based output growth in a 
 (a) little different manner than Table 2. Output 
 growth is rotten into (things that are given/work that's done) by traditional inputs (land, labor stock, animals) modern 
 inputs ((material that makes plants grow better)s, tractors), farming-based export 
 growth, calorie availability and land quality. Fig. 2 
 shows that the first (or most important) source of output growth 
 in SSA remains growth in stocks of traditional 
 inputs. Modern inputs (tractors, (material that makes plants grow better)s) were 
 next in importance in terms of (thing that's given/work that's done) to 
 output growth, except in the Lowland Humid 
 Tropics where use did not increase noticeably. 
 (related to a large area) averages mask differences across countries, however. For example, in the Semi-Dry 
 
 59 
 
 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) area, Botswana, Chad, Senegal, Somalia, and Sudan all experienced declines in (material that makes plants grow better) use even though the (related to a large area) average of 
 (material that makes plants grow better) use increased (Table 2). In Rwanda, 
 strength of all modern inputs (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse). A (worsening / rusting, crumbling, etc.) of farming-based trade performance, in 
 terms of export growth, affected all areas but 
 the Semi-Dry Tropics. Negative export growth 
 in other places accounted for a once-a-year decrease in 
 working well of - 0.07 to - 0.12% per year (Table 
 2). 
 
 5. Ends/end results 
 
 This paper examined sources of farming-based 
 growth in sub-Saharan Africa. Growth in the 
 stock of traditional inputs (land, labor, animals) 
 remains the most in control/most common source of output growth. 
 Growth in modern input use was of secondary 
 importance, but still accounted for a 0.2-0.4% 
 once-a-year growth rate across three of four sub-areas. Econometric results are agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the 
 argument of Binswanger and Pingali (1988) that 
 increasing land (not enough of something) is a requirement for 
 growth in land working well. 
 Results also pointed to/showed that research has yet to 
 create broad part/areaal working well growth in 
 SSA farming. We experimented with guessing different hits/effects of research across sub-areas and with interacting research with measures 
 of quality of national research programs. In neither case did we find a (meaningful numbers) 
 relationship between research stock (numbers that change/things that change) and 
 group farming-based working well. 
 The guessed ability to stretch of farming-based output 
 with respect to calorie intake was quite high, 
 about 0.35. This is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with results received/got by Correa and by Wheeler who found a 
 strong (quality of quickly responding to things) of money-based growth to improvements in nutrition. The very high elasticities 
 of both labor and calorie intake suggest that 
 improved labor working well through provision of 
 basic nutrition needed things is a possibly great 
 source of farming-based growth. Improved calorie 
 availability added/gave more to output growth 
 than did growth in (material that makes plants grow better) use in all areas 
 except the Humid Tropics. 
 
 G. Frisuold, K. Ingram 1 Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 60 
 
 Table A1 
 Countries in sample grouped by agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) zone 
 Humid Tropics Semi-Dry Tropics Sub-Humid Tropics 
 Benin 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Congo 
 Ivory Coast 
 Ghana 
 Liberia 
 Nigeria 
 Rwanda 
 Sierra Leone 
 Togo 
 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Paso 
 Chad 
 Ethiopia 
 Mali 
 Mauritania 
 Niger 
 Senegal 
 Somalia 
 Sudan 
 Zambia 
 
 Kenya 
 Malawi 
 Tanzania 
 Zimbabwe 
 
 Lowland Humid Tropics 
 Madagascar 
 Mauritius 
 
 Another important finding is that trade performance is an important (thing that decides something) of longer-term 
 working well growth. Farming-based export growth 
 was found to have a (meaningful numbers) good effect on working well. Negative export 
 growth in many countries over the sample period 
 accounted for working well losses in three of four 
 areas in the study. These latter results suggest 
 important positive (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) effects exist between 
 trade performance and food security on one hand 
 and farming-based working well on the other. 
 
 References 
 Antle, J., 1983. (set of machines) and group farming-based working well: International (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 
 31: 609-619. 
 Behrman, J., Deolalikar, A. and Wolfe, B., 1988. (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.): 
 Hits/effects and (things that decide other things). World Bank Econ. Rev., 2: 
 299-320. 
 Binswanger, H. and Pingali, P., 1988. (related to computers and science) (things that are important) 
 for farming in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank Res. (person who watches something), 3: 81-98. 
 Boserup, E., 1965. The Conditions of Farming-based Growth: 
 The Money flow of Land-related Change under Population 
 Pressure. George Allen and Unwin, London. 
 Knife, K., 1993. A plan to develop farming in subSaharan Africa and a focus for the World Bank. Tech. 
 Pap. No. 203, Africa Technical Department Series, World 
 Bank, Washington, DC. 
 Correa, H., 1970. Sources of growth in Latin America. South. 
 Econ. J., 37: 17-31. 
 Edwards, S., 1993. Openness, trade (easing government rules), and growth 
 in developing countries. J. Econ. Lit., 31: 1358-1394. 
 
 Eicher, C., 1990. Building African scientific ability (to hold or do something) for farming-based development. Agric. Econ., 4: 117-143. 
 Fosu, A., 1990. Exports and money-based growth: The African 
 case. World Dev., 18: 831-835. 
 Fosu, A., 1992. Effect of export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) on money-based growth 
 in Africa. J. Dev. Areas, 26: 323-332. 
 Fuller, W. and Battese, G., 1974. Guess of linear models 
 with crossed-error structure. J. Econometrics, 2: 67-78. 
 Ghura, D. and Just, R., 1992. Education, (set of machines) and 
 (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) in East African farming: Effects/results/suggestions for 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programs. J. Afr. Finance Econ. 
 Dev., 1: 85-106. 
 Gyimah-Brempong, K., 1991. Export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) and money-based 
 growth in sub-Saharan Africa. Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 
 39: 815-828. 
 Haley, S., 1991. Capital collection and the growth of 
 group farming-based production. Agric. Econ., 6: 121157. 
 Hayami, Y. and Ruttan, V., 1985. Farming-based Development: 
 An International (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Johns Hopkins University 
 Press, Baltimore, MD. 
 Kates, R. and Haarmann, V., 1992. Where the poor live: Are 
 the ideas (you think are true) correct? (surrounding conditions), 34: 4-11, 25-28. 
 Lau, L. and Yotopolous, P., 1989. The meta-production function approach to (related to computers and science) change in world farming. J. Dev. Econ., 31: 241-269. 
 Lipton, M., 1988. The place of farming-based research in the 
 development of sub-Saharan Africa. World Dev., 16: 
 1231-1257. 
 Love, J., 1989a. Export (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) and repeating and development expense in a sample of developing countries. J. 
 Dev. Areas, 24: 19-26. 
 Love, J., 1989b. Export imports and investment in developing 
 countries. J. Dev. Stud., 25: 183-191. 
 Mundlak, Y. and Bellinghausen, R., 1982. The intercountry 
 farming-based production function: Another view. Am. J. 
 Agric. Econ., 64: 664-672. 
 Mundlak, Y., Cavallo, D. and Domenech, R., 1989. Farming and money-based growth in Argentina, 1913-84. Rep. 76, 
 International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, 
 DC. 
 Nguyen, D., 1979. On farming-based working well differences 
 among countries. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 61: 565-570. 
 Oram, P., Zapata, J., Alibaruho, G. and Roy, S., 1979. Investment and input needed things for speeding-up food production in poor countries by 1990. Res. Rep. 10, 
 International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, 
 DC. 
 Pardey, P., Roseboom, J. and Anderson, J., 1989. Farming-based 
 Research Policy: International (numbers-based) Opinions. 
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
 Peterson, W., 1987. International land quality indexes. Department of Farming-based and Applied Money flow Staff 
 Pap. P87-10, University of Minnesota. 
 Pingali, P., Prejudiced person, Y. and Binswanger, H., 1987. Farming-based 
 Mechanization and the (change over time) of Farming Systems in 
 Sub-Saharan Africa. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
 
 G. Frisvold, K Ingram j Farming-based Money flow 13 (1995) 51-61 
 
 Rao, J. Mohan and Caballero, J., 1990. Farming-based performance and development plan: Looking back and prospect. 
 World Dev., 18: 899-913. 
 Roumasset, J., 1976. Rice and Risk: Decision-making among 
 Low-Income Farmers. North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
 Singer, H., 1984. Success stories of the 1970's: Some relationships. World Dev., 12: 951-952. 
 
 61 
 
 irtle., C., Atkins.. , J.. , B 
 .. ottoml.ey, P., Gonese, N., Jones Gov- 
 
 and Khatri, Y., 1993. Farming-based working well in 
 &#126; ereh 
 Zimbabwe, 1970-90. Econ. J., 103: 474-480. 
 Tyoout,-J:;1992. Linking trade and working well: New research directions. World Bank Econ. Rev., 6: 189-211. 
 Wheeler, D., 1980. Basic needs fulfilment and money-based 
 growth: A (happening together) model. J. Dev. Econ., 7: 435-451. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
