 Farming-based Money flow, 4 (1990) 117-143 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam - Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 117 
 
 Building African Scientific Ability (to hold or do something) for 
 Farming-based Development 
 Carl K. Eicher 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
 Ml 48824-1039 (U.S.A.) 
 (Accepted 16 May 1989) 
 
 Abstract 
 Eicher, C.K., 1990. Building African scientific ability (to hold or do something) for farming-based development. Agric. Econ., 
 4: 117-143. 
 During Africa's first twenty years of independence from 1960 to 1980, priority was given to increasing the size of national extension services because it was assumed that technology could be 
 imported from industrial countries and the International Farming-based Research Centers. Over the 
 past ten years, (people who give money or other things) have turned their attention to helping national farming-based research 
 systems (NARS). But many NARS are (doing/completing) poorly and are faced with a high turnover of 
 scientific staff and (not good enough) operating budgets. More than that, the present donor-financed project by 
 project and country by country approach to building African scientific ability (to hold or do something) is seriously flawed. 
 This paper examines Africa's farming-based research history over the past sixty years and draws 
 lessons for strengthening national and (related to a large area) farming-based research systems over the coming 30 
 years. 
 
 "The true measure of the success of a program of international and technical cooperation is not in its completed things during the period it is in force but rather in 
 what happens after money from other countries has been withdrawn." 
 -George HARRAR, 1967, p. 20. 
 
 Introduction 
 The biggest challenge facing the international farming-based research community in the 1990s is sub-Saharan Africa, a continent of 45 (many different kinds of people or things) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 and 500 million people. The development of improved technology through 
 farming-based research is central in facing Africa's dual problems of lazy food production and (away from cities) poorness. From independence in 1960-1980, 
 (people who give money or other things) helped in expanding national extension services in Africa because it 
 was assumed that improved technology could be borrowed from industrial 
 countries and international farming-based research centers. Starting around 
 
 0169-5150/90/$03.50 
 
 © 1990 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 118 
 
 1980, (people who give money or other things) offered (for only a short time) project support to strengthen national 
 farming-based research systems (NARS) in Africa. But Africa has one-fifth the 
 number of R&amp;D scientists and engineers per million people as Asia. More than that, 
 about one-fourth of the total number of farming-based (people who work to find information) in NARS and 
 school-related staff in Teachers/professors of Farming in Africa are (ban from a country). In short, 
 after thirty years of independence, Africa has a low level of scientific ability (to hold or do something). 
 This paper presents some thoughts on building African scientific ability (to hold or do something) 
 and strengthening national and (related to a large area) farming-based research systems 
 (NARS) in sub-Saharan Africa (Africa) over the next 30 years. The big idea of 
 this paper is that since many African countries are generations behind Asian 
 and Latin American countries in terms of their stage of scientific ability 
 and institutional maturity, the (for only a short time) project approach now used by 
 (people who give money or other things) to build African scientific ability (to hold or do something) should be replaced by long-term 
 institution-building approaches that were effective in Asia in the 1960s and 
 1970s. But because of Africa's cultural and institutional (many different kinds of people or things), no single 
 model of institution-building should be forced on Africa. More than that, because 
 of the differential stage of development among African countries, institutionbuilding approaches that are effective in middle-income countries such as Zimbabwe and the Cameroon, will have to be changed for countries at an earlier 
 stage of development, such as Guinea, Chad, Burundi, Somalia and Uganda. 
 The performance and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of NARS will be examined over two 30year periods: the colonial period from 1930 to 1959 and after-independence from 
 1960 to 1989. This historical test raises some longer-term issues to 
 think about in strengthening NARS over the coming 30 years, 1990-2020. Finally, 
 some of the effects/results/suggestions are explored for African states, and (people who give money or other things). 
 
 African development big picture 
 In 1957, Ghana, earlier the Gold Coast, reached its independence in the middle of  an 
 outpouring of joy and high expectations. Three years later, 17 added/more countries won their independence, this way explaining why 1960 is often referred to as 
 the date of Africa's independence. Today, 45 countries totaling around 500 
 million people make up sub-Saharan Africa. But (even though there is the existence of) the joy going along with independence in the late 1950s and early 1960s, there has been a basic (existence of two things that aren't equal in size, power, color, etc.) between the huge physical production (possible power or ability within/possibility of) 
 Africa and the ability (to hold or do something) of African governments to reach their money-based 
 wishes. Africa's poorness is (taken by force/controlled) in a single statistic: the total GNP of 
 the 45 countries in sub-Saharan Africa in 1985 was (a) little less than the total 
 GNP of Spain, a nation of 40 million (World Bank, 1987a). 
 African states are usually small in terms of population. Half of the 45 
 countries have fewer than 5 million people, pointing up the need to examine 
 
 119 
 
 how NARS in these countries can chase after what Emil JAVIER calls "smart 
 borrowing" as the first (or most important) plan for owning new technology. Smart 
 and planned borrowing of technology is the common symbol of the energetic 
 money-based growth of Japan, Singapore, South Korea and other countries, including The Netherlands, where now about half of the technology used 
 by farmers is imported. Anyway, there is a view in some scientific circles 
 in Africa that borrowing is an inferior (related to computers and science) path. 
 The stage of institutional development of African states relative to Asia and 
 Latin America is a sensitive topic that was avoided in the early years of 
 Africa's independence in the 1960s and 1970s and is slowly starting to be 
 discussed openly. For example, the respected Africanist, Colin Legum, (not very long ago) watched/followed that as colonial powers withdrew from the continent in 1960, they 
 "left behind them a series of national states, but very few nation-states. The 
 level of development of the continent's nation-state was still roughly 
 equal to that of Europe or China in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries 
 - and certainly no later than the seventeenth century" (Legum, 1985, p. 24). 
 The early stage of Africa's development is limiting the amount offoreign aid 
 that can be now soaked up with good quality/completeness. Most (people who give money or other things) are ignoring the 
 different stage of institutional maturity of individual Mrican states as they 
 prepare standard 5-7-year projects to strengthen NARS and national extension services. More than that, these (for only a short time) projects are always 'front-loaded' 
 with quick-paying activities such as buildings, vehicles, and equipment. 
 A few studies are starting to document the scientific and institutional gap 
 between Africa, and Latin America and Asia (Lele and Goldsmith, 1989). For 
 example, Shapiro (1985) has shown that Africa has about one-fourth the 
 number of scientists, engineers and managers per million people as Asia. Twothirds of the villages in India were excited/with electricity in 1987 as compared with a small 
 fraction in most African countries. Sri Skinnya and Sierra Leone both had percapita incomes of $330 in 1983, but the (how long a person is expected to live) was 69 years in Sri 
 Skinnya as compared with 38 years in Sierra Leone (Behrman et al., 1988). 
 There are written records of farmer crop-watering/rinsing with water associations in Thailand dating 
 back 600 years (Surareks, 1986). Very differently, farmer crop-watering/rinsing with water associations 
 are in their (very beginning stages) in Africa because only 3-5% of the cropped land is under 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) as compared with 30-50% in Asia. A recent study of 25 World 
 Bank-financed farming-based development projects in East Asia, Latin America 
 and Africa points to big differences in the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of 
 farming-based projects by continent. The study shows/tells about that all of the ten projects 
 in Latin America and Asia were thought about/believed (money-based)/cheaply (able to last/helping the planet), compared with only two of the 15 projects in Africa (Cernea, 1987, p. 4). These studies suggest that donor-financed farming-based projects, including support to 
 NARS in Africa, should be designed differently than those in Asia and Latin 
 America. But, Africa's scientific and institutional gap should be expected 
 
 120 
 
 because it is partially the unstoppable result of a century of colonial 
 underinvestment in developing Africa's scientific and managerial ability (to hold or do something). 
 Also, it should be kept in mind that most African countries have been independent for barely 30 years relative to 150 years in Latin America. 
 
 Institutions, (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and African development 
 In this paper, I have used a broad definition of institutions to include institutions and organizations and the rules and conventions that govern them. Over 
 the past twenty years, there has been a lack of hard (related to careful studying or deep thinking) and scientific 
 research on the money flow/money-based studies, financing and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of (related to a plan to reach a goal) national 
 farming-based institutions, such as NARS and extension services. For example, 
 to date there is not a single published study of the money flow/money-based studies of investment in 
 farming-based research for any NARS in sub-Saharan Africa. As a result, 
 (ability to be done) teams are forced to use rate of return guesses from studies in Asia 
 and Latin America to permit donor investments in valuable thing research, FSR 
 projects &#126;nd NARS in Mrica. But this should not come as a surprise. The late 
 Gunnar Myrdal reports that when he was carrying out research for Asian 
 Drama in the 1960s, the hardest issue was learning how "to deal with 
 the political issues of changing institutions, which were then, as now, avoided 
 by most ordinary money-flow experts in their writings on development" (Myrdal, 1984, 
 p. 154). 
 Anyway, the study of institutions is growing in (quality of being liked a lot or done a lot) among 
 money-flow experts. In a 20-year (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) of the money-based development process in 
 23 countries over the 1850-1914 period, two smart people  (not very long ago) decided that 
 "institutions mattered most in telling the difference between country groups experiencing more successful and less successful money-based development" (Morris 
 and Adelman, 1988, p. 209). The authors decided that "(many different kinds of people or things) in growth, 
 (many different kinds of people or things) in institutions and (many different kinds of people or things) in related explanations were the 
 common symbols of the process of nineteenth century development." Glenn L. 
 Johnson argues that "institutional limits are now the most 
 serious holding back factor" on farming in the developed, newly improved and developing countries (Johnson, 1989, p. 177). 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) came of age with the (book, magazine, etc.) of Our Common Future, commonly known as the Brundtland report (World Commission on (surrounding conditions) 
 and Development, 1987). But to date, there has been little debate on the (things that decide other things) of (able to last/helping the planet) farming-based institutions in Mrica. A (able to last/helping the planet) 
 NARS must meet three basic needed things. First, a (able to last/helping the planet) NARS must 
 be able to meet a performance test: the ability to plan and put into use national 
 research programs and develop improved technology in an (producing a lot with very little waste) manner. 
 Second, a (able to last/helping the planet) NARS must have the ability to change and change  in 
 order to meet the changing research needs of its clients and important people over 
 
 121 
 
 time. Third, a (able to last/helping the planet) NARS must (put into a hospital)/(make a behavior acceptable) the ability to 
 create domestic money-based help and develop a stable group of national 
 scientists to carry out its research mission in line with changing (things that are important). 
 The hard core knowledge base on how to strengthen institutions such as 
 NARS, extension services and faculties of farming in Africa is sadly not enough. Research is very much needed on the causes of the (existing all over a large area) failure 
 of parastatals and the poor performance of national research and extension 
 services (Eicher, 1982; Lipton, 1988). But research should also examine why 
 some farming-based institutions are extremely effective such as the Kenya Tea 
 Development Authority that serves 150 000 smallholders, the Zimbabwe 
 Smallholder Cotton Marketing Board, the Botswana Meat Commission, West 
 Cameroon Coffee Cooperative Union, and the Mali Sud Cotton Project that 
 serves 70 000 smallholders. These success stories should be carefully studied 
 to draw lessons for institution building in the 1990s. 
 Thirty years of independence have produced a large knowledge base on 
 why many money from other countries-financed farming-based and (away from cities) development projects 
 are not (doing as expected) well at this early stage of Africa's money-based history and institutional easily-broken quality (Cernea, 1987; World Bank, 1987b, 1988d; Eicher, 1989). 
 There is consistent (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that human ability and institutional (blocking things) 
 to development have been skirted in the drive to increase money from other countries flows to 
 African farming - especially during the fast build-up of aid for direct action projects over the 1973-83 period. Starting around 1983, the money from other countries 
 pendulum swung from project to policy-based lending. But (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) 
 whether the focus was on project or policies, the result has been the same: 
 the long-run human ability, scientific and institutional and social organizational issues - the most important movers of farming-based development - are being 
 seriously neglected by both African policy makers and (people who give money or other things). There is a need 
 for a basic reexamination of the ideas (you think are true) about Africa's stage of 
 money-based history, the differential levels of development of different African 
 states, (able to/ability to hold or take in something else) ability (to hold or do something), repeating costs and plans for building African 
 ability (to hold or do something) in research, extension, and training. 
 The longer one works in Africa, the more one is forced to decide that a 
 human ability/institution building model of development should replace 
 the long term technical help and across-the-ocean training model. The faults/problems of the technical help model are painfully seen/obvious in Somalia. A recent joint UNDP/IBRD technical mission dug deeply into the mode of delivering money from other countries to Somalia, a country ripped apart with group  wars and a century or 
 two behind most Asian countries in terms of its level of scientific, institutional, 
 and (related to managing and running a company or organization) maturity. The mission reported that (people who give money or other things) were together pumping US$100 million into Somalia each year to support 1200 (ban from a country)s on technical help contracts to different government (services businesses/government units) 
 
 122 
 
 and ove\seas training for Somali nationals (UNDP and IBRD, 1985).1 Anyway, this revolving door model of foreign advisors and across-the-ocean training is 
 not (accomplishing or gaining) the final/best goal, "the development of national ability (to hold or do something) 
 through the permanent move (from one place to another) of skills and know-how to Somali nationals 
 and national institutions" (UNDP and IBRD, 1985, p. 2). Without question, 
 the model is not facing the long-term problem of developing (able to last/helping the planet) 
 Somali institutions. 
 We will  now examine Africa's colonial farming-based research history from 
 1930 to the eve of independence in 1959. 
 
 Farming-based research during the colonial period: 1930- 1959 
 National farming-based research services 
 
 A extremely skinny/skeleton-related farming-based research (set of machines) was established in most 
 countries in Africa during the first two to thirty years of this century. 2 A 
 few countries such as the Sudan launched research programs immediately 
 following World War I (Idris, 1969). By 1930, small groups of (people who work to find information) were 
 at work on export valuable things, but food crop research included (grass grown for food) in 
 Uganda, maize in Zimbabwe and Kenya, rice and cassava in Zaire, and rice 
 in English speaker and francophone West Africa. In most countries, a few scientists 
 worked on clearly stated/particular crops in a loose organization which was more modest than 
 present-day national farming-based research systems. The exception was the 
 huge Belgian research operation in Zaire (earlier the Belgian Congo). 
 The (ability to create interesting new things) and working well of NARS during the colonial period can be 
 illustrated through historical sketches of research in Zaire, Zimbabwe and 
 Kenya over the 1930-59 period. In Zaire, about two-thirds of the budget ofthe 
 Belgian-financed national farming-based research service (INEAC) was focused 
 on export crops and one-third on food crops. 3 Research on oil palm was launched in 1933 with the goal of developing a high-cooperating with/producing/giving up palm to replace the tall, 
 (producing or giving very little)ing wild palm that grew in the bush in West and Central Africa. In 
 1939, after only 6 years of research at the INEAC station at Yangambi in northern Zaire, a team of five colonial (people who work to find information) unlocked the (the study of tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) of the oil 
 palm that led to the development of blended varieties that out-cooperated with/produced/gave up wild 
 
 1 About US$90 million was spent on the 1200 long-term advisors and about $10 
 million on across-the-ocean training in 1985. 
 2 Colonial research in English speaker countries is recorded/told about by Jeffries (1964), McKelvey 
 (1965) and Masefield (1972). 
 3 Professor Eric Tollens, Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium is carrying out a 
 study of the return to Belgian investment in research on eight valuable things in Zaire 
 from 1933 to 1959. 
 
 123 
 
 palms by (more than two hundred) percent under farm conditions (Beirnaert, 1940; 
 Tollens, personal communication, 23 July 1988). The oil palm research at INEAC had large (related to a large area) and international spillover effects which laid the foundation for the modern oil palm industry in Cote d'Ivoire (earlier the Ivory 
 Coast), 4 Nigeria (Eicher, 1967), Malaysia (Hartley, 1970), and Indonesia. 
 Research "spillovers" refer to the benefits from research which build up to 
 farmers and people in countries that import technology without paying for 
 the cost of its development. 
 INEAC's rice research also (shows or proves) the (related to a large area) spillover effects of a 
 technology-producing national farming-based research system (TP/NARS). In 
 1958, INEAC released an upland rice variety, O.S.6, after 6 years of breeding. 
 Although O.S.6 is not grown in Zaire, it remains one of the most in control/most common upland 
 rice varieties in West Africa 30 years after its release. O.S.6. is grown under 
 different local names in West Africa and it accounts for about 90% of the 
 upland rice now grown in Nigeria. In summary, the INEAC research program in Zaire illustrates the huge (possible power or ability within/possibility of)  national research services in 
 Africa to produce new food and export crop technology for local needs as well 
 as the needs of surrounding technology borrowing (TB) NARS. 
 The NARS of Zimbabwe is the second example of the (ability to create interesting new things) of a national 
 research system in Africa. Combination maize development in Zimbabwe from 1932 
 to 1960 represents an example of a NARS in Africa producing new 
 technology without depending on imported germplasm. In 1932, H.C. Arnold 
 launched a maize improvement program in Zimbabwe (then Southern 
 Rhodesia) followed by A.G.R. Rattray in 1938. In 1949, 17 years after research 
 was started, the first combination, SR-1, was developed by crossing two locally raised/trained 
 open-(brought pollen from one plant to another) varieties, Southern Cross and Salisbury White. But SR-1 was 
 not released to farmers because yields were low and research continued from 
 1949 to 1960 in a search for higher-cooperating with/producing/giving up combinations. In 1960, SR-52 (Southern 
 Rhodesia-52), a single-cross combination, was released to commercial farmers after 
 28 years of research on combinations (1932-1960). Looking back over the past six 
 20 years of research on food crops in Africa, the SR-52 white maize combination is 
 definitely the Green Revolution food crop success story in Africa (Eicher, 
 1984). Although the size of the maize research program in Zimbabwe has been 
 small (two to four (people who work to find information)), the program is known for its (unbroken, constant quality), its 
 scientific and (related to managing and running a company or organization) leadership and its working well. 5 Zimbabwe's exIn 1947, the French established the Institut de interesting pour les huiles et 
 oleangineaux (IRHO) to carry out research on oil palm. Cooperation between INEAC 
 and IRHO scientists played a very important role in developing the modern oil palm industry 
 in Cote d'Ivoire (Drachoussoff, 1965). 
 5 A.G. Rattray served as director of maize research from 1938 to 1968. Zimbabwe's 
 maize research program has been directed by four scientists over the past sixty years 
 (1932 -1989). 
 4 
 
 124 
 
 perience also illustrates the long/big spillover effects of a technology producing NARS (TP/NARS). SR-52 maize seed has been sold as far north as Ethiopia, 
 as far west as the Cameroon, and as far south as the Republic of South Africa. 
 In Kenya's national farming-based research system, it took Michael Harrison 
 and his maize team only 9 years (1955-1964) to develop a high-cooperating with/producing/giving up combination 
 maize variety by crossing a local variety with a variety imported from 
 Ecuador. Kenya's experience shows the potential of importing germplasm 
 and highlights the need for N ARS in Africa to develop the high level of 
 technical ability (to hold or do something) needed/demanded to chase after a plan of "smart borrowing" of 
 technology from close-by countries and the worldwide  system. 
 (related to a large area) research institutes 
 
 (related to a large area) research institutions were introduced during the colonial period to 
 deal with the small country problem and stimulate the production of export 
 valuable things for (related to Europe) markets (Kyomo, 1988). In 1930, Ghana was the 
 world's largest cocoa producer, but the industry was harmed by insect and 
 disease problems. To deal with these problems, in 1938 the British colonial service established a Cocoa Research Institute at Tafo to serve Ghana. The Institute carried out highly successful studies of controlling a few cocoa 
 sicknesses, including swollen shoot virus, capsid and black pod. Spraying programs based on these research findings were useful in boosting 
 Ghana's cocoa production to a peak output of 520 000 metric tonnes in 1965 
 (Martinson et al., 1987). 
 In 1944, the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana was renamed the West 
 African Cocoa Research Institute (W ACRI) and given a order to serve the 
 British (groups of people or other living things) of Ghana and Nigeria. The WACRI staff in 1944 was composed 
 of 15 British scientists. W ACRI had a productive life span of 18 years but in 
 1962, 5 years after independence, the government of Ghana ended/stopped W ACRI 
 and set up the Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG). In the move/change from a 
 (related to a large area) to a national order, twelve (ban from a country) staff quit, leaving seven 
 local professional staff and 25 vacancies at (CRIG). The number of Ghanaian 
 scientific staff increased slowly to eleven (of 17 total) in 1970 and to 25 by 1985. 
 The order of CRIG was expanded in 1975 to include coffee, kola, and shea 
 nuts. 
 But the Cocoa Research Institute of Chana (CRIG) has been shoved by 
 changing government decisions on its (related to managing and running a company or organization) home. For example, 
 CRIG has been given by the following six organizations from 1962 to 
 1989: 
 National Research Group of people 
 Ghana College/school of Sciences, 
 Group of people for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
 
 125 
 
 - Ministry of Cocoa Affairs 
 - Ghana Cocoa Marketing Board, and 
 - Ghana Cocoa Board. 
 CGIG has been reshuffied on the average of once every 4.5 years. No scientific 
 organization can wave/grow/decoration in an (surrounding conditions) of such organizational confusion. 
 We now turn to oil palm research in West Africa. Nigeria was the world's 
 leading producer of oil palm during the colonial period and in 1939, the British 
 colonial government established the Nigerian Oil Palm Research Station in 
 Benin in order to meet the growing challenge of oil palm production on (large farms with crops) in the Far East. In 1951, the British converted Nigeria's oil palm station 
 into the West African Institute for Oil Palm Research (WAIFOR), with a order to serve the British West African (land areas owned or controlled by someone) of Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra 
 Leone and the Cameroon. In the 1950s, WAIFOR was a highly productive 
 (related to a large area) research organization with a scientific staff of 16 senior officers 
 (WAIFOR, 1955-56). 
 Soon after Nigeria became independent in 1960, the new government decided to (convert to government ownership/make nation-wide) WAIFOR and rename it the Nigerian Institute for Oil Palm 
 Research (NIFOR). During the 1962-64 change period, ten of the 15 
 research officers left the Institute. When NIFOR was formally established in 
 1964, it had a staff of ten senior officers and the number increased slowly to 
 15 in 1970. Nigeria's oil boom of the 1970s gave/given money available for a (atomic) 
 jump in NIFOR's staff from 15 senior officers in 1970-71 to 283 in 1985 
 (NIFOR, 1965-66, 1970-71, 1985). 
 But today, NIFOR is not (doing as expected) well. Most of NIFOR's budget is used 
 to pay the (moneys paid for working) of its huge (related to managing and running a company or organization), scientific and support staff. Only 
 about 1/3 of its 283 senior staff are directly working at research while the other 
 2/3 are in management, support services, social services and money/money income 
 creating activities. NIFOR's research order has been broadened beyond 
 oil palm to include date palm, raphia, coconut and other palms. But in 1985, 
 only 48 scientists were working on the key crop - oil palm - while 64 out of 
 the 283 senior officers were (controlling or managing/giving medicine or something else) the Institute. NIFOR is also starved 
 for foreign exchange to buy equipment and supplies. In summary, NIFOR 
 is top heavy with (related to managing and running a company or organization) staff and it has a order looking like a 
 government development corporation. Many specialists believe that oil palm 
 research in Nigeria is less productive today with 283 senior officers than when 
 it had 15 from 1955 to 1970. 
 The spoiling of cocoa and oil palm research in Ghana and Nigeria stands 
 very different than the experience of Malaysia and Indonesia. In 1925, 
 Malaysia established the Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia (RRIM) and 
 concentrated its national research effort on rubber for forty years. Malaysia 
 became independent in 1957, the same year as Ghana, but Malaysia chose the 
 farming-based road to development while, under Nkrumah, Ghana chose the 
 
 126 
 
 industrial path. In the late 1960s, Malaysia began a huge 
 farming-based (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) program away from rubber by beginning and building on the 
 Malaysian Farming-based Research and Development Institute (MARDI) in 
 1971. Malaysia drew on Zaire's new research on combination palms (Beirnaert, 1940) and over time developed combinations good for Malaysian conditions. In 1978, oil palm research was spun off from MARDI into a new institute, the Palm Oil Research Institute of Malaysia (PORIM, 1985). Malaysia 
 is also planning to spin off cocoa research from MARDI and set up a separate 
 cocoa research institute with the goal of around 100 scientists and technicians. 
 Malaysia increased its farming-based research staff from 100 officers at independence in 1957 to 1000 today. Malaysia's highly productive research 
 system has helped (branch out into different things) its export base, and Malaysia is now regularly selling palm oil to Nigeria. Ghana's per person GDP of $390 in 1986 stands in 
 sharp contrast to $1830 in Malaysia. 
 Nigeria and Ghana have disappeared/wasted their research base for oil palm and 
 cocoa and lost world (your share of sales out of all sales)s to Malaysia and Indonesia. Restoring the 
 competitive position of oil palm and cocoa research will require more than increased (money-related) help from (people who give money or other things). Many basic political, managerial and 
 scientific problems are annoying/harming export crop research in West Africa. These 
 problems must be talked to/looked at by Africans at both the political and scientific 
 levels. 
 But in francophone Africa a few (related to a large area) research programs are still (doing as expected) well. One of the most successful is the CFDT/ffiCT network that supports cotton production and marketing in ten countries in francophone 
 Africa.6 Cotton research is carried out by a group of about 100 IRCT (people who work to find information) in France and in francophone Africa. 7 In nine of the ten francophone 
 countries where data are available, average cotton yields increased four-fold 
 over the 20-year period, 1963-1982 (Dequecker, 1983). The CFDT is a private 
 cotton management and extension organization with forty years of experience in Africa. The World Bank (not very long ago) tested the CFDTIIRCT model 
 in Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, and Togo- and decided that it is a "striking 
 success" when compared with other farming-based development projects in 
 Africa (World Bank, 1988b, p. 29). Lele et al. (1989) reports that phasing out 
 (related to a large area) cotton research and extension programs in English speaker Mrica in the 
 1970s is partially responsible for the slow growth in cotton production m 
 English speaker relative to francophone Africa over the past 15 years. 
 
 6 
 
 Institut de Interestings de Coton et des Fabrics Exotiques (IRCT). Compagnie Francaise pour le developpement de fibres fabrics (CFDT). 
 7 In 1986, the IRCT network of 105 scientists was composed of the following: 26 (people who work to find information) in France, and 40 (ban from a country)s and 39 national cotton (people who work to find information) in the ten main 
 Francophone cotton growing countries in Africa. 
 
 127 
 
 Five lessons from the colonial research experience 
 Colonial research included many failures such as the inability to (accomplish or gain with effort) 
 breakthroughs in (grass grown for food) and millet after sixty years of research, 
 underinvestment in training African scientists and the pursuit of inappropriate research plans in many land plentiful countries (Carr, 1982; 
 Binswanger, 1986). But (even though there is the existence of) these faults/problems, there were some stunning 
 successes in organizing, financing and executing colonial research that have 
 relevance for modern farming-based research policy in Africa: 
 
 1. Small valuable thing research teams. In most cases, three to four scientists, 
 and in a few cases, no more than half twelve scientists, formed the valuable thing 
 teams ofTP/NARS that produced combination maize in Zimbabwe and Kenya, rustresistant wheat in Kenya, improved tea copies in East Africa, cotton in U ganda, and improved soybean and cotton varieties in Zimbabwe. 
 2. (ability to create interesting new things) of technology producing NARS (TPINARS). During the colonial 
 period, many countries (showed/shown or proved) the (ability to create interesting new things) of national 
 farming-based research systems in producing new technology. 8 
 3. Borrowing technology. Borrowing technology is a proven colonial research 
 plan. The tea industry in Eastern Africa drew heavily on imported copies 
 from Sri Skinnya and India. Zimbabwe's SR52 maize seed was borrowed by a 
 dozen African countries. 
 4. Research spillovers: (related to a large area), Pan African, and international. Research 
 spillovers from TP/NARS and (related to a large area) starts are illustrated by combination oil 
 palm, combination maize, cotton and other valuable things. For example, Cote d'Ivoire, 
 Nigeria, Malaysia, and Indonesia borrowed the basic breeding plan for 
 combination oil palm from Zaire and used it to develop combinations for local conditions. 
 The spillover issue should be clearly incorporated in (investigations to see if something can be done) to 
 strengthen NARS in the 1990s. 9 
 5. (related to a large area) research: (producing a lot with very little waste) but dependent upon external financing. (related to a large area) research was chased after to serve the large number of small (groups of people or other living things). It was highly (producing a lot with very little waste) because of its concentration on a few valuable things, 
 promised to/certain across the ocean money/giving money (to), and its (unbroken, constant quality) of (related to managing and running a company or organization) and scientific 
 leadership. Examples of successful (related to a large area) research include the East African 
 8 
 9 
 
 For a summary of 48 years of cocoa research in Ghana, see (Martinson et al., 1987). 
 Most (investigations to see if something can be done) ofNARS give/reserve little attention to research spillovers and the 
 interaction of NARS in a smaller area. For example, see Mali (1988) and Niger (1988). 
 
 128 
 
 Farming-based and Forestry Research Organization (EAAFRO), the Federation 
 of Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) and 
 Nyasaland (now Malawi), and the West African valuable thing research institutes 
 (cocoa, oil palm, rubber, rice). 
 
 Farming-based research since independence: 1960- 1989 
 The total experience ofNARS in the first thirty years of independence 
 can be carefully studied under five topics: 
 
 Political confusion, destruction of institutions, and the brain drain. At independence, the institutional base of African farming was geared to 
 supporting large farms, (large farms with crops), ranches and export farming. The 
 1960s and 1970s were marked by the destruction of many of the born-in 
 (related to a large area) and national research institutions. Soon after independence, for example, Guinea and Madagascar ended/fired the services of French research 
 help. 'ln 1962, Nkrumah stopped Ghana's national extension service. 
 Tanzania stopped local government and farm cooperatives in the mid-1970s. 
 Many training institutions, such as Makerere University in Uganda, 
 were ruined during internal political big changes. 
 The localization and basic rebuilding of land-related institutions to serve the 
 majority of (away from cities) people is now happening throughout Africa. English speaker 
 countries such as Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, and Tanzania have (accomplished or gained) 
 (in a big way) greater progress in the (conversion to government ownership/making something nation-wide) of their NARS and 
 Faculties of Farming than francophone countries. For example, after 29 
 years of independence, Cote d'Ivoire has 73% of its farming-based research and 
 teaching posts filled by (ban from a country)s as compared with 6% in Ghana and none 
 in Nigeria (Pardey and Roseboom, 1989). This is a puzzle that warrants further 
 analysis and debate at the political and technical levels. 
 Without question, one of the underreported events limiting African 
 farm-related today is the farming-based brain drain that has been fueled by plans, 
 (wars between groups that all live in one country) and political unrest. For example, Ghana, Ethiopia, Uganda, 
 Somalia, Tanzania, and Zambia have been stripped of farming-based scientists 
 and teachers through the brain drain. 
 Uncontrolled growth ofthe state slow-working department. Thirty years of independence have 
 been marked by an increase in the state machinery serving farming: 
 Sub-Saharan Africa started independence in 1960 with a deep/extreme extension bias of 21 200 extension agents and 1329 (people who work to find information). This bias was stronger as African states hired an added 36 000 extension agents over 
 the next 20 years (Judd et al., 1987, pp. 11-13). 
 
 129 
 
 - The Congo increased the size of its extension staff ten-fold from 1960 to 
 1972 (Young, 1988, p. 26). 
 - In Ghana, the Cocoa Marketing Board employed 105 000 in the early 1980s 
 to handle a crop half as large as that which 50 000 workers had managed 
 in 1965 (Young, 1988). 
 In Nigeria, the national farming-based research service expanded from 100 
 (people who work to find information) in 1960 to around 1000 today (Pardey and Roseboom, 1989). 
 In many cases, the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the state institutions has been went with 
 by an wearing away in the performance of the institutions, with most of the 
 budget used to pay (moneys paid for working) (Abernethy, 1987). 
 
 The Green Revolution footprint. The Green Revolution has (accomplished or gained) the hit/effect of a small footprint on Africa's (away from cities) (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land). Dalrymple (1986a, b) 
 reports that the total area of modern wheat and rice varieties under (producing crops/helping something grow) in sub-Saharan Africa in 1983 was about 800 000 ha (wheat 556 000 and 
 rice 242 000 ha) which is roughly equal to one-quarter of the once-a-year cropped area in Zimbabwe, one of the 45 countries in Mrica. Since the Green 
 Revolution has barely touched Africa, African leaders and the donor community must face up to the reality that the CGIAR and French research networks 
 have not delivered the volume of new food crop technology that many experts 
 had completely/in a hinting way promised when the first CGIAR center IITA, was established in 
 Ibadan some 20 years ago. Three lessons flow from the limited hit/effect of Green 
 Revolution in Africa to date. The first is the need to strengthen the ability (to hold or do something) 
 ofNARS to develop new technology and add to/addition the efforts of the CGIAR, 
 CIRAD and the worldwide  research system. The second is to strengthen the ability (to hold or do something) ofNARS to become (producing more with less waste) borrowers of technology from close-by 
 countries and the worldwide  research system. The third is the need for the CGIAR 
 to (look at again) its plan of strengthening the ability (to hold or do something) of the NARS of Africa. 
 Money from other countries buildup for NARS. In the 1960s and 1970s, (people who give money or other things) invested 
 heavily in developing the CGIAR worldwide  system, including four IARCs with 
 their headquarters based in Africa. In 1980, the CG system launched a new 
 institute, ISNAR, to help strengthen national farming-based research systems. 
 During the 1980s, (people who give money or other things) channeled investments to the NARS of Mrica. The 
 World Bank took the lead in co-financing a large loan for the NARS of Sudan 
 in 1979 followed by loans to Senegal, Rwanda, Malawi and other countries in 
 the early 1980s. The loans by the Bank and other (people who give money or other things) to African NARS in 
 the 1980s are noted for their conservative time frame (usually 5-7 years), 
 support for a large number of valuable things (e.g. 17 in the World Bank Project 
 for Rwanda), quick paying activities such as buildings, equipment and 
 vehicles, farming systems research (e.g. Senegal, Rwanda and Sudanese proj- 
 
 130 
 
 ects) and not enough attention to the important issues of human and (money-related) 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) (Eicher, 1982b; 1989). 
 What flows from the record of donor-financed projects for African NARS during the 1980s is the unavoidable end/end result that the connected issues of the 
 size, performance and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of NARS are not being talked to/looked at by 
 African policy makers, NARS and (people who give money or other things). Today, most NARS do not have the 
 institutional, managerial and (money-related) ability to soak up current levels of 
 project aid "with good quality/completeness" and to sustain the project activities after foreign 
 aid is phased out. But this problem is not restricted to NARS. In some 
 smaller areas such as the Sahel, money from other countries (people in charge) are unwilling to discuss the 
 financing of repeating (operating) costs of institutions because it is assumed 
 that (people who give money or other things) will be paying some of these costs for the blurry/unknown future maybe for another generation or longer.l 0 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): the Weak spots of NARS and (related to a large area) institutes. Soon after 
 independence in the late 1950s and early 1960s, almost all (related to a large area) research 
 institutes in English speaker Africa were phased out with the exception of the Tea 
 Research Foundation of Central Africa, a private research institute based in 
 Malawi that was (at first/before other things happened) set up to serve tea huge houses in the area. But the 
 Foundation has received some donor support for at least 20 years (R.T. Ellis, 
 personal communication, 8 August 1988). In francophone Africa, a few impressive (related to a large area) research networks are still in operation such as the ten country CFDT/IRCT cotton research, extension and international marketing network. 
 Today, after thirty years of independence, many NARS and (related to a large area) 
 research systems are (doing/completing) poorly, and are heavily dependent upon 
 money from other countries. In fact, Zimbabwe has one of the few NARS in Mrica that is 
 basically financed from national sources and staffed by local scientists. The 
 issues surrounding the human and (money-related) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of national and 
 (related to a large area) research systems call for in depth research and critical debate in the 
 1990s. 
 
 10 The repeating cost problem is basically the inability of an African government to 
 pay for the operating costs of an institution or service such as a NARS (Howell, 1986). 
 Most (investigations to see if something can be done) of NARS ignore the repeating cost problem or assume it away 
 by silly ideas (you think are true) about the ability of an institution to gain special budget 
 support from the Ministry of Finance. For example, a recent (investigation to see if something can be done) of the 
 N ARS in Niger, assumed that the Ministry of Finance would increase the real budget 
 for INRAN, the NARS of Niger, by an average of 7% per year in the 1990s (Niger, 
 1988). 
 
 131 
 
 Scientific ability (to hold or do something) building: 1990-2020 
 Drawing on Africa's research experience over the past 60 years, the following issues come out  for debate on strengthening national and (related to a large area) 
 farming-based research systems over the next 30 years: 
 
 Politics of science and technology for farming-based development. The central question to be talked to/looked at by African states, scientists and the international 
 community in the 1990s is the following: How can African nations of different 
 sizes organize themselves to become more (related to computers and science) skilled? The present donor-financed project by project and country by country approach to 
 building African scientific ability (to hold or do something) is seriously flawed. The road ahead needs/demands a vision of the changing role of science and technology in Mrica's (away from cities) 
 change over the next 25-50 years. There is an important need for the 
 NARS, the Special Program for African Farming-based Research (SPAAR) and 
 the major (people who give money or other things) to develop a long term (related to how land, rivers, etc. affect a country's rules and relationships) and coordinated approach 
 to scientific ability (to hold or do something)-building in Africa. But the foundation for this new vision 
 of the role of science and technology in Africa development must come from 
 Africa and must flow from Africa's historical, cultural, technical, and political 
 experience. For example, Professor Thomas Odhiambo of Kenya argues that 
 African "farming-based research leadership, in concert with the (related to how land, rivers, etc. affect a country's rules and relationships) 
 leadership, must create and care for an (surrounding conditions) that encourages research 
 business-starting and excites inventions" (Odhiambo, 1988, 
 p. 48). African scientific ability (to hold or do something)-building should also include long-term international money-based help for (related to a large area) research and MSc training institutions 
 (because of the small country problem) for at least the next 20-30 years. 
 Payoff to coordinated investments in research, extension and training. Most 
 studies reporting high rates of returns to investment in farming-based research 
 in Asia and Latin America and industrial countries are, in fact, combined returns 
 to investments in research, extension and training. The payoff to a coordinated 
 set of investments to strengthen the institutional base (research, extension, 
 and training) for farming is (taken by force/controlled) in a new study of U.S. 
 farming-based research by Evenson, Waggoner and Ruttan (1979). The authors 
 found that the highest payoffs to research came from a coordinated set of interactive investments to further the decentralization of research and the promotion of research-extension linkages. The end/end result that flows from this 
 study is the need to shift the debate from strengthening research to the coordination of investments in research, extension and training (Bonnen, 1987). 
 The issue for (people who give money or other things) to think about in the 1990s is the following: what national and 
 (related to a large area) (machines/methods/ways) need to be developed to strengthen the coordination of 
 research, extension and training institutions in support of African 
 farming? 
 
 132 
 
 Strength in (many different kinds of people or things) of institutional approaches. Africa's experience since 
 1960 has illustrated the (many different kinds of people or things) of institutions, the strength in this (many different kinds of people or things) 
 and the need to help develop (many different kinds of people or things) in the future. For example, (even though there is the existence of) the failure 
 of (related to a large area) research systems in English speaker Africa since 1960, the French 
 directed CFDT/IRCT multi-country cotton model is (doing as expected) well in francophone Africa. On the other hand, Zimbabwe's (up and down) (having different things working together as one unit) cotton 
 research, production and extension model is growing without scientific 
 help from an industrial country such as France. The ghost/terrible thing on the 
 (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  that should be argued with is the World Bank's drive to (help increase/show in a good way) one extension model - T&amp;V -throughout Africa, a model (helped increase/showed in a good way) by the World 
 Bank in 32 of Africa's 45 countries. 
 Farming-based research investment normal behaviors and (things that are important). How much should 
 African states spend on farming-based research? Now, most (people who give money or other things) follow 
 the guideline that a desirable farming-based research investment target would 
 be in the range of 0.5-2.0% of the total national value of farming-based GDP. 
 The World Bank has argued that a desirable investment target for research 
 for many countries would be a once-a-year expense (repeating, plus capital) 
 "equal to about 2 percent of farming-based gross domestic product" (World 
 Bank, 1981, p. 8). But this norm is taken from industrial countries with a 
 century or more of experience in (getting ready for action) political and money-based help 
 from farm organizations, valuable thing groups, private firms and state and 
 federal organizations. There is little scientific information from Africa on the 
 pay off to investing 0.5-2.0% of farming-based GDP in research. There is, 
 however, enough historical and (less than definite) evidence to decide that some of 
 the recent statements on the level of investment in NARS should be 
 taken with some doubt. For example, Dayanatha Jha (not very long ago) ended/decided 
 that there is "big underinvestment" in farming-based research in Africa 
 because 14 countries were spending less than 0.5% of their farming-based GDP 
 on research (Jha, 1987, p. 267). But the ready availability of money from other countries in the 
 1980s has led to an overinvestment in some NARS relative to their current 
 stage of institutional maturity, (able to/ability to hold or take in something else) ability (to hold or do something), scientific leadership, projected government money/money income, and political support to maintain the NARS after 
 money from other countries is phased out. For example, it is usually easier for the manager of a NARS to (get ready for action) an added million dollars of research 
 support from (people who give money or other things) than from domestic sources. Although Vernon Ruttan 
 (1987) has over and over again stressed the need to tie (in small steps up) donor money available for 
 NARS to matching money from the receiver government, in practice, (people who give money or other things) 
 are unwilling to enforce this common sense approach. 
 The farming-based research investment normal behaviors came/coming from the experience of 
 advanced countries, either (person who uses money to make more money) or socialist, can be used as rough guides 
 but not as decision rules for (people who give money or other things) and African states. If money from other countries is 
 
 133 
 
 gave out to NARS in Mrica according to the 1-2% investment norm, it may 
 inflate the size of the NARS (staff, buildings, and equipment) beyond the 
 ability to (get ready for action) domestic political and money-based support to sustain it over 
 time. The question of how much to spend on farming-based research in Africa in 
 the 1990s should be chased after through scientific research on African NARS. 
 
 Size, (things that are important) and performance of NARS. The size of many NARS has increased very much since independence in 1960. Four factors help explain the 
 growth of NARS and why this growth has often been at the expense of the 
 quality of the research program. First, since independence, as part of the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the state slow-working department, many NARS have increased the 
 number of scientists, technicians, buildings, equipment, research stations, 
 research projects, and operating budgets beyond the ability to sustain these activities from national budgets. In many cases, this (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) has outstripped 
 the ability (to hold or do something) oflocal research managers to restrict the number of research 
 problems talked to/looked at, manage the national research business/project, pay staff on 
 time, plant experiments on schedule, and (get ready for action) political and slow-working 
 support from the Ministry of Finance to finance and sustain the system after 
 money from other countries is phased out. For example, Nigeria's petroleum boom has fueled 
 the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of its NARS from around 100 scientists at independence in 1960 
 to 1000 in 1989, but the research system is starved for operating money. Professor Francis Idachaba, Vice Chancellor of the University of Farming, 
 Makurdi (not very long ago) reported that "Research management probably makes up/is equal to 
 the most important restriction on Nigeria's National Farming-based Research 
 System" (Idachaba, 1987, p. 351). 
 Second, many NARS have been under lots of nagging to soak up 
 new university graduates. In Kenya, for example the NARs has been under 
 pressure to go beyond the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) practice of hiring farming-based graduates to 
 accepting some of the growing number of science graduates from the 
 university system, a system that has grown from one university in 1970 to five 
 in 1989. 
 Third, (people who give money or other things) have directly and indirectly added/gave to the increase in the 
 size of NARS. For example, (people who give money or other things) are now paying a big share 
 of the repeating budget of the national farming-based research systems in Mali, 
 Ghana, Senegal, Niger, Zambia, Rwanda, and many other countries. It is 
 almost impossible to refer to  a donor (investigation to see if something can be done) that recommends reducing 
 the size of a N ARS and (focusing mental and physical effort) on upgrading the quality of the present 
 research staff and the (quality of being connected or related to something) of its research program. The fourth factor adding/giving to the growth of NARS is the lack of institutional (machines/methods/ways) to 
 finance (related to a large area) research institutes. 11 As a result, there is (making copies of something/more than one person doing the same thing) of 
 research programs in being close to NARS. 
 11 For a discussion of federal/state financing of research in the U.S. federal system of 
 government, see Schweikhardt (1989). 
 
 134 
 
 These examples illustrate how national scientific, political and slow-working 
 interests have interacted to inflate the size of many NARS and enabled the 
 directors of NARS to delay some of the tough decisions on (things that are important) in 
 terms of the number of scientists, number of research stations and number of 
 research projects. The ready availability of money from other countries has served an "escape 
 valve" for local managers who are often inexperienced and unwilling to 
 take the hard scientific and (money-related) decisions on size and (things that are important). In summary, many African countries are making some of the same mistakes that 
 Asian and Latin American countries made in the 1960s and 1970s when the 
 focus was placed on expanding the size of NARS to the point where there 
 were many research facilities and (people who work to find information) "without programs" (Ruttan, 
 1987, p. 78). 
 Plans for scientific ability (to hold or do something) building. The preparation of an Mrica-wide 
 plan to strengthen African scientific ability (to hold or do something) would be a paper exercise 
 because the continent is too big, complex and weakened with colonial (future things) 
 to be took/taken (like game pieces) in a single plan. For example, the political forces and colonial (future things) at play in a smaller area such as southern Africa are much different 
 from those in the Sahel. For these reasons, there is an important need for African 
 scientists to take the effort in preparing a smaller areaal plan to 
 strengthen the core national farming-based services - research, training, and 
 extension - in each of the five major agroecologies: the Sahel, Coastal West 
 Africa, Central Africa, Northeast Africa and Southern Mrica. Each 
 smaller areaal plan should includes technology producing CTP) NARS, 
 technology borrowing (TB) NARS, projected research spillovers, research networks and post graduate training. The new work of SACCAR in 
 Southern Africa serves as a model for developing an African scientific opinion about  smaller areaal research and post graduate tra<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
