AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Land use patterns in the central highlands of Vietnam: 
 a (related to space or existing in space) model combining village survey data with 
 pictures from planes (understanding/ explanation) 
 Daniel Muller*, Manfred Zeller 
 Institute of (away from cities) Development, Georg-August University of Gottingen, 
 Waldweg 26, 37073 Gottingen, Germany 
 
 Abstract 
 The paper (asks lots of questions about/tries to find the truth about) geo-physical, agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), and (related to how much money and power people have) (things that decide other things) of past land use change in two 
 districts of Dak Lak area of control/area of land in the Central Highlands of Vietnam and tests the influence of (away from cities) development policies 
 on land cover change. Landsat satellite images from the years 1975, 1992 and 2000 are understood/explained to detect land cover in two 
 time periods. A survey in randomly selected villages provides first (or most important) recall data on (related to how much money and power people have) and policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 guessed to influence land use change. Secondary data on rainfall, soil suitability, and mountains, land, rivers, etc. was gotten from 
 weather-related stations and from a digital soil map and digital elevation model. All data were (related to space or existing in space)ly referenced using 
 (land-area-based/location) information systems (GIS) software. A reduced-form, multinomiallogit model is used to guess the influence 
 of guessed (things that decide other things) on land use and the chances that a certain pixel has one of five land classes during either 
 of the two periods. 
 Results suggest that the first period from 1975 to 1992 was seen as land-intensive farming-based (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and 
 the (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) of forest into grass and farming-based land. During the second period, since 1992, the fast, more labour- and 
 capital-intensive growth in the farming-based part/area was enabled by the introduction of fertiliser, improved access to (away from cities) roads 
 and markets, and (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the watered area. These policies, combined with the introduction of protected forest areas 
 and policies discouraging shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) during the second period reduced the pressure on forests while at the same time 
 increasing farming-based working well and incomes for a growing population. Forest cover during the second period mainly 
 increased due to the regeneration of areas earlier used for shifting (producing crops/helping something grow). 
 © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: C 25; 0 13; R 14; R 22 
 Keywords: Land use change; (chopping down trees); (land-area-based/location) information systems (GIS); (related to space or existing in space) modelling; Multinomiallogit; Vietnam 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-551-393901; 
 fax: +49-551-393076. 
 E-mail address: danielix@gmx.net (D. Miiller). 
 URL: http://www.gwdg.de/&#126;uare 
 
 Land use change, the physical change in land cover 
 caused by human activities such as farming and silviculture, is a common thing/event connected with 
 population growth, market development, technical 
 and institutional invention of new things, and related (away from cities) development policy. Changes in land use can have different 
 
 0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S0169-5150(02)00073-7 
 
 334 
 
 D. Muller; M. Zeller! Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 results on money-based growth, the level and distribution of income, and on valuable things from nature such 
 as (lots of different living things all existing together), communities, water, and soils. Land 
 use change leads to change in-and is influenced 
 by-socio-money-based indicators such as farming-based 
 working well, wealth, and workers. A better understanding of the complex interactions of 
 these changes over time can enable decision makers at different policy levels to design and put into use (within a large area) changed/ready policy helping actions which 
 stimulate benefits and undo negative results of land use change by (thinking about/when one thinks about) the 
 trade-offs among money-based, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), and social goals in the process of (able to last/helping the planet) (away from cities) 
 development. 
 The paper came from from a larger research program 
 that tries to test the hit/effect of policy, technology, (related to how much money and power people have), and geo-physical conditions on 
 land use change and its related results on money-based 
 growth, welfare, and the protection of forests. The research program is happening in two districts of Dak 
 Lak area of control/area of land in the Central Highlands of Vietnam. 
 Dak Lak shows an interesting case in the study of 
 land use patterns with its plentiful forest useful things/valuable supplies, 
 (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) (many different kinds of people or things), high (entering a country) rates, and energetic 
 farming-based and (related to how much money and power people have) development, especially during the last ten years. 
 (related to space or existing in space) data analysis gives valuable ideas of 
 processes of land use change and their hidden (under) 
 causes. The paper employs (not very long ago) developed methods for combining data from a village-level survey 
 with remote sensing data came/coming from Landsat images. Our goal is to analyse the influence of 
 (related to how much money and power people have), agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), geo-physical, and 
 policy (numbers that change/things that change) on land use, using an ex-post research design and a reduced-form, (related to space or existing in space)ly referenced 
 multinomiallogit model. 
 After a brief description of major (popular things/general ways things are going) in farming-based and (related to how much money and power people have) development in the 
 research area, we present the idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) and way(s) of doing things, including issues and related new and interesting methods employed in combining 
 geo-referencing data from different sources, and 
 present the guesses concerning (things that decide other things) of 
 land use change. Section 3 presents results of the 
 econometric model. We end with a discussion 
 of results and their effects/results/suggestions for policy and future 
 research. 
 
 2. Trends in population, farming-based growth, and 
 land use in the research area 
 The research area is located in Dak Lak area of control/area of land, 
 the largest of a total of 63 areas in Vietnam. 
 The area of control/area of land has a forest cover of 52% compared to 
 33% in the overall country (General (related to studying numbers) Office, 
 2001). Dak Lak has experienced high (entering a country) 
 rates since Freeing/freedom Day in 1976. During the last 
 ten years, its (process of people making, selling, and buying things) grew quickly. Major factors of 
 growth include the rising population supported by 
 in-traveling from other areas, increases in the 
 farming-based and watered area, improved farming-based 
 working well, and rising production and marketed 
 (more than what's needed) in higher-value crops and animals. Apart 
 from rice, the quickly growing cash crop production of mainly coffee and rubber, and more (not very long ago) 
 pepper, is the major factor for the growth in farming-based exports from Vietnam (Minot and Goletti, 
 2000). (even though there is the existence of) once-a-year growth rates in the population of about 7.7% during 1975-1990 and 6.4% 
 during 1991-2000, the huge farming-based growth 
 enabled large increases in per person income during 
 the 1990s. According to official data, forest cover in 
 Dak Lak area of control/area of land has (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) steadily, especially 
 where soil conditions allow large-scale coffee production. The basaltic soils good for coffee (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 cover 40% of Dak Lak area of control/area of land (Dak Lak (related to studying numbers) 
 Office, 2001). 
 The research area is located in two districts (Lak 
 and Krong Bong) in the southeastern part of Dak 
 Lak area of control/area of land. Sixty percent of the whole area consisting of 2400 km2 is covered by forest. In 2000, the 
 population in the research area was around 124,000 
 residents (Dak Lak (related to studying numbers) Office, 2001). Population has doubled since 1981. Roughly 20% of the 
 population growth was due to government-controlled 
 (the act of moving people to live in a new place) programs in areas described/separated as new 
 money-based zones (NEZ) following the fixed (producing crops/helping something grow) and (the act of moving people to live in a new place) program (FCRP) put into use 
 mainly during the 1980s. Uncontrolled (entering a country) 
 was strongest during the last ten years with high coffee 
 prices stimulating traveling from Central and North 
 Vietnam to the Central Highlands. However, the research area did not participate in the 'coffee boom' 
 as much as other districts of the Central Highlands 
 because only small areas of the two selected districts 
 have the basaltic soil good for coffee production. 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 Farming is the main source of income. Paddy 
 is the most important crop with respect to the factors 
 income share and area helped grow. Degrees of market 
 integration differ significantly between villages and 
 (groups of people related by culture, race, religion, etc.). (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) Vietnamese (kinh) 1 have a long 
 tradition of intensively growing (land with a layer of water) rice and marketing extra production to local traders. Their villages have a habit/desire to be located close to roads, and 
 they usually market a large share of their farming-based 
 production. On average, they own more paddy area 
 per head, which they help grow more intensively than 
 villages lived in by (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minorities. Before 1990, 
 very little fertiliser and bug-killers were used in the research area. During the nineties, the adoption of new 
 crops (maize and coffee), fertilisers (Urea and NPK), 
 and bug-killers was (helped increase/showed in a good way) by governmental extension programs and related investments in the road and 
 market (set of machines)s. Today, the second most important crop is maize, with blended varieties helped grow by 
 65% of families in the research area. Maize has 
 turned into a major source of cash income during the 
 last five years, especially for families which are 
 not able to produce rice above their survival/income needs 
 and lack good soil for coffee production. Animals 
 is another important production activity; however, it 
 will not be thought about/believed further in this article because of 
 its minor importance for land use change in the area. 
 For possible effects of animals on land use, see for 
 example Cattaneo (2001). 
 According to our analysis of the Landsat images, 
 forests cover in 1990 accounted for 69% of the total research area. In 2000, forested area increased to 
 77%, only two total percentage points below the 
 level watched/followed in 1975. At lower elevations and in locations close to villages and roads, bush land, open 
 (cloth covering that shelters), and plant/wood forests win. Huge evergreen forests rule areas with heights above 
 600 m. Bush and plant/wood forests as well as young 
 open (cloth covering that shelters) forests are found as secondary green plants 
 on areas earlier used for upland (producing crops/helping something grow). About 
 7% of the research area belongs to nature reserves and 
 1 People of (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) Vietnamese origin are called kinh people, 
 which we will use (after this, in this document) to distinguish them from people 
 belonging to (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minority groups (referred to as 'ethnic people'). 
 Politically, both groups are Vietnamese people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.). Also note that 
 we use the expression 'minority' in a purely (numbers-based) sense 
 pointing to/showing that people belonging to (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) 'minority' groups are 
 outnumbered by the kinh in Vietnam. 
 
 335 
 
 protected areas selected/named for forest healing/fixing and 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) (protecting something from harm). Strict enforcement of forest 
 protection over the last few years might have helped the 
 (rebuilding/renewal) of forest cover in these areas to a fairly 
 (a mixture of things that are all pretty much the same), closed (cloth covering that shelters) cover. 
 
 3. Way(s) of doing things 
 3.1. Idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 
 Our idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) draws heavily from 
 the explanation of caused invention of new things (Boserup, 1965; 
 Ruthenberg, 1980; Ruttan and Hayami, 1984). We 
 distinguish two key processes of land use change as 
 a source for increasing farming-based production: first, 
 farming-based (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) into (before that/before now) rude 
 areas, which usually happens at an long/big and 
 constant (related to computers and science) level; and second, farming-based 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) on already (helped to grow) land. (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) involves the substitution of land with labour 
 or capital-intensive technology such as crop-watering/rinsing with water, 
 improved seeds, and fertiliser. Boserup (1965) and 
 Ruthenberg (1980) focuse the responses of families, communities, and (communities of people) to pressures and 
 opportunities caused by (coming from the outside of something) shift factors such 
 as population growth, improvement of (away from cities) road networks, and investments in markets and the farming part/area enabling the introduction of higher-value 
 repeating crops. In the research area, added/more pressures on land use change include the introduction of 
 protected areas during the 1990s, and a more effective 
 enforcement of state policies discouraging shifting 
 (producing crops/helping something grow). 
 These policies and driving forces at the macro and 
 (related to a large area) levels cause changes in land use begun/tried 
 by local agents (Pender et al., 1999; Scherr et al., 
 1996; Templeton and Scherr, 1997). With the switch 
 from a planned (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) to a household responsibility system in the early 1990s, changes in prices, 
 transaction costs, and availability of technology caused private farmers and businesspersons to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) their 
 land use patterns quite quickly, as can be seen in 
 Dak Lak Area of control/area of land. More than that, the Vietnamese policy 
 change towards more market (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) was 
 supported by significant public investments in the (away from cities) (set of machines) and farming-based extension services, 
 which (helped increase/showed in a good way) the adoption of new technologies, 
 
 336 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 crops, and animal farming/managing money systems. As an indication 
 for the scale of improvement in the (away from cities) (set of machines), 
 the average distance from a village to an all-year road 
 in the research area decreased from 18 to 6 km between 
 the two periods (being thought about carefully). Apart from policy 
 and (related to how much money and power people have) factors, changes in the use of land 
 by farming or forestry are figured out by/decided by a range of 
 mainly time-invariant, natural conditions (Ruthenberg, 
 1980) such as rainfall, mountains, land, rivers, etc., soil quality, and 
 other geo-physical and agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Chomitz and Gray (1996) developed a widely referred to 
 (related to space or existing in space)ly clear model based on survey and satellite 
 data from Belize. They tested the effect of roads on 
 land use and employed a land rent model based on explanations developed by Ricardo and von Thiinen. Nelson 
 and Hellerstein (1997) guessed a almost the same  model for 
 Mexico, including corrections for (related to space or existing in space) dependence. 
 Both models depend on satellite data to get land cover 
 and employ geophysical data and limited secondary 
 information for (related to how much money and power people have) (features/ qualities/ traits) as (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)). 
 Following the idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of caused 
 invention of new things and taking into account recent advances 
 in the books using (related to space or existing in space) analysis in combining 
 geo-physical and (related to how much money and power people have) data,2 we explain 
 land use change as a function of geophysical (numbers that change/things that change) (level and variance of rainfall, soil suitability, 
 the height and slope of land), endogenous (and 
 therefore fell behind) population growth, (related to how much money and power people have) 
 village (features/ qualities/ traits), and operational (numbers that change/things that change) for 
 measuring the (related to space or existing in space) placement of policy-caused investments in road and market (set of machines)s and the 
 introduction of new farming-based technology and crops. 
 We will explore the (proof that one thing definitely causes another) relationships between these 
 (numbers that change/things that change) in a (related to space or existing in space)ly clear (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) and attempt 
 to number their (pertaining to each person or thing) direction and importance. 
 3.2. Sources and methods used for collecting data 
 This section briefly describes the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of 
 the left-hand-side changeable land cover3 and distin2 As this special issue features reviews of (related to space or existing in space) modeling 
 approaches for explaining changes in land use, we have chosen to 
 not include a review section in this paper. Other reviews include 
 Kaimowitz and Angelsen (2002) and van der Veen and Otter 
 (2001). 
 3 Exactly defined, land cover is the (bio) physical cover of the 
 land surface and immediate subsurface. Land use, on the other 
 
 guishes different categories for the hidden (under) guessed (things that decide other things) as right-hand-side (numbers that change/things that change). The 
 right-hand (numbers that change/things that change) are separated into geophysical 
 (numbers that change/things that change) mainly deciding/figuring out the natural farming-based 
 possible, (numbers that change/things that change) describing the (related to how much money and power people have) 
 village (features/ qualities/ traits) influencing land use, and 
 policy-caused (numbers that change/things that change). 
 3.2.1. Land cover data 
 Changes in land cover were measured using time 
 series of satellite data. Landsat images for the research area were visually translated for  the years 
 1975 (multi-(ghost-related/rainbow-related) scanner, MSS), 1992 ((related to underlying messages and morals in a story) 
 mapper, TM), and 2000 (improved (related to underlying messages and morals in a story) mapper, ETM). 4 All images were taken in the spring 
 season between March 4th and April 7th. Because of this, 
 they stem from the same cropping season and from 
 similar (related to the Earth's weather) conditions. This improves the 
 (understanding/ explanation) as the (ghost-related/rainbow-related) reflection of land cover 
 is easier to compare. Also, (not very long ago) updated 
 1:50,000 UTM maps were scanned, geo-referenced, 
 and merged to get a consistent set of base information. These maps allow the checking (for truth) of land 
 cover description/separation using added/more point information 
 and linear features such as outlines, roads, and rivers. 
 The (understanding/ explanation) resulted in land cover maps, which 
 point to/show physical land cover of the (pertaining to each person or thing) years 
 for the major land use classes. Overlays produce 
 (numbers-based) guesses of changes in land cover over 
 time. 
 For the econometric analysis, the land cover data 
 was grouped into five classes, which were used for 
 later analysis: 
 (1) mixed farming-based land, including cash and food 
 
 crops as well as plots under shifting (producing crops/helping something grow); 
 (2) paddy fields, both with one and two crops a year; 
 (3) closed (cloth covering that shelters), dense forest; 
 (4) open (cloth covering that shelters), mixed and secondary forest; 
 
 hand, describes human employment of that get. In that sense, 
 e.g. hunting would be a kind of land use while shrub could be 
 the similar cover. However, in books the two are used 
 almost the same thing/sounding the samely. For the purposes of this paper, we will use 
 'cover' to represent the categories of the (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)) and 
 refer to land 'use' when understanding/explaining the results of the analysis. 
 4 To match remote sensing data with recall information, 
 cloud-free satellite images from 1980 to 1990 should have been 
 used. They were, however, not available. 
 
 D. Muller; M. Zeller/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 (5) mixed grass land containing plant/wood, bush, and 
 shrub as well as re-growing shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 fields. 5 
 3.2.2. Geophysical data 
 Mostly, data on geophysical 
 (numbers that change/things that change) decide/figure out the farming-based potential built into a clearly stated/particular plot. Geophysical (numbers that change/things that change) include 
 rainfall-time series, soil types, elevation, and slope 
 values. Rainfall data comes from/is caused by five rainfall stations 
 in, and a few others around the research area. Daily 
 time series were available starting from Freeing/freedom 
 Day in 1976. We calculated the yearly mean and the 
 variance of daily rainfall amounts for both time periods thought about/believed in the data analysis. 6 Continuous surfaces for these layers were created by figuring out the 
 point coverage with a regularised spline interpolator. 
 A digital soil map (DSM) on a scale of 1:250,000 
 has been reclassified into nine suitability classes for 
 paddy and mixed farming-based production with 'one' 
 showing the most good soils and 'nine' the least 
 good soils. The suitability classes are based on interviews with soil experts from the area. The digital 
 elevation model (DEM) is based on outline lines from 
 American topographic UTM maps, scaled at 1:50,000. 
 The DEM has a (related to space or existing in space) (ability to display or measure very small things) of 50 m x 50 m. 
 Slope degrees were calculated from this DEM. 
 3.2.3. Socio-money-based village (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 A village survey was done in 101 randomly 
 selected villages out of a total of 191 villages in the 
 research area. The survey provides first (or most important) data on the 
 current status and changes in land use practices since 
 Freeing/freedom Day in 1975, and on the causes of these 
 changes and their effects on money-based, (related to how people and cultures interact), 
 5 Field checking (for truth) shows/tells about that most shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) plots, 
 which were in unplanted for one or two years, were still classified 
 as farming-based land. Longer unplanted periods result in the category 
 'mixed grassland.' 
 6 The rain-fed cropping season is almost all-year-round, and 
 only 4 months of the year, (in other words) December-March, are carefully thought about/believed 
 to be the dry season. During this dry season, however, there is 
 large amounts of difference/different version with respect to the beginning/graduation ceremony and end 
 of rainfall during these months due to (related to a large area) (many different kinds of people or things) in height 
 and micro-climate (closeness to forests). Rainfall during the dry 
 season influences soil moisture for the planting season and has an 
 effect on water availability in semi-technical crop-waterings/rinsings with water systems 
 that use collected rainfall water as a source. Therefore, we chose to 
 calculate the mean and variance of rainfall data for the whole year. 
 
 337 
 
 and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (numbers that change/things that change). Recall ways of doing things were 
 employed to get guesses from villagers for Freeing/freedom Day in 1976, 1980 and 1990.7 Added/more 
 (related to how much money and power people have) indicators were collected from interviews with shared people's (groups that decide or promote things) and 
 from secondary sources such as official government 
 statistics. 
 A metric (number or thing that changes) was created for the age of the villages in years since their foundation. Villages in theresearch area are usually lived in by kinh or (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minority people. Mixed villages do not exist, apart from 
 one or two Vietnamese families, who usually own a 
 shop in an (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) village. For that reason a dummy 
 (number or thing that changes) coded one for an (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minority village, and 
 zero otherwise, was included to (take control of) the effect of 
 (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) on patterns of land use. Another 
 dummy was created for villages awarded the status of 
 a 'hero village.' Villages, which helped the Northern Vietnamese government in the fight against the 
 South and the USA were awarded this title after the 
 war. A (number or thing that changes) for land good for permanent farming-based production was figured out/calculated on a pixel basis by 
 subtracting already (helped to grow) land, land with a slope 
 over 20°, and land belonging to a soil suitability class 
 smaller than six. The fell behind value of this continuous 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) convertible landwas included in the 
 (moving backwards). For population data, an inverse distance 
 weighted figuring out way of doing things, which calculates a 
 linearly weighted combination from the set of sample 
 points, was used to get a continuous population surface. So, we account for the fact that the population 
 is highest at actual village locations and pressure decreases as one moves away from population centres. 
 The population surface aims to represent population 
 distribution more realistically with a distribution of the 
 data values as a property of location rather than a whole area (Bracken, 1994). The fell behind value of the continuous population map was included in the data analysis as a pre-serious and stubborn (number or thing that changes) and, therefore, treated 
 as an (coming from the outside of something) factor in our reduced-form equations. 
 There is possibly a range of other important (numbers that change/things that change), which can have a big effect on land use. 
 7 We related the questions for 1980 to a large flood that happened 
 in 1981, which nearly all of the villagers remembered. The recall 
 information from 1990 is related to a period seen as 
 money-based renovation policy (doi moi), which also gave/given a 
 good point of reference. 
 
 338 
 
 D. Muller; M. Zeller/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 For instance, land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) and property rights shifted 
 (not very long ago) from a system based on usual/usually done rights to 
 an official recognition of property rights. The first land 
 use titles for farming-based land were issued in 1996. 
 Until today, 65% of the families received these 
 certificates&mdash;45% of them in the past 2 years. Therefore, it is too early to guess the effects of secure 
 property rights on land use given our land cover data. 
 3.2.4. Policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Policy-caused (numbers that change/things that change) reflect investments from 
 external sources such as governments and (people who give money or other things) in 
 (set of machines) and technologies as well as restrictions 
 on land use forced by the government. 
 Surface vectors for roads received/got on a scale of 
 1:250,000 were corrected for the research area to 
 a scale of 1:50,000 using the (put into a computer) UTM base 
 maps and the pan-chromatic band from the Landsat 
 ETM. Market access was measured by the Euclidean 
 distance to nearest all-year roads for trucks and to 
 district centres. Based on recall information, we came close to a second road network for the year 1990, 
 which was, however, highly related to distance 
 to district capitals and, therefore, dropped. We tried to 
 capture the effect of road upgrades by incorporating 
 the fell behind travel time in hours to the nearest all-year 
 road from the survey as an added measure for 
 market closeness, this way taking the means of transport 
 and their changes into account. The number of years 
 since (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) a first (or most important) school in a village was included as an indicator of investment in 
 first (or most important) education. 
 Technology (numbers that change/things that change) are incorporated in the analysis relating to/connected to the time of the introduction of 
 a new technology for farming-based production: (a) the 
 number of years since the introduction of NPK as a 
 yield-increasing technology, (b) the number of years 
 since the construction of a holding tank for crop-watering/rinsing with water of 
 farming-based land, and (c) the increase of watered area 
 per village multiplied by the number of years already 
 watered as a measure for the number of watered 
 hectare-years. 
 The edges for National Parks and Nature Reserves were included as a policy (number or thing that changes) (Chomitz 
 and Gray, 1996; Deininger and Minten, 2001). We incorporated the time of protection as the number of 
 years since a pixel belongs to a protected area, zero 
 otherwise. 
 
 J:i 
 
 Integration ofvillage and remotely sensed data 
 
 Farmers, and other land users, make their land management decisions based on goals, restrictions, 
 and the potentials of their families and individual 
 members. At the village-level, we watched/followed group 
 behaviour of all land users and other important people in 
 land portion and management. In a perfect world, to integrate 
 grid-based data with survey data, the scale of the analysis should match the unit of decision-making. Yet, in 
 Vietnam as in most developing countries, plot maps 
 and village edges are not available. This makes/gives 
 (related to space or existing in space) modelling a time-using/eating and expensive job 
 due to the necessary description/separation of the (related to space or existing in space) extent 
 of plots or villages, e.g. using worldwide  positioning systems (GPS). 
 The (related to space or existing in space) extent of village edges could not 
 be described/separated with the time and budget available. 8 To 
 (show the limit) the (related to space or existing in space) base unit for the (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of 
 (related to how much money and power people have) (numbers that change/things that change), the (land-area-based/location) positions of 
 all villages were recorded with GPS and point coverages created. Village edges for all surveyed 
 villages were then defined using Thiessen polygons, 
 which are built so that each location within a 
 polygon is closer to all its contained points than to any 
 other point in the layer (Aronoff, 1995). These polygons were then used as a base unit for village-level 
 data in sub-following/next analyses (Entwisle et al., 1998). 
 Hence, survey data-apart from population-takes the 
 value of the interviewed village for each point, which 
 is closer to the village's centroid than to any other centroid (see Fig. 1).9 The huge areas of almost unused 
 8 Describing/separating plot edges as the base unit of analysis would 
 match the unit of decision-making of an individual land user much 
 more correct, by that/in that way being much closer to money-based reality. However, this is obviously not (able to be done) for an area of 2400 km2 
 with about 124,000 families involved in farming, 
 each usually having a few broke up plots. Examples of analysis 
 at the plot level linking geophysical, agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) data on plots 
 with (related to how much money and power people have) data of farms or villages include Mertens 
 et al. (2000) and Fox et al. (1994). 
 9 This method hints that surveyed and (non-sampled) neighbor 
 villages are almost the same  with respect to land use data. Apart from 
 many field visits into the research area, however, we cannot 
 validate this idea (you think is true) because of lack of data on non-sampled 
 villages. In order to avoid almost the same  issues arising in future research, 
 we recommend to first construct the Thiessen polygons, and then 
 randomly select a subset of Thiessen polygons with chances 
 (along with something else/related to something else) to size of area for later village-level survey. 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 339 
 
 Source: Subset of Landsat ETM, date: 03 March 2000; (bought something for money) at the (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) Rain Forest Information Center 
 (http://www.bsrsi.msu.edu); village positions from GPS survey of authors. 
 Notes: Image displayed in band combination 5-4-3. 
 Fig. I . Landsat satellite image with survey village positions and Thiessen polygons. 
 
 and remote forestland are completely/in a hinting way (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) via geophysical indicators such as mountains, land, rivers, etc., soil quality, 
 and slope as well as distance to major roads, which all 
 make/give land use (losing money) on these not important lands 
 and should therefore not distort results much. 
 In this study, the unit of analysis is a pixel. The 
 research area was (related to space or existing in space)ly referenced to pixels with a 
 size of 50 m x 50 m. Each pixel, therefore, represents 
 an area of a quarter of a hectare. After resampling all 
 (related to space or existing in space)ly available information to above grid size, data 
 was stored as surfaces in a raster GIS. 
 The research area contains 964,000 grids cells. To 
 make up for potential (related to space or existing in space) dependence in the (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)), Besag' s coding big plan/layout/dishonest plan was used 
 Besag{, 1974, 663/id}, also employed by Nelson and 
 Hellerstein (1997), Munroe et al. (2001) and Nelson 
 et al. (2001) in almost the same  studies. The regular (related to space or existing in space) 
 
 sample was drawn by selecting every fifth cell in the 
 X- and Y-directions so that no selected cells are physical neighbours. This sampling procedure allows us to 
 apply standard guess ways of doing things (Anselin, 1999). 
 To control possible border effects, an inside buffer of 
 75 m was cut-off the outer edge of the research 
 area. After merging data from the (related to how much money and power people have) survey with geophysical and land use data, 33% of the 
 grid cells were randomly sampled. These sampling 
 procedures resulted in a dataset of 20,000 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 used for later econometric modelling. 
 3.4. Expected effects of move backwardors 
 
 We ran (moving backwards) on four types of move backwardors. First, 
 we used time-invariant geophysical (numbers that change/things that change), with 
 the exception of rainfall , which we watch/notice in both 
 
 340 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 periods, and second, historical (numbers that change/things that change), which describe (related to how much money and power people have) (features/ qualities/ traits) of the villages. 
 Here, we include population and land available for 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) as a time-version, but fell behind (numbers that change/things that change) 
 referring to the state in the previous period. Third, 
 (coming from the outside of something) policy (numbers that change/things that change) to describe government 
 investments and macro-level policies are included in 
 the model. 10 
 Now, there are no models and test statistics 
 available which account for (enough to be meaningful) (related to space or existing in space) interaction in a (not numbers-based) (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 (Anselin, 2001) as referred to in Munroe et al. (2001). To 
 make up for potential (related to space or existing in space) effects, we used the 
 coding big plan/layout/dishonest plan described in Section 3.3. Also, 
 we included two (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) pointing to/showing the Xand Y-eo-ordinates of each cell in the grid as a (related to space or existing in space) 
 filter (Nelson et al., 1999; Munroe et al., 2001). 
 Guessed effects of move backwardors on land use categories can be expected based on (before that/before now) organized and listed 
 possible (things to carefully think about), research findings, and field 
 experience. Table 1 summarises the (numbers that change/things that change) and their 
 expected effects where a plus sign points to/shows a positive 
 expected influence of that (number or thing that changes) on the (pertaining to each person or thing) 
 land cover class and a minus points to/shows a negative effect. Question marks point to/show possibly confusing 
 results. In the following, the guesses are stated 
 for the four types of move backwardors. 
 3.4.1. Geophysical (numbers that change/things that change) 
 On higher elevations, farming-based land use is less 
 (able to be done) and less likely due to harder (related to the Earth's weather) 
 conditions such as lower temperatures and harder land. Equally, agriculture on steeper slopes and 
 poorer soils is usually less money-making and harder. We guesse that the coefficients for elevation, 
 slope, and soil are negative for farming-based land use 
 and positive for forest land. 
 The amount and variance of rainfall critically affect farming-based activities in a few ways. In areas 
 with high total rainfall, more water-demanding 
 crops can be (helped to grow). To decrease risks from highly 
 (number or thing that changes) and, therefore, more insecure rainfall, more 
 drought-resistant crops and a higher crop (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) should be expected. However, since the land cover 
 data (nearby/ close/ currently important) does not enable us to explain crop choice, 
 10 The former we assume to be (coming from the outside of something), but later may deal 
 with sample selection problems. 
 
 we can only figure out the following guesses: More 
 total amounts of rainfall in the medium-level climate 
 winning/most common in the research area 11 can be expected to 
 increase the natural (possibility of/possible happening of)  farming, while, 
 due to more risks, one would expect that higher 
 rainfall difference/different version would reduce land under farm-related 
 without crop-watering/rinsing with water facilities and increase the 
 chance of other uses. 
 3.4.2. (numbers that change/things that change) describing the (related to how much money and power people have) 
 history of the villages 
 (away from cities) development is mostly path-dependent. 
 Hence, initial states and historical events influence current and future (related to how much money and power people have) situation of villages, 
 including land use. In this big picture, a few (numbers that change/things that change) 
 will be thought about/believed and explained in the following. 
 A positive relation is expected between (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minority villages and former shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) areas, 
 be they unplanted or (helped to grow). Followed fields are either 
 understood/explained as grass land or as farming-based land, depending on the time of unplanted. Some fields might have 
 already recovered to become secondary, open (cloth covering that shelters) 
 forest. Due to these traditional land-intensive (producing crops/helping something grow) ways of doing things and probably less political power, 
 (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) villages might be connected with more farming-based area (helped grow less intensively), less watered 
 paddy area, and more grass land. Common belief also 
 attributes (chopping down trees) to (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) people; therefore, we 
 would expect less open and closed (cloth covering that shelters) forest. 
 Available convertible landprovides the (possibility of/possible happening of) 
 farming-based (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). A higher fell behind value should 
 increase the chance that these patches will be converted for farming-based land uses. We would expect a 
 strong positive relation for farming and paddy land 
 and negative signs for other land uses. 
 Higher fell behind (groups of people/animals/things)hould be connected with 
 increasing demand for farming-based land uses and is 
 often referred to as a major factor influencing (chopping down trees) (Tachibana et al., 1998; Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 
 2000). 
 The status of 'hero villages' is used as a substitute operational (number or thing that changes) to measure the political capitalof a 
 11 In more (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) settings with higher amounts of rainfall other 
 authors found the opposite effect (Chomitz and Thomas, 2001). 
 In the research area rainfall averaged 1800mm between 1976 and 
 1999. In drier weather where total rainfall is a restricting factor 
 at least part of the year, we do expect an increase in farming-based 
 production for higher amounts of rainfall. 
 
 Table 1 
 Description and (described the future) signs of (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Level of 
 measurement 
 
 Pixel/village 
 
 Source 
 
 Geophysical 
 Slope degrees 
 Elevation 
 Soil suitability classesa 
 Mean rainfall amount 
 Mean variance of rainfall 
 
 Degrees 
 lOOm 
 9 classes 
 lOOmm 
 lOOmm 
 
 Pixel 
 Pixel 
 Pixel 
 Pixel 
 Pixel 
 
 Digital elevation model (DEM) 
 Digital elevation model (DEM) 
 Digital soil map (DSM) 
 Point figuring out 
 Point figuring out 
 
 Socio-money-based history of village 
 Years since village establishment 
 (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) composition 
 Land good for (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 Fell behind population 
 Hero village 
 
 2000-year 
 0/1 
 0/1 
 Families 
 0/1 
 
 Village 
 Village 
 Pixel 
 Pixel 
 Village 
 
 Survey 
 Survey 
 Land use maps maps and DEM 
 Survey (figuring out) 
 Survey 
 
 Policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Distance to district centre 
 Distance to all-year road 
 Travel time to all-year road 
 Years since first (or most important) school 
 
 Kilometres 
 Kilometres 
 Hours 
 2000-year 
 
 Pixel 
 Pixel 
 Village 
 Village 
 
 Road network 
 Road network/survey 
 Survey 
 Survey 
 
 Technology 
 Years since construction of holding tank 
 Increase in watered area 
 Years since introduction of NPK 
 Nature conservancy 
 Nature reserve areas 
 
 2000-year 
 Hectare 
 2000-year 
 
 Village 
 Village 
 Village 
 
 Survey 
 Survey 
 Survey 
 
 0/1 
 
 Pixel 
 
 Official park edges 
 
 (related to space or existing in space) effects 
 X- and ¥-coordinates 
 
 Every 5th 
 
 Pixel 
 
 Sampled from grid 
 
 Mixed 
 farming 
 
 - 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 Paddy 
 
 Closed 
 forest 
 
 Open 
 forest 
 
 Mixed 
 grass 
 
 - 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 .-.&#126; 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 &#126; 
 
 + 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 - 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 -.fi;"' 
 ;:;: 
 OQ 
 
 &#126;- 
 
 ;:: 
 
 - 
 
 ? 
 
 &#126; 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 c;,: 
 c 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 ? 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 - 
 
 '-.; 
 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 '-.; 
 
 - 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 - 
 
 ? 
 
 - 
 
 !=:J 
 ;::, 
 
 &#126; 
 &#126; 
 
 - 
 
 ;:; 
 c;· 
 
 "'w 
 
 '-l 
 
 w 
 c 
 &#126; 
 
 '-.; 
 
 '-.; 
 
 I 
 
 &#126; 
 
 a One (number or thing that changes) for soil suitability for paddy and one for mixed farming-based production with 1 = highest suitability and 9 = lowest suitability. 
 
 "'.p.. 
 &#126; 
 
 342 
 
 D. Muller; M. Zeller/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 village. We guesse that higher political capital 
 (Birner and Wittmer, 2002) is expected to improve the 
 access to government programs and outside help. 
 This may well lead to an improved (set of machines) such 
 as crop-watering/rinsing with water facilities and better access to extension 
 services and credit supplies. (after that), the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) effect might be connected with a reduction 
 of land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), therefore, reducing the pressure on 
 forest land and allowing grass land to recover to become forest once again. 
 3.4.3. Policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 With respect to (set of machines) investments by the 
 government, we employed a few operational (numbers that change/things that change) came/coming from the village survey. Distance and 
 travel time from the village to all-year roads and to 
 the two district capitals serve as a substitute for market 
 access and access to political centres. Lower values 
 of these (numbers that change/things that change) might be connected with lower forest cover because of higher producer prices, lower input prices, and lower transaction costs compared to 
 remote locations. Yet, Deininger and Minten (2001) 
 find that these (numbers that change/things that change) are highly related to 
 population density, soil life-creating ability, and physical capital 
 such as crop-watering/rinsing with water facilities. However, that was not the 
 case in our dataset where these (numbers that change/things that change) all showed 
 relationship coefficients below 0.5. Since no farm-gate 
 prices for inputs or outputs are available with (related to space or existing in space) 
 difference/different version, distance and travel times to roads and markets serve as a substitute for prices as well as transaction 
 costs (Deininger and Minten, 2001). Farming-based land 
 use is expected to be more likely to happen closer to 
 all-year roads, while forest cover should be less likely 
 (Chomitz and Gray, 1996; Pfaff, 1997; Nelson and 
 Hellerstein, 1997). Again, the effect on mixed grass 
 land cannot be guessed good. 
 Access to education is proxied by the availability of first (or most important) schools in years since their opening. 
 The effect might be uncertain. Common sense tells 
 us that farmers with better access to education should 
 be expected to use land more intensively and put into use 
 new technologies earlier, this way saving land to (accomplish or gain with effort) 
 a given income or farm output. However, there is also 
 evidence that educated families might engage more in land clearing (Pichon, 1997). 
 (related to computers and science) change, which has been (helped increase/showed in a good way) 
 by a variety of government (services businesses/government units), is incorporated via the introduction of NPK, one example for a 
 
 yield-increasing technology. NPK increases first and 
 best the working well of land, and one might expect land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) to become more attractive with 
 NPK, gave/given farmers have (good) enough labour and 
 the ability to finance the (instance of buying something for money) of farming-based inputs. However, given current labour restrictions and 
 incomplete (away from cities) (money-related) markets, we rather expect 
 increasing produces and more input in production on existing fields. The longer ago the introduction of NPK, 
 the more likely the possibility of forest cover. On the 
 other hand, more money-making farming could increase 
 the (reward or reason for doing something) to expand area under (producing crops/helping something grow) and, 
 therefore, lead to a lower forest cover and a positive 
 coefficient for farming (Angelsen and Kaimowitz, 
 2001). Therefore, the overall expected sign of the 
 effect is confusing. Another (number or thing that changes) related to (related to computers and science) change are years since the construction of a 
 holding tank for farming-based crop-watering/rinsing with water. We expect that 
 this labour-intensive (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) on existing farming-based areas will cause families to set apart less 
 time to land clearing and land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) into upland 
 areas; in the same way/in that way, forested pixels will be more likely 
 (Slicely and Martinez, 2001; Pender et al., 2001). 
 Inside a protected area, it is impossible to establish property rights for long-term secure (producing crops/helping something grow), 
 by that/in that way decreasing the money-making ability of farming 
 (Deininger and Minten, 2001). We expect a significant positive coefficient for non-farming-basedland uses 
 and a regeneration of grass to secondary forest. Protected areas may be located on more not important lands 
 with steeper slopes and on less good soils. For 
 that reason, we interact the protection dummy with 
 slope and soil suitability for mixed farming. If our 
 guess holds, the introduction of these interaction 
 terms should reduce the importance and the effect of 
 the protection dummy on preserving forest land. 
 
 4. Models and results 
 4.1. Descriptive statistics 
 Farming-based land increased by 9% from 1975 to 
 1992, and has gone bad since then (Table 2). The 
 farming-based area mainly developed from open (cloth covering that shelters) 
 forest and grass. Grassland decreased in the second 
 period from 11 to 4%. It is interesting to look at total 
 forest cover, which (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) by 10% in the first period, 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller I Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 343 
 
 Table 2 
 Land cover in km2 , percent of total land and number of patches 
 Cover class 
 
 2000 
 
 1992 
 
 1975" 
 
 km 2 
 
 km2 
 
 Patches 
 
 km2 
 
 339 
 57 
 17 
 74 
 259 
 
 146.7 
 67.2 
 836.2 
 1052.3 
 295.7 
 
 746 
 
 2398.2 
 
 Mixed farming 
 Paddy 
 Closed forest 
 Open forest 
 Grass 
 Total 
 
 339.8 
 111.0 
 866.6 
 962.6 
 101.5 
 2381.6b 
 
 % 
 
 14.2 
 4.6 
 36.4 
 40.5 
 4.3 
 100 
 
 Patches 
 
 % 
 
 141 
 62 
 14 
 56 
 159 
 
 352.0 
 117.0 
 828.2 
 827.9 
 273.5 
 
 432 
 
 2398.6 
 
 14.6 
 4.9 
 34.5 
 34.6 
 11.4 
 100 
 
 % 
 
 6.1 
 2.8 
 34.9 
 44.0 
 12.2 
 100 
 
 Source: (understanding/ explanation) of Landsat satellite images by Nguyen Thanh Huang (Tay Nguyen University, Buon Ma Thuot) and authors for Lak 
 and Krong Bong districts, Oak Lak Area of control/area of land, Central Highlands, Vietnam. 
 a Number of patches only counted for the images from 1992 to 2000, which have the same (related to space or existing in space) (ability to display or measure very small things) of 30m x 30m. 
 h 18 km 2 missing in 2000, because part of the research area was not covered by the scene. 
 
 but has grown by eight percent since 1992. So, no 
 extreme (chopping down trees) has happened over the last 25 
 years, with total forest cover decreasing by about 2%. 
 Another important/famous feature from Table 2 is the (related to space or existing in space) pattern of land breaking (up), measured as the 
 number of patches under a clearly stated/particular land cover. Land 
 breaking (up) in the last eight years decreased very much from 746 patches of land cover in 1992, 
 to 432 in 2000. Most of that change was due to the 
 high breaking (up) of farming and grass in 1992, 
 compared to 2000, and it reflects the virtual disappearance of shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) in the research area, 
 which until today has often been made responsible 
 for large-scale (chopping down trees). 
 Described/explained descriptive statistics of the independent 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are reported in Table 4 of the Add on A. 
 The range of values in (related to how much money and power people have) and policy (numbers that change/things that change) (shows or proves) the (many different kinds of people or things) (features/ qualities/ traits) of villages. The mean population per pixel increased from 
 three in the first period to more than five families in 
 the second period, pointing to/showing higher population pressure in the last ten years. The Euclidean distance to 
 all-year roads averages 6 km for all villages, although with 
 a large standard moving away pointing to/showing the large amounts of 
 difference/different version in village locations. Construction of holding tanks and more watered land boosted rice production 
 by allowing two harvests of (land with a layer of water) rice per year. 
 
 4.2. Multinomiallogit 
 To explore relationships between (coming from the outside of something) and 
 pre-planned (numbers that change/things that change) and the land cover categories 
 as left-hand side (LHS) (numbers that change/things that change), a multinomiallogit 
 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) (MNL) was employed. MNL models guess the direction and strength of the explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change) on the categorical (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) by (describing the future) a chance result connected with each category of the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)). The chance that 
 Y = h can be stated as (Greene, 1997): 
 PROB (Y 
 
 = h) = 
 
 ef3'xth 
 &mdash;-,M;-;&mdash;-_; 
 
 (1) 
 
 Lm=lef3'xtm 
 
 In (1), m represents the land cover classes used for 
 analysis, fJ a vector of guess limits/guidelines and 
 Xt are the (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) for all Y and at all 
 locations /. Eq. (1) holds, if the error terms are independently and identically distributed as log Weibull 
 (McFadden, 1973). (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ising on all chances 
 produces /gives up a log-odds ratio (Greene, 1997): 
 In [_( Pth 
 Plm 
 
 J = x; (fJh - 
 
 fJm) 
 
 (2) 
 
 The (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) is expressed as the log of the 
 odds of one other choice relative to a base other choice. 
 If model ideas (you think are true) hold, the maximum chance 
 estimators are asymptotically (usually/ in a common and regular way) distributed, 
 with a mean of zero and a variance of one for large 
 samples. Importance of estimators is tested with 
 z-statistics, which are reported in the output tables. 
 Chance-ratio (LR) tests compare the log chance from the full model with the one from a reduced 
 model leaving out explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). To test the guess with (m - 1) limits/guidelines, a chance-ratio 
 and Wald test can be used. Here, only LR test statistics are reported as the two tests showed no major 
 differences. 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 344 
 
 cover over time. About 70% of the pixels from 1992 
 to 2000 and 60% in the period 1975 to 1992 did not 
 change over time. Therefore, the fell behind values (describe the future) 
 present land use almost perfectly, making model guess filled with problems. In the 'model 1990' the (number or thing that changes) 
 for convertible land was dropped due to perfect (statement about the future) of paddy land. Since the first nature reserve in 
 the research area was established in 1991, we included 
 the protection (number or thing that changes) only in the 'model 2000'. 
 Test statistics are reported in Table 6 in the 
 Add on A. Overall, the model for the second period 
 performs better than the model for the first period due 
 to fewer missing values and more exact data on land 
 cover and recall information. Chance-ratio tests 
 for (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) (Table 7 in the Add on 
 A) show/tell about that most coefficients are significant on 
 the 1% level in both models, except the interaction 
 coefficients of protected areas with soil suitability. 
 Chance-ratio tests for combining dependent categories let us reject the guess that categories 
 are unable to be separated. Overall (describe the future)ive power as 
 measured by the locations (described the future) correctly is high 
 for both models, with 81% of the pixels (described the future) 
 correctly in 'model 2000' and 69% in 'modell990', 
 (match up each pair of items in order) (Table 3). Most of the false 
 
 4.3. Scientific results 
 The MNL has five land cover classes as categorical, unordered (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)). One multinomial 
 logit model was performed for each of the two time 
 periods, (in other words) for 1975-1992 and 1992-2000. After now, 
 we will refer to the 'model 1990' for the first period 
 and 'model 2000' for the second period. Survey recall data for Freeing/freedom Day and 1980 was used as 
 'best estimate' for pre-planned (numbers that change/things that change) in 1975 
 and, (in almost the same way), recall data from 1990 was employed 
 for 1992. It would have been more good to arrive 
 at equally long time periods, which, however, was 
 not possible. 4 To control possible endogeneity problems, only fell behind values for time-version (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) such as population growth and placement of schools are carefully thought about/believed in the scientific applications. Also, all (numbers that change/things that change) were tested for 
 multi-collinearity. Model results are reported as raw 
 coefficients in Table 5 in the Add on A for closed 
 forest as the comparison group. In the discussion, we 
 will also talk about/say the signs of other interesting coefficients not included in Table 5. 
 The model does not include fell behind values of land 
 use due to (compared to other things) little difference/different version in the overall land 
 
 Table 3 
 (describe the future)ive power of land use 
 (described the future) land use, 2000 
 % correct 
 
 Mixed farming 
 
 Paddy 
 
 Closed forest 
 
 Open forest 
 
 2289 
 304 
 8 
 294 
 302 
 
 178 
 561 
 9 
 6 
 
 10 
 0 
 6084 
 844 
 38 
 
 251 
 16 
 1042 
 6793 
 403 
 
 41 
 10 
 7 
 55 
 73 
 
 2769 
 891 
 7142 
 7995 
 822 
 
 82.7 
 63.0 
 85.2 
 85.0 
 8.9 
 
 3197 
 
 755 
 
 6976 
 
 8505 
 
 186 
 
 19619 
 
 80.5 
 
 (described the future) land use, 1990 
 Watched/followed land use, 1990 
 Mixed farming 
 1743 
 Paddy 
 253 
 Closed forest 
 20 
 Open forest 
 329 
 Grass 
 678 
 
 259 
 657 
 0 
 2 
 30 
 
 29 
 2 
 5627 
 968 
 116 
 
 555 
 24 
 943 
 5137 
 982 
 
 327 
 3 
 205 
 409 
 460 
 
 2913 
 939 
 6795 
 6845 
 2266 
 
 59.8 
 70.0 
 82.8 
 75.0 
 20.3 
 
 948 
 
 6742 
 
 7641 
 
 1404 
 
 19758 
 
 69.0 
 
 Watched/followed land use, 2000 
 Mixed farming 
 Paddy 
 Closed forest 
 Open forest 
 Grass 
 Total 
 
 Total 
 
 3023 
 
 I 
 
 Grass 
 
 Total 
 
 Source: own calculation. Notes: land use with highest (described the future) chance as (stated or said earlier) land use; bold entries along the diagonals point to/show 
 correct (statements about the future); number of entries go along with/match up to the number of pixels, (in other words) to 900m2 . 
 
 D. Muller, M. Zeller!Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 333-354 
 
 Factor Change Scale Relative to category Grass 
 .2 
 :a 
 .37 
 .51 
 
 .7 
 
 .95 
 
 c 
 
 Age of village (years), 2000 
 
 0 
 
 Q_____p 
 
 c 
 
 Population (families), 1990 
 
 M 
 
 2.4 
 
 p 
 
 0 
 
 p 
 
 c 
 
 G 
 
 Sid Cool 
 
 v 
 
 c 
 
 Years since holding tank, 2000 
 Sid Cool 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Age of holding tank - watered area, 2000 
 Sid Cool 
 
 -1.6 
 -1.29 
 -.98 
 -.67 
 Logit Coefficient Scale Relative to category Grass 
 
 M 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Sid Cool 
 
 Km to all-year road in 1998 
 
 1.76 
 
 G 
 
 M 
 
 011 
 
 1.29 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Sid Cool 
 
 (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minority village (0/1) 
 
 345 
 
 -.38 
 
 G 
 
 -.05 
 
 0 
 
 &#126; 
 .26 
 
 .56 
 
 .87 
 
 Source: own calculation 
 Notes: The chance increases in importance from left to right; initial letters point to/show (number or thing that changes) values of land use classes: M =Mixed farm-related, P = 
 Paddy, C =Closed forest, 0 = Open forest, G = Grass; grass (G) as the comparison group has a factor change scale of one; (numbers that change/things that change) are either tested 
 for a change in 1 SD (Std Coef) or for a separate change from 0 to 1values connected by lines are NOT significant at the 5 % level; one example for 
 (understanding/ explanation) for (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) minority villages in row two: grass (G) is much more likely than all other land uses, while closed forest (C) is the least 
 likely land use class; paddy (P) is NOT much more likely than closed forest (C) as the two are connected by a line. 
 
 Fig. 2. Odds ratios of selected explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) for land use in year 2000. 
 
 (statements about the future) in the 'model1990' are pixels covered with 
 grass, which were (described the future) to be mixed farming 
 in 23% of the c<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
