AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 EL&#126;EVIER 
 
 Agncultural Money-based; 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 Sustaining growth in farming: 
 a (numbers-based) review of farming-based research investments 
 Jock R. Anderson 
 
 *·a, 
 
 Philip G. Pardey 
 
 b,c, 
 
 Johannes Roseboom 
 
 b 
 
 "Agncultural Polzctes Du-l5ton, Agnculture and Natural useful thing/valuable supply Department, World Bank, 
 1818 H Street N.W, Waslungton, DC 20433, USA 
 h lntematwnal SerVice for Natwnal Agncultura/ Research (ISNAR), The Hague, The Netherlands 
 ' Department of Agncultural and Applwd Economtcs, Unu erslly of Mumesota, Mmneapohs, MN, USA 
 (Accepted 21 June 1993) 
 
 Abstract 
 
 Growth in farming depends on many things but one of the most important is investment in farming-based 
 research. Decision making in the farming-based research policy area can only be helped by access to better information. 
 This article summaries a recent try to move policy talk beyond only (not numbers-based) impressions towards a 
 process that is supported with new and clear data. The data used have been got together at ISNAR in a manner 
 designed to make comparisons both over time and between countries more valid than has been the case in the past. 
 The comparisons this way possible show/tell about large amounts of (many different kinds of people or things) both between countries and between broad (related to a large area) 
 groupings. Also lit up/educated here are issues related to the valuable thing (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting), capital and labor strength, and 
 size and extent of particular national programs. 
 
 * Corresponding author. 
 The research data reported here are mostly from a study 
 begun/tried by ISNAR with help from the then Agnculture and (away from cities) Development Department of the World Bank 
 (Pardey, Roseboom and Anderson, 1991). The money-based values throughout this paper have been expressed in constant 
 1980 PPP dollars. PPP stands for buying-related power equality and 
 represents a (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) exchange rate that tries to reflect 
 the purchasmg power of a currency. Money-based values m 
 current local currency were first (lowered/flattened from losing air) to base-year 1980 
 with a local (GoP) deflator and then converted into constant 
 1980 dollars using 1980 PPP exchange rates taken from Summers and Heston (1988) and, for China, Summers and Heston 
 (1991). The authors thank Hugh Quigley for hts help in 
 preparing this paper. 
 
 Policy-makers are having to deal with unprecedently fast changes in the market for farming-based science and technology services. In the 
 less-developed countries, the fast (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of 
 farming-based research ability (to hold or do something) experienced during 
 the 1960s and 1970s slowed much in the 
 1980s. Especially in debt-ridden areas, such as 
 sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America and 
 Caribbean, investment in farming-based research 
 spoiled or even (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse). Also, the level 
 of development aid to less-developed countries 
 stalled during the 1980s (OECD, 1989) while the 
 small but significant share that was channeled to 
 farming-based research is threatened by other demands. A reversal of these (popular things/general ways things are going) seems unlikely 
 
 0169-5150j94j$07.00 © 1994 Elsevier Science B.V. All nghts reserved 
 SSDJ 0169-5150(93)E0035-L 
 
 108 
 
 J.R. Anderson et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 upon to broaden their research (lists of things to deal with/desires to reach goals) and to 
 give greater attention to concerns of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) worsening and useful thing/valuable supply management. The 
 international system is also rebuilding its research (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection) relating to/connected to forestry, fisheries 
 and vegetable research in addition to its traditional focus on basic food crops and animals. 
 These changes raise major policy issues about the 
 appropriate division of labor and problem focus 
 between the national, (related to a large area) and international 
 centers that are yet to be settled. 
 There are large differences/different versions across countries and 
 over time in the level of investment in farming-based research. As a country's per person income 
 grows, its support for farming-based research - as 
 indexed by an farming-based research strength 
 (ARI) ratio that expresses research expenses 
 relative to farming-based output - tends also to 
 grow. But there are offsetting habits/desires, includ- 
 
 in the near future and therefore useful things/valuable supplies for 
 public farming-based research in less-developed 
 countries could well tighten even further in the 
 coming years. In the more-developed countries, 
 public support for farming-based research is under 
 close review and there is a strong habit/desire to 
 have those who most directly benefit from research pick up at least part of the bill. More than that, 
 farming-based (more than what's needed), (lowering in number/getting worse) farming-based 
 prices, and a continuing decline in farm numbers 
 in many of the more-developed countries have 
 led to common calls for a (ending something) on further 
 public investment in farming-based research. 
 Against this background of money-related stringencies, 
 the demands being placed on national, and in fact international, research systems are strengthening. In addition to the usual focus on 
 stimulating working well growth within farming, many of these systems are also being called 
 
 Table 1 
 Once-a-year farming-based research personnel and expenses, (related to a large area) totals 
 Area 
 
 1961-65 
 
 1971-75 
 
 1981-85 
 
 Growth rate(%) 
 
 a 
 
 Farming-based research personnel (full-time equals per year) 
 
 Sub-Saharan Africa (43) b 
 China 
 Asia and Pacific, excl. China (28) 
 Latin America and Caribbean (38) 
 West Asia and North America (20) 
 
 1323 
 7469 
 6641 
 2666 
 2157 
 
 2416 
 11781 
 12439 
 5840 
 4 746 
 
 4941 
 36335 
 22576 
 9000 
 8995 
 
 6.8 
 8.2 
 6.3 
 6.3 
 7.4 
 
 Less-developed countries (130) 
 More-developed countries (22) 
 
 20256 
 40395 
 
 37221 
 48123 
 
 81848 
 56376 
 
 7.2 
 
 Total (152) 
 
 60651 
 
 85344 
 
 138224 
 
 4.2 
 
 1.7 
 
 Farming-based research expenses (millions 1980 PPP dollars per year) 
 
 Sub-Saharan Africa (43) b 
 China 
 Asia and Pacific, excl. China (28) 
 Latin America and Caribbean (38) 
 West Asia and North America (20) 
 
 149.5 
 486.7 
 316.7 
 229.1 
 126.9 
 
 276.9 
 874.8 
 651.5 
 486.6 
 300.7 
 
 372.3 
 1712.7 
 1 159.6 
 708.8 
 455.4 
 
 4.7 
 6.5 
 6.7 
 5.8 
 6.6 
 
 Less-developed countries (130) 
 More-developed countries (22) 
 
 1308.9 
 2190.7 
 
 2 590.5 
 3 726.3 
 
 4408.7 
 4812.9 
 
 6.3 
 4.0 
 
 Total (152) 
 
 3499.6 
 
 6 316.8 
 
 9 221.6 
 
 5.0 
 
 Source: Most of this table is drawn from Pardey, Roseboom and Anderson (1991, p. 200), as are most of the data reported in this 
 paper. The China data are from Fan and Pardey (1992). 
 Totals may not add up exactly because of rounding. 
 a Compound once-a-year average growth rate between 1961-65 and 1981-85. 
 b Bracketed figures point to/show the number of countries in the (related to a large area) totals. The add on to Pardey, Roseboom and Anderson 
 (1991) points to/shows which clearly stated/particular countries were included in the (related to a large area) groups. 
 
 l.R. Anderson et al. j Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 ing one within which/by which farming-based research expenses rise less than (along with something else/related to something else) with farming-based output, due possibly to (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size or 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of scope in research. In this paper we 
 present a (numbers-based) review of the worldwide  pattern of investment in farming-based research using a 
 new collection of data that serves to completely 
 revise and update the data series reported by 
 Evenson and Kislev (1975), Oram and Bindlish 
 (1981) and Judd, Boyce and Evenson (1986). Our 
 plan/purpose is to illustrate what is actually happening in the world of farming-based research and to 
 help move the policy talk beyond only 
 (not numbers-based) impressions toward a process that is 
 supported with a set of basic data and (numbers-based) indicators. 
 
 1. Public investments in national farming-based 
 research 
 
 1.1. Investment (popular things/general ways things are going) 
 
 Differences in patterns of farming-based growth 
 are in large part the result of national differences 
 in factor and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) gifts and in 
 the policies put into use towards farming and, 
 more specifically, farming-based research. For two 
 20 years, up to the mid-1980s, worldwide  investment 
 in public farming-based research increased (in a big way). 1 Between 1961-65 and 1981-85, the total 
 number of (government) farming-based (people who work to find information) 
 grew at an average once-a-year rate of 4.2%. The 
 number of (people who work to find information) in less-developed countries increased by 7.2% a year, just over four 
 times the once-a-year rate in more-developed countries (Table 1). 
 In the period 1981-85, the less-developed 
 countries employed 59% of the world's farming-based (people who work to find information), compared with 33% in 1961-65. 
 Once-a-year growth rates in research investment in 
 less-developed countries have slowed during the 
 
 1 The worldwide  comparisons presented in this paper do not 
 include the former USSR, Eastern Europe, Cuba, Vietnam, 
 Cambodia, the Republic of South Africa, and some 
 very small countries for which no data were available. 
 
 109 
 
 1980s, most (in an obvious way) in sub-Saharan Africa, and 
 Latin America and Caribbean, both of which 
 have been struggling to contain flying/increasing international (money owed). In fact, the 1976-80 to 1981-85 
 once-a-year rate of growth in real research expenses was only 0. 7% for sub-Saharan Africa and 
 0.9% for Latin America and Caribbean compared 
 with a more-and less-developed country average 
 of 2.9% and 4.3%, (match up each pair of items in order). Although spending on farming-based research increased faster in 
 less-developed than in more-developed countries 
 during the past twenty years, the less-developed 
 countries' share of total expense on research 
 rose only to 48% from its 37% in 1961-65. 
 Of the less-developed areas, only in Asia and 
 Pacific did once-a-year growth in research expenses go beyond the once-a-year increase in (people who work to find information). 
 In more-developed countries, on the other hand, 
 spending on research increased twice as fast as 
 the number of (people who work to find information). 
 1.2. Expenses per (person who works to find information) 
 
 Average spending per (person who works to find information) in less-developed countries has been falling since the early 
 1970s. In 1981-85, it was actually lower in real 
 terms than in 1961-65. In more-developed countries meanwhile, spending per (person who works to find information) has been 
 rising steadily and the focus has regularly 
 been towards greater investment in workers within the NARSs. 
 One reason for the (compared to other things) lower spending 
 per (person who works to find information) in less-developed countries is that, 
 of late, the quickly expanded university systems in 
 these countries have produced many more graduates than (before that/before now). Many governments in lessdeveloped countries insist that public bodies, including research systems, employ graduates, but 
 then do not provide (good) enough matching money. 
 In the Asia and Pacific area, expense per 
 (person who works to find information) has always been lower than in other 
 less-developed areas. This is partly because relative prices for labor are lower, which causes a 
 substitution of labor for other inputs in the system. But it is also because they are ruled by 
 larger research systems that may well be able to 
 (understand/make real/achieve) (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) and range. 
 
 110 
 
 J.R. Anderson eta/. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 In sub-Saharan Africa, expense per (person who works to find information) has for a long time been higher than in 
 other areas. During the 1960s, the NARSs in 
 this area continued to be heavily staffed by 
 expensive (ban from a country)s from the former 
 colonial powers. The poor quality of Africa's (set of machines) and the need to import nearly all 
 equipment also drive up the research costs in this 
 area. Although still higher than in most other 
 less-developed areas, spending per (person who works to find information) 
 in sub-Saharan Africa is falling, in part a reflection of the fact that (ban from a country) (people who work to find information) are 
 more and more being replaced by less expensive national research staff, and in part because of the 
 (talked about before this) money-related problems. 
 
 1.3. Workers 
 One of the basic strengths (or, too often, weaknesses) of NARSs, and a major factor in 
 deciding/figuring out the success of farming-based research, 
 lies in the quality, composition and use/military service 
 of their research staff. 
 Developing meaningful measures of this workers part is challenging both mentally and practically. Indicators such as university qualifications and years of research experience may explain much of the difference in 
 quality between research systems, but they are 
 not the only factors. The (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) of the 
 research staff will depend, among other things, 
 on the NARS's size and the type of research it is 
 conducting. These influences change/differ  greatly between areas and will change within a system 
 over time. For instance, a smaller NARS whose 
 activities are focused more on (taking by force)/(taking control of) research 
 spillovers and adapting them to local facts or conditions (that surround someone) is unlikely to need a group of (people who work to find information) 
 almost the same as  that needed/demanded by a large NARS that is 
 likely to argue with an completely different scale 
 and set of research problems. (in almost the same way), while a 
 system ruled by (people who work to find information) holding PhDs 
 and 20 years of experience may be thought about/believed 
 highly qualified, it is not necessarily the most 
 appropriate labor force to argue with the applied 
 and site-clearly stated/particular problems that face many national research systems today. 
 Data for the period 1981-85 point to/show that 
 
 Table 2 
 (state of belonging to a certain country) and degree status of farming-based (people who work to find information), 
 1981-85 average (%) 
 Areajcountry 
 
 (ban from a country)s Share of 
 postgraduates 
 
 Sub-Saharan Africa a 
 Asia and Pacific b 
 Latin America and Caribbean 
 West Asia and North Africa 
 Less-developed countries 
 
 29 
 2 
 18 
 12 
 
 45 
 53 
 51 
 27 
 48 
 
 Australia 
 New Zealand 
 United States 
 
 na 
 na 
 na 
 
 57 
 78 
 93 
 
 11 
 
 a 
 
 Measures the proportion of national (people who work to find information) holding a 
 PhD or MSc degree or equal. Figures for Australia and 
 New Zealand are for 1981, and for the United States for 1980 
 only. 
 b Does not include China and India, the two major NARSs in 
 the area. 
 a 
 
 roughly one-half of farming-based (people who work to find information), including (ban from a country)s, in less-developed countries 
 held a postgraduate research degree (Table 2). If 
 (ban from a country) (people who work to find information) are left out/kept out from the calculation, no less-developed area has a share of 
 (people who work to find information) with a postgraduate qualification 
 greater than 60%. For a lot of 
 countries it is even lower than 40%. Somewhat 
 surprisingly, poorer less-developed areas have a 
 (compared to other things) high proportion of qualified staff, although that is much lower if (ban from a country) (people who work to find information) are left out/kept out from the calculation. 
 In many less-developed countries, the early 
 farming-based research institutes were established 
 by (related to Europe) colonial powers and, during the first 
 half of this century, these institutes were staffed 
 with (ban from a country) (people who work to find information). On independence, 
 most former (groups of people or other living things) moved to replace (ban from a country)s with national (people who work to find information). In some countries, 
 this change happened slowly but in others it 
 was a more sudden process and caused major 
 disruptions in farming-based research programs. At 
 present, only the smaller countries of sub-Saharan 
 Africa, the Caribbean, the Pacific and the oil-rich 
 countries of West Asia have (compared to other things) large proportions of (ban from a country)s on their research staffs. 
 The share of (ban from a country)s is (lowering in number/getting worse) quickly, however. In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, the 
 share of (ban from a country)s in NARSs was about 90% in 
 
 J.R. Anderson eta!. j Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 1960 but had (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) to some 30% in the early 
 1980s. Making the reasonable idea (you think is true) that the 
 numbers of (ban from a country) (people who work to find information) working within 
 the Chinese and Indian systems are very small, 
 the percentage of (ban from a country) (people who work to find information) working 
 throughout the less-developed world in 1981-85 
 is guessed to be around 3%. 
 Although money-based development can be expected to increase the supply of university graduates, research systems in some of the richer 
 less-developed countries appear to have difficulty 
 recruiting or keeping/holding qualified staff. In part, this 
 is because (moneys paid for working) and conditions in public farming-based research starts are not competitive 
 with other employment opportunities. In some countries, for example, universities employ 
 large numbers of PhDs in the farming-based sciences, while the national public farming-based research institutes employ few or none. 
 On the other hand, as argued earlier, a large 
 proportion of PhDs on the research staff does not 
 necessarily point to/show a successful or a mature research program. The modern systems of 
 Australia and New Zealand, for instance, have 
 (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) (accomplished or gained) significant successes with a 
 high proportion of staff trained only to the BSc or 
 MSc level, as did the U.S. system in earlier years. 
 While certainly not discounting the value of training (people who work to find information) to the PhD level, these (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) would suggest that greater attention should 
 be given to the research information meeting and training 
 within BSc and especially MSc programs at local 
 universities rather than simply looking (for) a high 
 proportion of PhDs through training in other countries, par- 
 
 Ill 
 
 ticularly when such training may be of (possibly not true, good, or honest) relevance. 
 1.4. Valuable thing orientation 
 In less-developed countries, farming-based research is directed mostly at crops. Based 
 on a sample of 83 countries, roughly two-thirds of 
 all farming-based (people who work to find information) are involved in work 
 related to crops. For the rest, 19% are 
 working at animals research, 7% in forestry research, and 6% in fisheries research. 
 There are some limited (related to a large area) weird differences in 
 the share of useful things/valuable supplies gave/reserved to a particular 
 valuable thing (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) (Table 3). While such weird differences are unavoidable, given (related to a large area) differences/different versions in 
 the pattern of production, it has been argued by 
 some that less research is loyal to/is dedicated to fisheries and 
 forestry than their reported money-based importance 
 warrants (see Mergen et a!., 1988, on forestry 
 research). In fact, the data - as shown in Table 3 
 - do not generally support this suggestion/possible plan. Research into forestry attracts more useful things/valuable supplies than 
 its matching share in farming-based output in all 
 areas. In Asia and Pacific, and West Asia and 
 North Africa, this is also true of fisheries. 
 Anyway, the actual facilities for research 
 into forestry and fisheries are limited, mostly 
 because NARSs in less-developed countries are 
 generally small. The majority (73%) of them employ fewer than 200 (people who work to find information) in total, while 
 only small percentages of these are involved in 
 research into fisheries or forestry. 
 
 Table 3 
 (related to a large area) congruence between farming-based GDP and research personnel, 1981-85 (%) 
 Area 
 
 Sub-Saharan Africa (22) a 
 Asia and Pacific, excl. China (10) 
 Latin America and Caribbean (20) 
 West Asia and North Africa (7) 
 Less-developed countries (59) 
 
 Crops and Animals 
 
 Forestry 
 
 AgGDP 
 
 Research 
 
 AgGDP 
 
 Research 
 
 AgGDP 
 
 Research 
 
 88.6 
 89.7 
 94.2 
 95.9 
 90.7 
 
 87.3 
 81.1 
 92.8 
 91.6 
 87.0 
 
 4.7 
 5.2 
 2.9 
 2.4 
 4.6 
 
 7.3 
 9.4 
 5.4 
 5.7 
 7.3 
 
 6.6 
 5.0 
 2.8 
 1.7 
 4.6 
 
 5.4 
 9.6 
 1.8 
 2.7 
 5.7 
 
 Fisheries 
 
 Data may not add up exactly because of rounding. 
 Bracketed figures represent number of countries included in the (related to a large area) samples on which the AgGDP breakdown is based. The 
 research breakdown is based on (related to a large area) samples that include a somewhat larger number of countries. 
 
 a 
 
 112 
 
 J.R. Anderson et al. j Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 1.5. Factor shares 
 
 A major challenge for managers of research 
 systems is to make the most effective use of 
 available useful things/valuable supplies. The best mix of spending on 
 capital equipment, personnel and operating costs 
 will depend mostly on the relative 
 availability and cost of research inputs, their quality, and the type of research being managed and did/done. 
 Since the most effective combination will differ 
 between areas and change within a system over 
 time, it is silly to propose standards for 
 deciding/figuring out the 'optimal' mix of inputs in research. The data presented in this section should 
 be thought of as indications of importance based on 
 a sample of countries, not as money-based optima 
 necessarily to be targeted. 
 The available data suggest that, in 1981-85, 
 NARSs in less-developed countries on average 
 gave/reserved 19% of once-a-year expenses to capital 
 investment, compared with 8% in the U.S. The 
 higher share of spending on capital equipment by 
 NARSs in less-developed countries supports the 
 end/end result, also proven true by their fast growth, 
 that most are in an expansion-related phase. During 
 this phase, not only must capital stock be replaced but added/more capital stock must be gotten. The pattern of expenses in the U.S., 
 on the other hand, reflects that of a mature 
 system, most of whose capital spending involves 
 replacement of existing equipment. The focus 
 in the U.S. system has, more than that, been regularly towards greater investment in workers rather than physical capital over the last few years. 
 Today the system (does/completes) with around 14 cents 
 of physical capital for each dollar of workers, compared with about 27 cents 50 years ago 
 (Pardey, Eveleens and Hallaway, honest/appearing soon). 
 The modern pattern of expense in 
 less-developed countries mirrors that of U.S. experiment stations in their early years at the turn 
 of this century, when the share of capital in total 
 expenses rose steadily to peak at 29% in 
 1912, before steadily falling. Capital (i.e., land, 
 buildings, equipment, etc.) has claimed the same 
 share of overall spending in U.S. research stations (about 8%) for the past thirty years. 
 A second factor in the higher share of capital 
 
 costs in less-developed country NARSs is that 
 capital items are often (compared to other things) more expensive 
 in less-developed countries and they often lack 
 (good) enough repair and maintenance facilities, leading to an early write-off of equipment. Factor 
 substitution, where less expensive inputs are substituted for more expensive, may even out 
 this effect somewhat, but it is not likely that it 
 will outweigh it. 
 Whereas (moneys paid for working) and operating costs in farming-based research expenses represent service 
 flows, capital expenses represent additions to 
 a stock. So, the high share of capital in once-a-year 
 spending may also (state that something is much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is) the actual share of 
 capital in the services used to (do/complete) research. 
 Capital equipment can last for many years, and a 
 measure of service flow, rather than of expense, would probably reduce the share of capital 
 actually used by a research system in any given 
 year, especially if such a system expands quickly. 
 The repeating costs of NARSs can be divided 
 between (moneys paid for working) and operating costs. In less-developed countries, (moneys paid for working) tend to be lower and 
 operating costs higher than in more-developed 
 countries. In 1981-85, a sample of 43 less-developed countries spent an average of $48,100 in 
 constant 1980 dollars per (person who works to find information), compared 
 with $91,200 per (person who works to find information) in the U.S. The modern level of spending per (person who works to find information) in 
 less-developed countries again appears to reflect 
 the situation in the early years of the U.S. experiment stations. In fact, in the U.S., total spending 
 per (person who works to find information) fell steadily in the early years as 
 the (putting something into use) of (people who work to find information) ran faster than rises in 
 research expenses. In the first 30 years, real 
 operating expenses per (person who works to find information) fell to 
 roughly one-third of original levels and did not 
 recover until the 1970s - some 60 years later! 
 One of the major (problems, delays, etc.) in making reasonable cross-country comparisons of factor shares is 
 that cross-country differences in price levels, 
 which are not the same across different expense items, act to confuse the comparisons. 
 So, if spending on operating costs and (moneys paid for working) 
 is (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) to take account of price differences 
 between countries, research in less-developed 
 countries is seen to be more labor-intensive relative to the U.S. Looked at this way, the share of 
 
 J.R. Anderson eta!. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 operating costs in repeating expenses in 
 1981-85 averaged 15% in less-developed countries. 
 After (changing to make better/changing to fit new conditions) for cross-country price differentials, operating expenses per (person who works to find information) are 
 also much smaller in less-developed areas than 
 in the U.S. Farming-based (people who work to find information) in subSaharan Africa, Asia and Pacific, Latin America 
 and Caribbean, and West Asia and North Africa 
 work with only 50%, 43%, 74% and 22%, (match up each pair of items in order), of the operating useful things/valuable supplies gave/given to a 
 U.S. (person who works to find information). However, the (money paid for working) part 
 of repeating expenses (including the (moneys paid for working) 
 of both scientific and support staff) in the less-developed areas is much closer to the U.S. level. 
 And in sub-Saharan Africa it is even higher. This 
 may be accounted for by the (compared to other things) high number of (ban from a country)s still working in African NARSs 
 and the fact that the employment policies of 
 many governments in less-developed countries result in NARSs employing large numbers of support staff. 
 1.6. Size, scope, and spillovers 
 
 Since 1961-65, the average size of NARSs has 
 more than doubled, from around 400 to 910 (people who work to find information), as has average expense per system. 
 In less-developed countries the average size of 
 NARSs has increased from 155 to 630 full-time 
 equal (people who work to find information). Anyway, 95 of the 
 carefully thought about/believed 130 NARSs in less-developed countries still employ fewer than 200 (people who work to find information), while 
 39 systems employ fewer than 25 (people who work to find information). 
 Only 14 employ more than 1000, illustrating that 
 the growth and development of NARSs in the 
 past twenty years has separated significantly. 
 When carefully studying the cost structures and effectiveness of a NARS, one needs to think about  both 
 the overall size and (many different kinds of people or things) of its operations and 
 the farming-based system it serves. 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on whether or not research operations are subject to (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size is limited 
 and far from definite. In the case of a NARS, 
 (things to carefully think about) of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size are confused by the fact that these systems create a 
 wide (many different kinds of people or things) of products and services that change/differ 
 in their valuable thing, technology, and agroecologi- 
 
 113 
 
 cal level of detail. For example, certain activities can 
 relate to improving crops or to developing new 
 breeds of plants good for clearly stated/particular agroecological zones within a country. Or, research 
 can be loyal to/be dedicated to developing improved crop and 
 soil management practices that will allow farmers 
 across a range of agroecological zones to increase 
 yields or improve pest and disease control. 
 Even without size (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) with 
 regard to any particular line of research (e.g., a 
 particular valuable thing research program), a system may well be able to create (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 scope through a wise choice in its (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection) 
 of research activities. Such scope (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) arise 
 when a system can begin/try a whole range of 
 research efforts/tries more cheaply than if these 
 efforts/tries were done/tried by separate research 
 things/businesses. These (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) can be (accomplished or gained), for 
 example, by sharing staff, equipment, information, or know-how between different lines of research. 
 An important hint/result/effect is that, when a system can create (good or well enough) strong (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 scope, these can, in turn, lead to (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 size across the whole range of its activities, even 
 if such (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size do not arise for some 
 individual research programs (Baumol, Panzar 
 and Willig, 1988). Of course, there can also arise 
 diseconomies of scope, especially among small 
 systems that spread their (not having enough workers, money, time, etc.) across 
 many research areas. So, small NARSs 
 will be unable to manage and do research in all areas 
 that may warrant attention in the farming-based 
 systems they serve. They will have to make choices 
 between areas of study and this, in turn, needs/demands 
 some (focusing on doing one thing very well) and flexibility in response to 
 opportunities as facts or conditions (that surround someone) change. 
 The (wasting very little while working or producing something) of a research system can also be 
 increased by adapting research managed and did/done in other places to local facts or conditions (that surround someone). The ability to take by force/take control of research spillovers is especially important 
 for small NARSs with the ability to do little 
 more than search and (examining and testing so a decision can be made) for good technologies. The best source of spillover would seem 
 to be being close to countries with almost the same  farming-based systems and agroecological features. This 
 plan would require a policy of hiring staff for 
 their ability to change  research to local situations 
 
 114 
 
 J.R. Anderson eta!./ Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 rather than necessarily to carry out original research. It also needs/demands flexibility in the research 
 system to identify and act upon opportunities 
 arising from developments in other places. 
 There is some disturbing (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that many 
 smaller NARSs are unable to take up information quickly enough and that the knowledge they 
 work with is more and more out-of-date. In a world 
 of growing international (state of being connected with, and dependent upon, each other), 
 adapting spillovers from other research systems is 
 most effective if they can be changed to fit local 
 facts or conditions (that surround someone) in a good manner. Using out-ofdate information only interferes with a country's relative (related to computers and science) ability (to hold or do something) and therefore its 
 (wanting to beat others in contests). 
 I. 7. Research and working well 
 
 Research is best seen as an investment activity. 
 The research process itself takes time, and a 
 further period goes by before the results of research are taken up. Recent (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) suggests, 
 what's more, that the benefits of research can 
 
 still have an effect in increasing output for as 
 long as 30 years after the research was started. 
 To think about  gains in farming-based gross domestic 
 product (AgGDP) as a measure of the hit/effect of 
 (happening at the same time) research expense could 
 this way be sneaky and false. Differences in the quality of 
 land and labor, and in the strength of use of 
 other inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better)s and machinery, 
 will influence output and so distort international 
 comparisons of output that are measured only in 
 terms of research. 
 In fact, all the more- and less-developed areas steadily increased their research strengths 
 during that period (Table 4). In 1981-85, less-developed countries spent an average of nearly $4 
 per farming-based worker on research, 2.5 times the 
 amount spent twenty years before. In more-developed countries, spending on research increased 
 4.4 times over the same period, to $214 for every 
 farming-based worker. 
 A final factor asking caution in testing the 
 benefits of research in terms of increasing AgGDP 
 is that a large share of farming-based research may 
 
 Table 4 
 Farming-based research factor-strength ratios 
 Area 
 
 1961-65 
 
 1971-75 
 
 1981-85 
 
 Farming-based research expenses per (money-based)/cheaply active person in farming 
 Sub-Saharan (37) a 
 China 
 Asia and Pacific, excl. China (15) 
 Latin America and Caribbean (26) 
 West Asia and North Africa (13) 
 Less-developed countries (92) 
 More-developed countries (18) 
 Total (110) 
 
 1.7 
 1.7 
 1.2 
 6.5 
 4.5 
 
 2.7 
 2.5 
 2.2 
 12.8 
 10.5 
 
 3.1 
 4.1 
 3.4 
 17.7 
 14.3 
 
 1.8 
 48.6 
 
 3.2 
 119.1 
 
 4.6 
 213.5 
 
 4.7 
 
 7.5 
 
 9.5 
 
 Farming-based research expenses per hectare of farming-based/and 
 Sub-Saharan (37) 
 China 
 Asia and Pacific, excl. China (15) 
 Latin America and Caribbean (26) 
 West Asia and North Africa (13) 
 
 0.2 
 1.2 
 1.0 
 0.4 
 0.4 
 
 0.4 
 2.1 
 2.1 
 0.7 
 1.0 
 
 0.6 
 4.1 
 3.6 
 1.0 
 1.4 
 
 Less-developed countries (92) 
 More-developed countries (18) 
 
 0.6 
 1.8 
 
 1.1 
 
 3.1 
 
 1.8 
 4.0 
 
 Total (110) 
 
 1.0 
 
 1.8 
 
 2.5 
 
 All expenses are in constant 1980 PPP dollars. 
 a Bracketed figures point to/show the number of countries in (related to a large area) totals. 
 
 I.R. Anderson et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 be directed towards maintaining gains from earlier research rather than improving output levels 
 (by itself/in and of itself). Recent guesses suggest that, in the U.S., 
 around one-third of research expenses are 
 spent on maintenance, and it is probable that 
 many less-developed countries give/reserve at least as 
 much (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) effort to such work (Adusei 
 and Norton, 1990). 
 
 2. International investments in farming-based 
 research 
 
 Opposite to the situation in many areas of 
 scientific research, there has always been an important element of international cooperation in 
 farming-based research. Much of this is due to the 
 (future thing) of the colonial relationships that existed at 
 the time (put into a hospital)/(made a behavior acceptable) farming-based research 
 was developing. 
 One of the leading international organizations 
 in the field is the Advice-giving Group on International Farming-based Research (CGIAR), an umbrella body of around 40 donor countries and 
 international (services businesses/government units) that help develop the activities of 
 some dozen supranational research centers. ((not very long ago) the number was enlarged to 18 but our 
 discussion here refers to the original 13.) Ten of 
 these centers have their headquarters in less-developed countries. Most are involved in research 
 into either food valuable things or farming-based production problems in a particular (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) area, 
 and three begin/try worldwide research into clearly stated/particular valuable things. 
 Established in 1971, the stated goal of the 
 CGIAR (CG for short), was to help efforts to 
 increase food production in the less-developed 
 world. The goals were extended in 1990, in recognition of agriculture's wider role in money-based 
 development, to helping less-developed countries 
 (accomplish or gain with effort) dependability in food. Self-reliance is taken 
 to mean the ability (to hold or do something) of a country to provide 
 (good) enough food for its population, either directly 
 through local food production or indirectly by 
 creating farming-based exports that will allow food 
 to be imported. 
 In 1981-85, the CG accounted for only 1.8% 
 of worldwide  (government) spending on farming-based 
 
 115 
 
 research, 4.3% if related to spending by and for 
 less-developed countries. Its budget rose, in (in name only/very small amount) terms, from $20 million added/gave by 20 
 (people who give money or other things) in 1971, to $280 million from 40 (people who give money or other things) in 
 1990. If corrected for inflation, the CG expenses show clearly different phases of growth: 
 fast (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) during the 1970s, slower growth 
 during the 1980s, and seen/obvious spoiling or 
 even (lower in number/get worse) in the past few years. 
 The U.S. was the largest single donor to the 
 CG, although both Europe and Japan increased 
 their share of (things that are given/work that's done) during the 1980s. The 
 World Bank acted as a balancing "donor of last 
 resort," giving-out its money after other donor 
 plans were known. It lately has added/has given 
 around 15% of the system's total budget each 
 year. 
 During the 1980s, although the CG was established partly in response to the high levels of 
 poorness and hunger in Asia, the focus in the 
 portion of money has moved/changed to sub-Saharan 
 Africa. Between 1986 and 1988, sub-Saharan 
 Africa accounted for 39% of the CG's core expenses, compared with 26% to Asia, 21% to 
 Latin America and Caribbean, and 14% to West 
 Asia and North Africa. 
 The "appropriate" (related to a large area) portion of money 
 is just one of the policy issues facing the CG. 
 Although much of the increase in money/giving money (to) to 
 sub-Saharan Africa has been for special projects, 
 it is (able to be argued over) that the concentration of useful things/valuable supplies 
 has swung too much towards that area at the 
 final/best expense of Asia, which has a few-fold 
 more poor than sub-Saharan Africa. 
 The valuable thing (direction of pointing) of the system has 
 been subject to change over time. As the system 
 expanded, the share gave out to cereals research 
 declined steadily to about 40%, of which rice 
 research still accounts for the largest share at 
 17% of the system's total. Food crops, such as 
 potatoes, other roots and tubers, and (peas, beans, lentils, etc.), 
 account for 24% of the total, while animals 
 research accounts for around 20%. The remaining useful things/valuable supplies are set apart and given out to noncommodity programs, including farming systems, food policy, 
 (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) useful things/valuable supplies, and NARS ability (to hold or do something) building. 
 The recent (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the system has broadened the valuable thing coverage to include fish- 
 
 116 
 
 l.R. Anderson eta!./ Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 eries, agroforestry and forestry, and bananas and 
 plantains. It may also eventually include (plant-related) valuable things. 
 The recent readjustation of CG goals to 
 focus on dependability instead of independence 
 in food was a recognition of the fact that increasing food production is not, in itself, a solution to 
 the hunger problem. Future policies must reflect 
 the role of farming-based growth as a means of 
 creating added/more on-farm and off-farm income and employment, and the need to sustain 
 the natural-useful thing/valuable supply base on which continued 
 gains in farming-based working well depend. 
 The CG's first efforts were mostly targeted 
 toward more good production (surrounding conditions). 
 Technology packages were developed that involved higher rates of (material that makes plants grow better) (online or paper form that asks for a job, money, admission, etc.), improved water management and cultural practices, 
 along with new crop cultivars that were especially (able to reply or react/quick to respond) to more stronger production 
 governments. While the dramatic (thing that's given/work that's done) of these 
 technology packages to increasing worldwide  food 
 supplies is unquestioned (Anderson, Herdt and 
 Scobie, 1988), by the mid-1970s the CG had also 
 begun to address production restrictions in the 
 more not important (surrounding conditions) of the semi-dry and 
 (sub-)humid tropics. 
 Now, about 30% of CG money/giving money (to) is targeted towards technology for not important lands, 
 which is roughly equal to the percentage of the 
 poor population in less-developed countries that 
 live in these areas. The issue of the relative 
 good qualities of trying to improve or maintain working well of good against/compared to/or not important lands will continue to be an important one for the CG, especially with respect to the possible opportunity 
 costs (in terms of working well gains previous/unavoidable) of 
 diverting rare/not enough  research useful things/valuable supplies away from 
 more (able to reply or react/quick to respond) areas towards the more not important 
 ones. Analyses of the type reported by Byerlee 
 and Morris (1993) will be needed for guiding 
 future investment policy this way. 
 Research on useful thing/valuable supply management will become more important as the need for continued 
 increases in food production places an ever 
 greater strain on the world's valuable things from nature. 
 The CG has taken the first step in this direction. 
 Plans on how best to include agroforestry 
 
 and useful thing/valuable supply management concerns into its research program are now being put into use. 
 This is being done by expanding the system and 
 redesigning its approach in order to incorporate 
 institutional things/businesses that specifically face/deal with research concerns within an agroecological (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Aware of the fact that (how money affects people's lives) - not 
 just natural - conditions hold back the effectiveness and spillover (possible power or ability within/possibility of)  the system's research, this agroecological aspect is being overlaid on a (related to how land, rivers, etc. affect a country's rules and relationships) or (related to a large area) dimension to 
 create a (what people commonly call a/not really a) "(large area of land)al" (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) 
 (TAC/ Center Directors Working Group, 1993). 
 
 3. Private investments in farming-based research 
 
 Any creation of future (government) research policy must take into account the level of 
 activity and changing role of the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) in 
 farming-based research. As farmers use more (bought) inputs and the value-added in farming 
 more and more moves off-farm to the marketing and 
 processing parts/areas, it is likely that the (rewards or reasons for doing something) 
 for (people and businesses that are not part of the government) investment in research will 
 grow. While there is a general perception that the 
 (people and businesses that are not part of the government) has increased its participation in 
 and money/giving money (to) of farming-based research, there are no 
 available data to give an correct (numbers-based) or 
 even (not numbers-based) (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) of these developments at the worldwide, (related to a large area), and, in many events, even country-level. 
 There are different reasons why these data are 
 not easily available. Firms may feel their competitive interests are not well served by a full and 
 honest  (telling to people) of their R &amp; D activities and so 
 may be less than honest/appearing soon this way. Even 
 when such data are reported, there are real/honest 
 (problems, delays, etc.) in identifying the R &amp; D part 
 that relates specifically to agriculture. This is 
 especially a problem for multiproduct firms in 
 the chemical, drug-based, (related to the body function of living things) and mechanical businesses that chase after (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 scope by sharing research useful things/valuable supplies across a 
 number of lines of research. Giving out these 
 R &amp; D expenses to a particular country in any 
 meaningful way is also filled with problems, especially 
 when dealing with huge company firms that cen- 
 
 J.R. Anderson eta/. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 tralize different parts of their worldwide  or (related to a large area) 
 R&amp;D operations. 
 Recent guesses by Pray and Neumeyer (1989) 
 for the U.S. and Thirtle et al. (1991) for the UK 
 suggest that (people and businesses that are not part of the government) investments in farming-based and food (i.e., mostly after-harvest) R&amp;D 
 are big and at least as great as the public 
 effort. Reliable worldwide  guesses of private expenses on farming-based R&amp;D are simply unavailable. Persley (1990, p. 48) reports that about 540 
 million dollars were spent worldwide by the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) on farming-based science research 
 in 1985, accounting for about 60% of the 900 
 million dollars spent on modern science 
 research for farming in that year. This 
 (people and businesses that are not part of the government) R&amp;D figure is significantly larger 
 than the 36 million dollars Pray and Echeverria 
 (1991) guess was spent every year by huge company companies on all types of farming-based (including after-harvest) R&amp;D in less-developed 
 countries during the last thing just mentioned half of the 1980s. 
 Taken together these figures suggest that an 
 almost completely large share of (people and businesses that are not part of the government) 
 spending on farming-based R&amp;D happens in the 
 more-developed countries. 
 The data reported by Pray and Echeverria 
 (1991) support this view. During the mid-1980s, 
 spending by U.S. firms on R&amp;D in the food and 
 farming-based parts/areas was around 2.4 billion dollars 
 per year (with about 58% of this total going to 
 agriculture). Similar figures for the UK and 
 France are 530 million and 270 million dollars, 
 (match up each pair of items in order). Much of the privately sourced money 
 for farming-based R&amp;D in the less-developed areas of the world comes from Latin America and 
 Asia and, according to Pray and Echeverria 
 (1991), it is mainly located in a few large countries 
 such as Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and India. 
 Our understanding of the scale and extent of 
 these (people and businesses that are not part of the government) efforts is, unfortunately, sadly not enough. The recent and careful efforts 
 by Falconi (1992, 1993) to collect time-series 
 data on (people and businesses that are not part of the government), farming-based R&amp;D expenses in Ecuador and Colombia are quite showing/telling about in this respect. These new data show that, 
 in both countries, (people and businesses that are not part of the government) spending on farming-based R &amp; D grew much more quickly than publicly sourced expenses during the 1980s. By 
 
 117 
 
 1991, the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) accounted for 37% of 
 total farming-based R&amp;D expenses in Colombia 
 (compared with 22% in 1970) and in Ecuador the 
 (people and businesses that are not part of the government) share is now 27% (up from 19% in 
 1986). To the extent these developments are representative of the situation in other Latin American (and maybe some Asian) countries, they call 
 for a radical rethink of the roles of the (government) research (services businesses/government units) in these areas. 
 Having said this, however, there are still many 
 countries, especially in Africa, where the low 
 level of (bought) inputs in farming limits the 
 size of the received/made from market for privately produced 
 farming-based technologies. This situation is likely 
 to continue for some time to come. Anyway, 
 governments have some policy instruments 
 with which to influence private R&amp;D. Public-part/area research can help develop (people and businesses that are not part of the government) research by 
 providing (or selling) research results and by 
 training the personnel needed by private companies to manage and do research. Patents and plant-variety 
 protection laws, if they are well designed and 
 enforced, can create the necessary (rewards or reasons for doing something) for 
 private companies to invest in R&amp;D. Technology 
 imports can stimulate local R&amp;D, so more liberalized (related to computers and science) trade could also increase local (people and businesses that are not part of the government) R &amp; D activities. 
 New and interesting institutional arrangements can also 
 help help develop those complementarities that exist 
 when the generally more upstream or "pretechnology" types of research best suited to the (not having copyright; free to use by anyone) are married with the more applied, 
 technology-creating types of research best 
 suited to the private domain. For instance, jointventure research efforts/tries, where both public 
 and private (services businesses/government units) both/together begin/try and/ or 
 cofinance a program of research are becoming 
 more frequent. Fee-for-service or contract research is also more and more being used to (turn over from the government to private companies) 
 the financing of research being performed by 
 (government) research institutions. 
 Private, for-profit research should not be seen 
 as something naturally harmful to the public good, but neither is it likely that an free 
 private businesses have the (rewards or reasons for doing something) to invest (good or well enough) in researching those problems that will 
 improve social welfare. Public-policy formulators 
 will need to become more and more sensitive to a 
 
 118 
 
 J.R. Anderson et al. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 quickly changing (related to computers and science) and institutional 
 (surrounding conditions) in order to take advantage of the 
 opportunities that exist to (get ready for action) both private 
 and public research useful things/valuable supplies in a socially desirable manner. 
 
 4. Political and money-based help for farming-based 
 research 
 
 A basic job  facing NARSs is to win 
 public support for research and translate it to 
 money-based help. This must be done in the big picture  of a (government) subject to competing claims 
 on its (when there's not nearly enough of important or valuable things) from different interest 
 groups in (community of people/all good people in the world), be they producers, people, 
 or taxpayers. 
 From this way of seeing things, governments give differential preference to different programs both within 
 and between parts/areas of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in response 
 to such pressures. So, farming-based expenses 
 are committed to such programs as (away from cities) (set of machines), education and credit as well as to the 
 generation and spreading around of new farming-based 
 technologies. Also, many poor countries 
 put into use distortionary pricing and marketing 
 policies in the (short-run) pursuit of cheap-food 
 policies and the like, that (in the end) tax farming and speed up the move (from one place to another) of useful things/valuable supplies from 
 the part/area. These same policies, in part by (assigning too low a value to) the part/area-clearly stated/particular valuable things in farming 
 (e.g., land, crop-watering/rinsing with water facilities, etc.), can also lead 
 to an underinvestment in farming-based research 
 and the level of effort invested by farmers in 
 searching for, testing, and adapting new farming-based technologies and practices. 
 To gain a full understanding of the watched/followed 
 weird differences in the nature and level of support for 
 farming-based research (and the final/best working well produces that flow therefrom) would require 
 described/explained (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of these "political (process of people making, selling, and buying things)" forces - an exercise that would take us well 
 beyond our present brief (Gardner, 1990; Roe 
 and Pardey, 1993; Alston and Pardey, 1994). 
 Rather, the aim here is to present some (serving to compare two or more things) (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the level of support for public 
 farming-based research, and to place publicly gave money (to) 
 
 Table 5 
 Farming-based research-strength ratios by area and income 
 group, total weighted average percentages(%) 
 Area/income group - 
 
 1961-65 1971-75 1981-85 
 
 Sub-Saharan Africa (37) b 
 China 
 Asia and Pacific, excl. China (15) 
 Latin America and Caribbean (26) 
 West Asia and North Africa (13) 
 
 0.26 
 0.42 
 0.14 
 0.30 
 0.28 
 
 0.42 
 0.40 
 0.22 
 0.46 
 0.50 
 
 0.49 
 0.41 
 0.32 
 0.58 
 0.52 
 
 Less-developed countries (92) 
 More-developed countries (18) 
 
 0.26 
 0.96 
 
 0.34 
 1.41 
 
 0.41 
 2.03 
 
 Low (30) 
 Lower-middle (28) 
 Middle (18) 
 Upper-middle (18) 
 High (16) 
 
 0.25 
 0.24 
 0.25 
 0.27 
 1.08 
 
 0.30 
 0.35 
 0.46 
 0.44 
 1.57 
 
 0.37 
 0.40 
 0.57 
 0.55 
 2.23 
 
 Total sample (110) 
 
 0.48 
 
 0.63 
 
 0.71 
 
 - Countries assigned to income classes based on 1971-75 
 per person Republican(s) averages where low is &amp;lt; $600; lower middle is 
 $600-1499; middle is $1500-2999; upper middle is $30005999; and high is &amp;gt; $6000. 
 b Bracketed figures represent number of countries in each 
 area or income class. 
 
 research in the big picture  of the overall level of 
 support for farming. 2 
 A traditional measure of the level of support 
 for farming-based research is the farming-based research-strength ratio that expresses levels of research spending as a percentage of farming-based 
 gross domestic product (AgooP ). Although the 
 majority of the less-developed countries spent 
 well above 0.5% of AgooP on farming-based research in 1981-85, the weighted average was only 
 0.4% (Table 5). This seen/obvious difference between 
 simple and weighted average is caused by the fact 
 that the smaller less-developed countries tend to 
 have (in a big way) higher farming-based research-strength ratios than the large less-developed countries. The weighted average of the more-developed countries barely reached 2% in 1981-85. 
 The Southern (related to Europe) countries fell behind significantly behind the other more-developed countries. When calculated by income group, a (not so 
 
 2 For an earlier version of these data, see Pardey, Kang and 
 Elliott (1989). 
 
 J.R. Anderson et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 107-123 
 
 surprising) strong relationship appears between 
 per person income and the farming-based researchintensity ratio. 
 Although farming-based research-strength ratios 
 about doubled in both more- and less-developed countries between 1961-65 and 1981-85, 
 they (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) in the last thing just mentioned half of that period in 
 37% of the less-developed countries, one-half of 
 which were in sub-Saharan Africa. 
 Research investment has usually/(in the past) produced high levels of return compared with investments in other areas, up to and going beyond 35% in 
 some events (Echeverria, 1990). This fact, and 
 the gap in investment compared with more-developed countries, has led some people in charge to decide that many less-developed countries underinvest in farming-based research. It has also led to 
 calls from the World Bank, for example, to set a 
 research investment target of 2% of AgGDP 
 (World Bank, 1981). 
 Research-strength ratios are useful to policymakers because they point to/show the importance 
 other countries attach to farming-based research. 
 But they may be an unreliable indicator of the 
 appropriateness of a nation's research investment 
 
 119 
 
 because the effectiveness of a country's research effort differs between areas and over time. It 
 could, therefore, be more helpful, instead of setting random targets for research investment, to 
 fix a desired rate of return from the investment 
 made - to set targets that would push rates of 
 return to below 20%, for example. 
 The data presented in Table 6 show that lowincome countries spend a much greater 
 share of overall public expenses on farming and farming-based research than high-income 
 countries, around 11% on farming and 0.7% 
 on farming-based research, compared with 2.7% 
 and 0.2%, (match up each pair of items in order), in high-income countries. 
 More than that, the share of public expenses on 
 farming directed specifically to research remains surprisingly constant, at around 8% in 
 1981-85, for both poor and rich countries alike. 
 To understand why this is so would involve, at 
 a low value, a described/explained (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of the decision-ma<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
