AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Consumption effects of (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change: 
 what if people are right?* 
 Konstantinos Giannakas a,*, Murray Fulton b 
 a Department of Farming-based Money flow, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 216 H. C. Filley Hall, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583, USA 
 b 
 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Sask., Canada S7N 5A8 
 
 Received 8 June 2000; received in changed form 29 January 2001; accepted 27 November 2001 
 
 Abstract 
 
 This paper develops a model of (made different) people to examine the consumption effects of (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change (GM) 
 under other choice labelling governments and separating people enforcement pictures/situations. (related to careful studying or deep thinking) results show that if people perceive 
 GM products as being different than their traditional partners, GM affects personal welfare and, this way, consumption 
 decisions. When the existence of market mistakes in one or more stages of the supply chain prevents the transmission 
 of cost savings connected with the new technology to people, GM results in welfare losses for people. The analysis 
 shows that the relative welfare ranking of.the 'no labelling' and 'mandatory labelling' governments depends on: (i) the level of 
 personal hatred of GM products; (ii) the size of marketing and separating people costs under required labelling; (iii) the share 
 of the GM product in total production; and (iv) the extent to which GM products are incotTectly labelled as non-GM products. 
 © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: Dll; D82; LIS; Q13; Ql8 
 Keywords: Person welfare; (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change; Labelling; Mislabelling; Separating people costs 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 Person concern about (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change 
 (GM) of food is one of the most famous features 
 of farming-based science. Unlike farmers, who 
 
 * 
 
 This work was carried out with partial support from the IFPRIled project on farming-based (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) useful things/valuable supplies and science policies. This project is mostly given money by the Swedish 
 International Development Cooperation (service business/government unit/power/functioning) (Sida), with added/more support from the Canadian International Development 
 (service business/government unit/power/functioning) (CIDA). The authors wish to thank Peter Hazell and two 
 unnamed reviewers of the journal for their useful comments 
 and ideas. This is University of Nebraska-Lincoln Farming-based 
 Research Division Article no. 13240. 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: + 1-402-472-2041; 
 fax: + 1-402-472-3460. 
 E-mail address: kgiannakas@unl.edu (K. Giannakas). 
 
 have seen (related to scientific farming) benefits in the new technology 
 and have quickly adopted transgenic plants such as 
 Bt cotton and corn and herbicide-resistant soybeans 
 and canola (Money-based Research Service, 1999), people have expressed serious doubt about the foods 
 produced from these crops. Personal fighting against/bad feelings about 
 GM products started in Europe and has spread to 
 other countries. 
 An Angus Reid poll in eight countries (France, 
 Germany, UK, Australia, Canada, US, Japan and 
 Brazil) found that among people aware of (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) 
 changed foods, 68% on average point to/show they would 
 be "less likely" to buy a food product if they 
 knew it contained (having characteristics that were changed by people) ingredients. 
 The proportion of people who responded expressing disgust 
 to GM products varied between 57% in the US and 
 
 0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B. V. All rights reserved. 
 Pll: S0169-5150(02)00033-6 
 
 98 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 83% in Germany (The Money-flow expert, 2000). In an earlier 
 poll in the UK (MORI poll), 77% of those surveyed 
 favoured a ban on GM food. Personal resistance 
 to GM is founded on health, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), moral 
 and thinking-related concerns about the 'new' practice 
 (Hobbs and Plunkett, 1999; Lindner, 2000). 
 In response to this personal reaction, a number 
 of food companies, such as Marks and Spencer, MeDonalds, Sainsbury, and Tesco in the UK, Nestle in 
 Switzerland, Carrefour in France, McCains in Canada, 
 and Frito Lay in the US, have pointed to/showed that they 
 are only accepting/selling non-GM products. Governments in the (related to Europe) Union (EU) and in other places have 
 also responded by introducing required labelling 
 or by blocking/forbidding specific GM products (i.e. GM corn 
 and canola in Austria, France, Greece, and Luxembourg) (Hobbs and Plunkett, 1999; Runge and Jackson, 2000). At the international level, the Biosafety 
 Rules signed by 130 countries in 2000 in Montreal 
 needed/demanded that shipments of living (having characteristics that were changed by people) 
 products (such as seeds) are to be labelled as such. 
 While labelling of food products makes happy personal 
 demand for the right to make (based on knowledge and learning) consumption 
 decisions (Caswell and Mojduszka, 1996; Caswell, 
 1998), the introduction of separating people and labelling 
 raises some issues that affect everyone in the 
 food chain. One issue is the added costs that separating people and labelling introduce and the money-based 
 hit/effect of these costs on people. A second issue 
 is that separating people and labelling activities create (rewards or reasons for doing something) for the lie and mislabelling 
 of GM products as traditional food. Although, there 
 is a growing books on the nature and origin of 
 person attitudes towards GM products, most of the 
 analysis on the money-based results of these attitudes is rather (experience-based thinking) in nature. An exception is the 
 paper by Plunkett and Gaisford (2000) who examine 
 the welfare effects of introducing GM products, but 
 do not think about/believe personal mixed-up nature or examine 
 the possibility of mislabelling. 
 The goal of this paper is to develop a idea-based model that examines the consumption effects 
 of GM under other choice labelling governments and separating people enforcement pictures/situations. More specifically, 
 the paper analyses the effect of GM products on the 
 welfare and buying decisions of people under: (i) no labelling; (ii) required labelling under 
 full obedience; (iii) and required labelling when 
 
 lie about the type of the product (i.e. 
 mislabelling) happens. 
 In analysing the consumption effects of GM, this 
 paper clearly accounts for personal mixed-up nature. 
 To take by force/take control of the different attitudes towards GM, people are said to differ in the utility they get 
 from the consumption of GM products and therefore 
 in their desire-to-pay (WTP) for these products. 
 Person mixed-up nature is critical in understanding 
 how demand for both GM and non-GM products exists when labelling happens. 
 In this paper, 'genetically changed' products refers 
 to transgenics-products in which some form of (tiny chemical assembly instruction inside of living things) 
 'splicing' has happened. The new technology is assumed to create production cost savings while 
 having no effect on product (features/ qualities/ traits) that are 
 (capable of being seen and known) by people; the analysis this way applies to 
 the producer-oriented first generation GM products 
 that are belief in nature. 
 The title of the paper comes from/is caused by the major result of 
 the analysis, namely, that if people perceive GM 
 products to be different from their non-GM partners, then there is a reasonable expectation that a percentage of people will correctly believe that the 
 introduction of GM products lowers their utility and 
 would prefer to see these products blocked/forbidden. The key 
 factors that decide/figure out the importance of this welfare 
 loss are the degree of hatred of GM products, the 
 degree to which the cost savings at the farm level are 
 not passed through to people, and the importance 
 of the costs connected with separating non-GM products from GM products. Although, this group would 
 like to ban GM products, when faced with the introduction of GM products as a given, this group will 
 prefer required labelling to no labelling. 
 The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
 presents the idea-based model. Sections 3-5 examine 
 the effect of GM on personal decisions and welfare 
 under no labelling, required labelling with full obedience, and required labelling with mislabelling, 
 (match up each pair of items in order). Section 6 compares and contrasts the no 
 labelling and the required labelling governments while 
 Section 7 summarises and ends/decides the paper. 
 
 2. Person (features/ qualities/ traits) and behaviour 
 The rise of person concerns over GM products and the (many different kinds of people or things) of these concerns hints that 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 people differ in their WTP for GM against/compared to/or non-GM 
 food products. In the simplest case, think about/believe a person that uses/eats one unit of either a traditional, 
 a GM, or a substitute product. Assuming that the 
 person spends a small fraction of total expense 
 on the products (that are bought and sold)  in question, her utility function can be 
 written as: 
 Ut 
 
 = U- 
 
 Pt 
 
 if a unit of traditional product is ate/destroyed, 
 Ugm 
 
 =U 
 
 - Pgm - AC 
 
 if a unit of GM product is ate/destroyed, 
 and 
 Us= U-Ps 
 
 if a unit of a substitute product is ate/destroyed 
 where Ut is the utility connected with buying one 
 unit of the usual product, Ugm the utility connected with buying one unit of the GM version of 
 the usual product, and Us the utility connected 
 with buying one unit of a substitute product. 1 The 
 price of the usual product is Pt. the price of its 
 GM partner is Pgm, and the price of the substitute product is Ps. The limit/guideline U is a per unit base 
 level of utility while the term A.c gives the discount in 
 utility from using/eating GM product. 2 The limit/guideline 
 A. is a non-negative utility discount factor while the 
 (typical and expected) c differs according to consumer and takes by force/takes control of the consumer's hatred ofwards GM products. 
 1 One example of a product that could be supplied in both a 
 traditional and a GM form is margarine made from canola. In this 
 case, butter can be thought of as a substitute product. A second 
 example could be corn chips (made from traditional or GM corn); 
 the substitute product is potato chips. Other examples of traditional, 
 GM, and substitute products include meat coming from animals 
 fed with (traditional or GM) corn or soybean against/compared to/or meat coming 
 from animals tbat are cereal-related fed. For simpleness and without loss of 
 (statement that's not detailed), it is assumed that the substitute product (butter, potato 
 chips and meat coming from grain fed animals in the previous/coming before 
 examples) is free of GM ingredients. The effects/results/suggestions of relaxing 
 this idea (you think is true) are discussed in note 6. 
 2 U can also be understood/explained as the maximum WTP for a unit of 
 the usual or the substitute product. In such a case, person 
 maximum WTP for the GM product equals U -?-.c. The difference 
 between the WTP and the price of the (traditional, the GM, or 
 the substitute) product then provides an guess of the (connected/related) 
 person extra. 
 
 99 
 
 To simplify the analysis, the (typical and expected) c takes values between 0 and 1. People with large values of c 
 prefer the usual product rather than the GM product, all else equal. The idea (you think is true) that A.c is greater 
 than or equal to 0 is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) showing 
 that people are either uncaring or against GM 
 products (Hobbs and Plunkett, 1999). 3 The analysis 
 at first assumes that people are completely distributed between the polar values of c. This idea (you think is true) 
 is then changed to allow a bunching or a concentration 
 of people at the ends of the spectrum (i.e. 0 and 1). 
 Fig. 1 illustrates the situation where no GM product has been introduced. By idea (you think is true), the net utility connected with the usual good is greater than 
 that connected with the substitute good, (in other words) U - Pt &amp;gt; 
 U-Ps, for all people. In such a case, all people 
 purchase the usual good and total personal welfare is given by the shaded area in Fig. 1. The effect of 
 introducing GM products into the market is examined 
 in the following sections. 
 
 3. Personal behaviour when GM products are 
 not labelled 
 Think about/believe first the situation where a GM product is 
 introduced, but no labelling of the product is carried 
 out. Because the GM product and its traditional partner are marketed together, the price faced by the 
 person, Pnl, is the same (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) which product is (bought). The lack of information about the 
 type of the product being sold means that people 
 are uncertain as to the nature of the product they buy. Since the presence or (not being there; not being present) of the GM is 
 not detectable with either search or experience, the 
 GM can be referred to as a belief (typical and expected) 
 (Darby and Karni, 1973; Nelson, 1974). Assuming a 
 3 While our analysis applies to the producer-focused, first generation, GM products, the model can be extended, with some 
 change, to analyse the results from the introduction of 
 consumer-oriented GM products. Specifically, if the new generation of GM products manages to possess attributes valued by people (e.g. nutraceuticals), the current hatred of GM products 
 could become preference for GM products with desirable (features/ qualities/ traits). In such a case, the limit/guideline c in the model would take by force/take control of blended person preferences and ?-.c would represent 
 utility improvement (rather than utility discount) from the consumption of GM products (i.e. the (connected/related) utility function would 
 be written as Ugm = U - Pgm +?-.c). 
 
 K. Giannakas, M Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 100 
 
 Person utility 
 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 1. Person decisions and welfare before the introduction of GM food. 
 
 chance of 1/f that the non-labelled product (bought something for money) is GM, personal utility is now4 
 Unl 
 
 = U- Pnl -1/fA.c 
 
 if a unit of non-labelled product is ate/destroyed, 
 and 
 Us= U-Ps 
 
 if a unit of a substitute product is ate/destroyed 
 where Unl is the expected per unit utility connected 
 with buying the non-labelled product (i.e. Unl = 
 1/fUgm 
 
 + (1 -1/f)Ut). 
 
 The consumption choice of the individual person 
 is figured out by/decided by the relationship between the utilities 
 came/coming from the non-labelled product and the substitute. More specifically, the person with hatred of 
 GM product given by: 
 
 4 The chance that the non-labelled product is GM can be 
 seen as reflecting the share of the GM product in total production 
 (i.e. the part of/amount of margarine that is (having characteristics that were changed by people) in the 
 example given in note 1). The greater is the production 
 share of the GM version of the product, the greater is the chance 
 that the non-labelled product is GM. 
 
 is uncaring between using/eating a unit of non-labelled 
 product and a unit of the substitute-the utility connected with the consumption of these offerings is the 
 same. Obviously, people with a lower hatred of 
 GM products (i.e. people with c E [0, c&#126;1 )) will 
 prefer the non-labelled product while people with 
 higher hatred of GM products (i.e. people with 
 c E (c&#126;1 , 1]) will consume the substitute. 5 
 Since people have been assumed to be completely distributed with respect to their hatred of OM 
 products, the level of disgust going along with/matching up to the 
 uncaring person, c&#126;, also decides/figures out the share 
 of the non-labelled product to total consumption, SnJ· 
 The consumption share of the substitute, Ss, is given 
 by 1 - c&#126; 1 . More specifically, SnJ and Ss can be written 
 as: 
 
 5 The focus of the analysis on people that were people 
 of the product before its (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change (promises that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) the 
 positive sign of c&#126;1 . More specifically, for people to prefer 
 the product before its (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change it should hold that 
 U - Pt &amp;gt; U - Ps where Pt represents the price of the product 
 before (man-made controlling of the characteristics of living things). Due to the cost savings connected with 
 the new technology, the price of the non-labelled product Pnl will 
 be less than, or equal to, Pt. 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 101 
 
 Person utility 
 
 V-Pnl 
 
 U-pt 
 
 U-ps 
 
 0&#126;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;--&#126;.&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;--&#126; 
 Cnz 
 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 2. Consumption decisions and welfare effects under GM and no labelling. 
 
 and 
 Ss 
 
 Ps- Pnl 
 = 1- :....::._....::.....:= 
 1/rA. 
 
 Fig. 2 graphs the desire/decision of s 111 and ss. The 
 downward sloping curve graphs the utility connected 
 with the unit consumption of the non-labelled product for different levels of the (making different) attribute 
 c, while the (continuous) flat/left-and-right line shows the 
 utility came/coming from the consumption of the substitute. The dashed U - Pt curve is the utility curve 
 before GM. So, Fig. 2 is built on the 
 idea (you think is true) that the price of the non-labelled product equals the price of the usual product, (in other words) 
 Pnl = Pt· 
 The intersection of the two (continuous) utility 
 curves decides/figures out the level of the (making different) 
 attribute that goes along with the uncaring person, c&#126; 1 , as well as the consumption shares of the 
 non-labelled product and the substitute. People 
 'located' to the left of c&#126;1 (instance of buying something for money) the non-labelled 
 product while people located to the right of c&#126;1 
 find it best to consume the substitute. Personal 
 welfare under no labelling is given by the area under 
 
 the effective utility curve shown as the bold kinked 
 curve in Fig. 2. 6 
 (serving to compare two or more things) statics results can easily be drawn from 
 this model. More specifically, a decrease in the price of 
 the non-labelled product shifts the Unt curve upwards 
 and increases Sn! while an increase in the price of the 
 substitute causes a downward move/change of the Us curve 
 that increases Sn! (i.e. asnJ/aPnl &amp;lt; 0 and asnJ/aps &amp;gt; 
 0). Finally, an increase in A. (i.e. an increase in the 
 utility discount from using/eating GM product for any 
 level of c) and/or an increase in the chance that 
 the non-labelled product is (having characteristics that were changed by people), 1jr, 
 6 Relaxing the idea (you think is true) that the substitute product (e.g. butter 
 and potato chips in the examples above) remains free of GM 
 ingredients would result in a (when a wheel turns so the top moves to the right) rotation of the utility curve 
 connected with its consumption through the (stopping or interfering with something) at U - p, 
 in Fig. 2. Almost the same as  the case of the non-labelled product, the 
 slope of the new utility curve for the substitute product would 
 be figured out by/decided by the utility discount factor A, and the share of 
 the GM version of the substitute product to its total production. 
 Obviously, (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) change of the substitute product reduces 
 personal welfare and increases the consumption share of the 
 non-labelled product (i.e. margarine and corn chips) relative to the 
 case where the substitute (i.e. butter or potato chips) remained in 
 its ordinary form. 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton! Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 102 
 
 Person utility 
 
 U-pnz 
 U-p, 
 U-ps 
 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 3. Welfare effects when GM reduces the market price (Pnl &amp;lt; Ptl· 
 
 cause a (when a wheel turns so the top moves to the right) rotation of the U0 1 curve through 
 the (stopping or interfering with something) at U - Politician  that reduces the share of 
 the non-labelled product to total consumption (i.e. 
 Bs0 1/BA. &amp;lt; 0 and Bs0 1/B1/I &amp;lt; 0). 
 The effect of GM on personal welfare depends 
 mostly on the effect of the technology introduction on 
 the market price of the non-labelled product. The effect 
 of GM on the final price of the product decides/figures out 
 whether there will be any gains for people as well 
 as the extent of losses due to consumer hatred of 
 GM technology. 
 More specifically, if the existence of market mistakes in one or more stages of the food chain 
 prevents the transmission of the cost savings to the 
 people, the price seen by people is not affected 
 by GM. As was noted earlier, Fig. 2 is built 
 on the idea (you think is true) that the price of the non-labelled 
 product remains unchanged, (in other words) Politician = Pt· Under this 
 idea (you think is true), the introduction of GM products leads to 
 a loss in welfare to people in group. This loss 
 in welfare is given by the hatched area. Although the 
 people located at c = 0 experience no loss in welfare, all people located to the right of this point 
 see their utility fall. The extent of the (understood/made real/achieved) welfare 
 loss depends on the level of personal hatred of 
 
 GM products c, the utility discount factor A, and the 
 chance that the non-labelled product is GM, 1/J. 
 If the production costs savings due to GM are transmitted to people (i.e. in the case of a perfectly competitive food chain), GM technology reduces the price 
 of the product relative to its price before GM, Pt, and 
 people with (compared to other things) low level of GM disgust 
 will (understand/make real/achieve) an increase in their welfare. People 
 with (compared to other things) high hatred of GM product experience a reduction in their welfare since the price effect 
 of GM is outweighed by the utility discount from GM 
 product consumption. Fig. 3 graphs the effect of GM 
 on personal welfare when Politician &amp;lt; Pt· 
 The analysis can be easily changed to examine 
 cases where people are not completely distributed 
 with respect to their value of c but, rather, are lumped 
 at either end of the continuous thing. For instance, when 
 people do not perceive GM products as being different from their ordinary partners (i.e. when 
 c = 0 for all people), the introduction of the new 
 technology will either leave the welfare of people 
 unaffected (case where Politician = Pt. Fig. 2), or will make 
 all people better off (case where Politician &amp;lt; Pt, Fig. 3). 
 On the other hand, when the disgust of all people 
 is (compared to other things) high (i.e. when c = 1 for all people), 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 GM will cause personal welfare to fall. More generally, when the distribution of people is continuous 
 (but not uniform), the welfare effects of GM depend 
 on its skewness, (in other words) the more skewed is the distribution towards 1, the greater are the losses and the lower 
 are the gains (when Pnl &amp;lt; Pt) from the introduction 
 of the new technology. 
 Overall, the results of this section show that GM 
 technology and no labelling may result in some consumption switching to the substitute good and a net 
 welfare loss. If the number of people experiencing 
 a welfare loss is big, a ban could be both clear and welfare improving. For net person losses 
 to happen/be made real it must hold that: (i) the price decrease 
 from GM (if any) is (compared to other things) small; (ii) the discount 
 in utility from using/eating the GM product is (compared to other things) 
 high; (iii) the chance that the non-labelled product 
 is (having characteristics that were changed by people) is (compared to other things) high; and/or (iv) 
 people are mainly located at the right hand edge of 
 the disgust spectrum. 
 
 4. Personal behaviour with required labelling 
 and full obedience 
 Think about/believe now the personal choice problem in an 
 institutional arrangement with a required labelling 
 government in place. In this case, traditional (non-GM) and 
 GM products are separated and marketed separately. 
 People now have a choice between a non-GM 
 labelled product, its GM labelled partner, and a 
 substitute product. 7 Person utility is given by: 
 U[ =U-p; 
 
 if a unit of non-GM labelled product is ate/destroyed, 
 7 While the analysis assumes that both GM and traditional products are legally needed/demanded to be labelled, the results are more general 
 and apply to the case where only the GM or the usual product 
 has to be labelled. Specifically, when only traditional products are 
 labelled, unlabelled products will be seen as  GM products. 
 (in almost the same way), if GM products are legally needed/demanded to be labelled as 
 such, unlabelled products will be seen as  being traditional. 
 This matching does not hold, of course, when labelling is (something you choose to do, but is not required). With (something you choose to do, but is not required) labelling, the labelling of a product as GM 
 does not suggest that non-labelled products are traditional in nature. 
 So, suppliers of traditional food will always have (rewards or reasons for doing something) to 
 label their produce as being traditional. People would perceive 
 products that are not labelled as traditional as being (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) 
 changed. 
 
 Ugm 
 
 = 
 
 103 
 
 U - Pgm - A.c 
 
 if a unit of GM labelled product is ate/destroyed, 
 and 
 Us= U-Ps 
 
 if a unit of a substitute product is ate/destroyed 
 where pf is the price of the usual product after the 
 introduction of the new technology. All other (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are as (before that/before now) defined. 
 The GM product and the non-GM product are not 
 necessarily priced the same. In fact for any (positive) amount of the GM labelled product to be demanded (i.e. for Ugm to go beyond U[),Pgm should be less 
 than pf. There are two reasons why the GM product 
 will be priced lower than its traditional partner. 
 First, required labelling means increased marketing 
 and separating people costs. These transaction costs connected with identity preservation cause person prices 
 to rise. Most of these costs are got/caused in 
 the non-GM labelled product chain (Lindner, 2000), 
 which, in turn, hints that people of the usual product face a greater price increase. 8 Second, 
 it is assumed that GM technology creates production cost savings at the farm level. Some, if not all, of 
 the cost savings may be transmitted to the person 
 of the GM product. 
 Not only do the existence of marketing and separating people costs suggest that U - Pgm &amp;gt; U - pf, the 
 size of these costs significantly affects the consumption shares of the products being examined. More 
 specifically, the greater the marketing and separating people costs, the greater is the price increase of the 
 non-GM labelled product (relative to the price of the 
 product before GM, Pt), and the lower is the utility 
 connected with the unit consumption of the non-GM 
 labelled product, U(. For (compared to other things) high marketing 
 and separating people costs, the utility from using/eating the 
 non-GM labelled product might fall below the utility 
 8 The labelling of one type of product would only affect the 
 (numbers-based) nature of the results by reducing the labelling costs in 
 the supply chain of the product that would not have to be labelled. 
 However, when any type of labelling happens, traditional and GM 
 products will have to be separated. The separating people costs will 
 always be higher for producers of the usual product due to 
 the effort needed/demanded to preserve the identity of their produce by 
 keeping it separate from the GM product that people regard 
 as being inferior. 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 104 
 
 Person utility 
 
 U-Pgm 
 
 14&mdash;&mdash;Sgm 
 
 0 
 
 * 
 
 Cf 
 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 4. Consumption decisions and welfare effects when separating people costs are (compared to other things) low (U-p; &amp;gt; U-Ps) and 
 
 connected with the consumption of the substitute (i.e. 
 U- pf &amp;lt; U - Ps). In such a case, people with 
 a (compared to other things) high hatred of GM products will switch 
 to the substitute product-there is no what people want to buy 
 for the usual (non-GM) product. 
 Fig. 4 shows the consumption decisions under 
 required labelling when marketing and separating people 
 costs are (compared to other things) low (i.e. when U - pf &amp;gt; U - p 5 ). 
 In this case, no personal switches to the substitute. 
 The consumption shares of the GM and non-GM labelled products are figured out by/decided by the intersection of 
 the Ugm and U{ utility curves. The person with 
 hatred of GM given by 
 
 * : U - Pgm - A.c * 
 1 
 
 c1 
 
 =U - 
 
 Pt1 
 
 pf- Pgm 
 =* c1* = &mdash;-'--)..&mdash;-=-- 
 
 is uncaring between using/eating a unit of GM and 
 non-GM labelled product-the utility connected with 
 the consumption of these offerings is the same. People with low hatred of GM products (i.e. people with c E [0, c!)) prefer the GM product, while 
 people with high hatred of GM products (i.e. 
 people with c E (c&#126;, l]) consume the non-GM labelled product. 
 
 Pgm &amp;lt;p 1- 
 
 When people are completely distributed between 
 the polar values of c, c&#126; also decides/figures out the share 
 of the GM product in total consumption, Sgm· The 
 consumption share of the non-GM labelled product, 
 St. is given by 1 - c&#126;, (in other words) 
 sgm= 
 
 pf- Pgm 
 ).. 
 
 (=ct) 
 
 and 
 St 
 
 = 
 
 I 
 
 1 _ Pt - Pgm 
 ).. 
 
 Obviously, the share of the GM labelled product falls 
 as its price and/or the utility discount factor increase, 
 and rises as the price of the non-GM labelled product 
 increases (i.e. Bsgm/BPgm &amp;lt; 0, Bsgm/BA. &amp;lt; 0, and 
 Bsgm/Bpf &amp;gt; 0). 
 When the transaction costs from required labelling are (compared to other things) high (i.e. when U- pf &amp;lt; U- p 5 ), 
 some people switch to the substitute product. 
 The consumption shares of the GM product and the 
 substitute product are figured out by/decided by the intersection of the Ugm and Us curves (Fig. 5) and can be 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 105 
 
 Person utility 
 
 U-pgm 
 
 U-pt 
 
 U-p, 
 U-p; 
 
 s, 
 
 0 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 5. Consumption decisions and welfare effects when separating people costs are (compared to other things) high (U-p; &amp;lt; U-Ps) and Pgm &amp;lt;p1 - 
 
 written as: 
 Ps- Pgm 
 * 
 Sgm = 
 (= cl) 
 A 
 and 
 
 = 
 
 l _ Ps - Pgm 
 A 
 Almost the same as  the case of smaller marketing and separating people costs examined earlier, Sgm falls as Pgm and/or A 
 increase, and rises asPs increases (i.e. asgm/aPgm &amp;lt; 
 0, asgm/aA &amp;lt; 0, and asgm/aps &amp;gt; 0). 
 The welfare effects of GM under required labelling clearly depend on the effect of GM technology 
 on the price of the GM product. More specifically, if 
 the price of the GM product is less than the price of 
 the product before its GM (i.e. if Pgm &amp;lt;p1) people 
 with (compared to other things) low hatred of GM product will gain 
 from the new technology. People with (compared to other things) 
 high hatred of GM product experience a reduction in 
 their welfare due to: (i) the utility discount from GM 
 product consumption; and (ii) the price increase of the 
 traditional product caused by the marketing and separating people costs. Note that for Pgm to be reduced relative 
 to pr, two conditions should be met. First, the market 
 Ss 
 
 structure must be such that production costs savings 
 from the GM technology are transmitted to people 
 and, second, the effect of the reduced production costs 
 available to buy price of the GM product should outweigh the effect of increased transaction costs connected with required labelling. 
 Fig. 4 graphs the effect of GM on personal welfare 
 when marketing costs are (compared to other things) low (i.e. U- pf &amp;gt; 
 U - Ps) and Pgm &amp;lt;Pt. The dashed U - Pt curve is the 
 utility curve before GM. For net person gains to be 
 (understood/made real/achieved) it should hold that: (i) the price decrease from 
 GM is (compared to other things) high, (ii) the discount in utility from 
 using/eating the GM product is (compared to other things) low, and/or 
 (iii) the marketing and separating people costs are (compared to other things) 
 low. A bunching of people at the left-hand edge 
 or the right-hand edge of the diagram would increase 
 the gain or loss, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 More specifically, the greater the price reduction 
 from GM, the greater the upward move/change of the Ugm 
 curve, the greater the personal gains and the lower the 
 welfare loss from the new technology. (in almost the same way), the 
 lower the A, the greater the slope of the Ugm curve, 
 the greater the gains and the lower the personal 
 losses from GM. Finally, the greater the marketing and 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 106 
 
 separating people costs got/caused in the non-GM product 
 chain, the greater the downward move/change of the U - pf 
 curve and the greater the personal welfare losses 
 from the new technology. 
 Fig. 5 shows the welfare effects of GM when the 
 transaction costs from required labelling are relative!&#126; high (i.e. when U- pf &amp;lt; U-Ps) and Pgm 2:: Pt· 
 In this case, no people gain from the new technology. The extent of the (understood/made real/achieved) welfare losses depends 
 on the level of hatred of GM c, the utility discount 
 factor A., and the level of Pgm· 
 
 5. Personal behaviour under required 
 labelling: the effect of mislabelling 
 This section of the paper analyses the results 
 of mislabelling on person buying decisions and 
 welfare. Mislabelling refers to the case where producers or processors lie about the type of the product 
 sold in the market; they label GM products as non-GM 
 (or in a case where only GM products are needed/demanded 
 to be labelled, they do not label their GM products as 
 such) in an attempt to take (prisoner) by force the higher price paid 
 for traditional (non-GM) produce. 
 When events of mislabelling happen in the food 
 marketing system, personal trust in labelling falls. 
 People can be expected to assign a chance to 
 the event that what is labelled as 'non-GM' is in fact 
 (having characteristics that were changed by people). Because of the doubt (related to/looking at/thinking about) the nature of the product ate/destroyed, the utility 
 came/coming from the consumption of the non-GM labelled 
 product, 
 equals e[U- pf- A.c] + (1- e)[V- p1 ]_), 
 where e is the chance that the non-GM label is fal&#126;e 
 and the product is actually (having characteristics that were changed by people).9 
 Taking into account this doubt, the personal 
 utility under mislabelling becomes: 
 
 uzn, 
 
 Utm 
 
 = 
 
 U - 
 
 pf - eA.c 
 
 and 
 Us= U-Ps 
 
 if a unit of a substitute product is ate/destroyed. 
 Relative to the situation of full obedience examined in the previous section, product lie results in a discount in the utility connected with 
 the consumption of the non-GM labelled product. 
 Graphically, this utility discount can be seen as a 
 (when a wheel turns so the top moves to the right) rotation of the utility curve connected with 
 the non-GM labelled product through the (stopping or interfering with something) at 
 U - pf in Figs. 5 and 6. 
 Think about/believe first the case where marketing and separating people costs are (compared to other things) low (i.e. U - p&#126; &amp;gt; U - Ps). 
 Compared to the case where mislabelling does not 
 happen, mislabelling reduces both personal welfare 
 (shaded area in Fig. 6) and the consumption share of 
 the non-GM labelled product. Some of the ((before that/before now)) 
 non-GM labelled product people (i.e. those with 
 cE(c/, ci]) switch to the GM labelled product while 
 people with a (compared to other things) high level of c (i.e. people with cE(c2, 1]) switch to the substitute. The 
 greater the chance ethat the non-GM label is false 
 and/or the greater the utility discount from the consumption of GM products, A., the greater the welfare 
 losses from mislabelling and the greater the share of 
 non-GM product people that switch to the GM 
 product and the substitute. 
 In the presence of mislabelling, the consumption 
 share of the GM labelled product, sgm- equals c 1 , the 
 share of the non-GM labelled product, St. equals c 2 CJ, while 1 - c2 percent of consumption moves to 
 the substitute. Mathematically, the consumption shares 
 can be written as 
 
 = 
 
 s 
 gm 
 
 St 
 
 = :Ps_____ _.:pf 
 .___:_ 
 eA. 
 
 if a unit of non-GM labelled product is ate/destroyed, 
 Ugm 
 
 = U- 
 
 I 
 
 Pt- Pgm _ 
 A.(1 -e) (- CJ) 
 
 pf- Pgm 
 
 A.(l-e) (=c2-CJ) 
 
 and 
 Pgm- A.c 
 
 I 
 
 Ss 
 
 if a unit of GM labelled product is ate/destroyed, 
 9 
 
 Note that the personal utility when the non-GM labelled 
 product is GM is given by U-p;- J...c (rather than U-p m - J...c) 
 since the price paid for the consumption of the product isg (and 
 not Pgm). 
 
 p; 
 
 = 1- 
 
 Ps e&#126; Pt ( = 1 - C2) 
 
 When the marketing and separating people costs are (compared to other things) high (i.e. when U - pf &amp;lt; U - Ps), then mislabelling, instead of full obedience, has no effect 
 on either welfare or the consumption decisions of 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 107 
 
 Person utility 
 
 -+- 
 
 Sgnz 
 
 st 
 
 _____. 
 
 -+- 
 
 ss _____. 
 
 Cz* 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 6. Consumption and welfare effects of mislabelling when separating people costs are (compared to other things) low (U - 
 
 people since in this case no traditional (non-GM) 
 product is ate/destroyed (Fig. 5). 
 
 6. No labelling against/compared to/or required labelling 
 After having analysed the consumption effects of 
 GM technology under the 'no labelling' and 'mandatory labelling' governments, the question that naturally 
 rises is which labelling government rules in terms of 
 its effect on personal welfare. Or put in a different 
 way, since the introduction of GM products can result 
 in net welfare losses under both the 'no labelling' 
 and the 'mandatory labelling' governments, what government 
 harms people the least? 
 The desire/decision of the factors affecting the relative performance of the two labelling governments is 
 plain/honest/easy. Fig. 7 shows the effective utility 
 curves under no labelling (dashed kinked curve) and 
 required labelling under full obedience (solid 
 kinked curve) when the marketing and separating people 
 costs are (compared to other things) low. For simpleness and without 
 loss of (statement that's not detailed) Fig. 7 shows the situation in which 
 
 p; &amp;gt; 
 
 U - Ps). 
 
 the price of the non-labelled product Pnl equals the 
 price of the GM labelled product Pgm. 
 The shaded area NL reflects personal utility under 
 the no labelling government that is lost when required 
 labelling is introduced. (in almost the same way), the area ML represents personal utility that is lost from a switch from 
 required labelling to no labelling. Obviously, people located to the right of c+ will favour required labelling, while for people located to the left 
 of c+ no labelling is the preferred labelling government. 
 The ranking of the labelling governments in terms of their 
 net effect on personal welfare depends on the relative size of the shaded areas in Fig. 7; if NL is greater 
 than ML, then no labelling is the superior government. Obviously, when the idea (you think is true) of a uniform distribution of people is relaxed, the welfare ranking of 
 the two labelling governments is affected by the skewness 
 of the distribution. In general, the greater the number of people that are seen as a (compared to other things) 
 high hatred of GM products (i.e. the more skewed 
 towards one is the distribution of people with respect to their value of c), the greater the chance that 
 required labelling is the preferred labelling government. 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 108 
 
 Person utility 
 
 U-Pnt 
 U-Pgm 
 
 U-ps 
 
 0 
 (making different) person attribute (c) 
 Fig. 7. Required labelling vs. no labelling when separating people costs are (compared to other things) low (U-p; &amp;gt; U- p 8 ). 
 
 (serving to compare two or more things) statics results can easily be received/made from 
 from Fig. 7. For instance, an increase in the chance 
 that the non-labelled product is GM (i.e. an increase in 
 1/J') causes a (when a wheel turns so the top moves to the right) rotation of the UnJ curve (Unl = 
 U- Pnr-1/1' "Ac) that increases ML and reduces NL. The 
 greater is 1/J', the greater is the personal support for 
 required labelling. (in almost the same way), an increase in the marketing and separating people costs connected with required labelling will shift the U - pf and U - Pgm - "Ac 
 curves downward increasing NL and reducing ML. 
 The greater the marketing and separating people costs, the 
 greater the proportion of people favouring no labelling; when marketing and separating people costs are (compared to other things) high (i.e. when U - pf &amp;lt; U - p8 ) the area ML 
 disappears and no labelling is the superior government. 
 Finally, when the idea (you think is true) of full obedience 
 is relaxed and the possibility of product lie is introduced, the required labelling government 
 becomes even less appealing from the people' 
 standpoint; mislabelling increases the chance that 
 no labelling is superior in terms of its effects on total 
 personal welfare. The greater the chance that 
 mislabelling happens, the greater the personal utility 
 losses under required labelling, and the greater 
 
 the chance that an ali-or-nothing choice between 
 the two labelling governments in terms of their effect on 
 personal utility will favour no labelling. 
 
 7. Ending/deciding statements 
 This paper develops a model of (made different) people to examine the effects of GM technology on 
 the welfare and buying behaviour of people. 
 The end of/final opinion of this paper is that if people perceive GM products to be different from their traditional partners, then demands for the blocking/forbidding of 
 GM products and GM labelling are clear. For instance, when the existence of market mistakes in 
 one or more stages of the supply chain prevents the 
 transmission of the cost savings connected with the 
 GM technology to people, then the introduction 
 of GM products will generally result in welfare losses 
 for people. This is true (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) the labelling 
 government that is in place. 
 Given that GM products have been introduced 
 into the food system, the analysis also shows that 
 the relative welfare ranking of the 'no labelling' and 
 
 K. Giannakas, M. Fulton/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 97-109 
 
 'mandatory labelling' governments depends on: (i) the 
 level of personal hatred of GM products, (ii) the 
 separating people costs connected with required labelling; 
 (iii) the share of the GM product in total production; 
 and (iv) the extent of mislabelling. More specifically, the greater the separating people costs connected with 
 required labelling, the greater the chance that no 
 labelling is the superior labelling government. The greater 
 the chance that the non-labelled product is GM, 
 the greater the chance that required labelling 
 will be preferred. 
 Finally, when the possibility of product mislabelling is introduced into the analysis, the (quality of something that makes people like it or want it) 
 of required labelling by people falls. The doubt about product (features/ qualities/ traits) due to mislabelling 
 reduces personal welfare and drives some non-GM 
 product people out of the market. The lower 
 the level of trust in the labelling system, the greater 
 the expectation that mislabelling happens, the greater 
 the personal utility losses under required labelling, 
 and the greater the chance that an aU-or-nothing 
 choice between the two labelling governments in terms of 
 their welfare effects/results/suggestions favours no labelling. 
 The results of this paper can provide an explanation for policy decisions about GM technology and 
 labelling watched/followed around the world. (compared to other things) low 
 (or zero) personal hatred of (man-made controlling of the characteristics of living things) 
 joined with a reduced price of GM products and 
 significant separating people costs connected with required labelling could be among the reasons why a 'no 
 labelling' policy has been put into use by countries such 
 as the US and Canada. Increasing personal concerns, 
 however, and the (compared to other things) high level of personal 
 trust in the food safety institutions in both countries 
 could increase the relative (wasting very little while working or producing something) of, and so the 
 personal demand for, required labelling. 
 A (compared to other things) high hatred of GM technology joined with a lack of a price reduction for GM products 
 would (give reasons for something) required labelling, an result 
 seen in different EU countries. However, a high level 
 of suspicion of food safety and (careful examination of something) systems can 
 interfere with the value of labelling. This result sheds 
 light on the demand for an completely/total ban of GM 
 
 109 
 
 products by some (related to Europe) people, since faith in 
 the food (careful examination of something) systems there has been reduced 
 by food safety scares such as the (cow-related) Sponge-like Brain disease (BSE) problem in the British beef 
 industry. 
 In summary, person concerns about GM products 
 can be expected to affect consumption decisions and 
 to influence the public policy response demanded by 
 people. These consumption decisions, along with 
 the decisions made by policy makers as to how GM 
 products are introduced into the food system, can have 
 significant hits/effects on the demand for GM products 
 throughout the food system. These system effects, in 
 turn, will affect the decisions made by farmers as to 
 which crops they grow as well as decisions made by 
 life science companies as to the pricing and the development of GM technologies. 
 References 
 Caswell, J., 1998. Should use of (having characteristics that were changed by people) organisms 
 be labelled? AgBioForum 1, 22-24. 
 Caswell, J.A., Mojduszka, E.M., 1996. Using informational 
 labelling to influence the market for quality in food products. 
 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78, 1248-1253. 
 Darby, M., Karni, E., 1973. Free competition and the best 
 amount of stealing/criminal. J. Law Econ. 16, 67-88. 
 Money-based 
 Research Service, 1999. (having characteristics of a living thing controlled by people) crops for pest 
 management. Money-based Research Service, US Department of 
 Farming, www.econ.ag.gov/whatsnew/issues/biotech. 
 Money-flow expert, 2000. Blech. 15 January, p. 69. 
 Hobbs, J.E., Plunkett, M.D., 1999. (having characteristics that were changed by people) foods: 
 personal issues and the role of information unevenness. Can. 
 J. Agric. Econ. 47, 445-455. 
 Lindner, B., 2000. The future of Frankenstein foods. In: 
 (series of events) of the Paper Presented at the 44th Once-a-year 
 Conference of the Australian Farming-based and Useful thing/valuable supply 
 Money flow (community of people/all good people in the world), Sydney. 
 Nelson, P., 1974. Advertising as information. J. Polit. Econ. 81, 
 729-754. 
 Plunkett, M.D., Gaisford, J.D., 2000. Limiting science? 
 Information problems and policy responses. Dog. Agric. Food 
 Res. Iss. 1, 21-28. 
 Runge, C.F., Jackson, L.A., 2000. Labelling, trade and (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) 
 changed organisms (GMOs): a proposed solution. J. World 
 Trade 34, 111-122. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
