 Farming-based Money flow, 6 (1991) 115-128 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam 
 
 115 
 
 A (random/including random data points) energetic programming (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 for weed control decision making: 
 an computer program to Avena fatua L. 
 Sushil Pandey 
 
 1 
 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, School of Farming, The University of Western 
 Australia, Nedlands, W.A. 6009, Australia 
 
 and R.W. Medd 
 Farming-based Research and Veterinary Centre, Forest Road, Orange, N.S. W. 2800, Australia 
 
 (Accepted 22 November 1990) 
 
 ABSTRACT 
 Pandey, S. and Medd, R.W., 1991. A (random/including random data points) energetic programming (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for weed 
 control decision making: an computer program to Avena fatua L. Agric. Econ., 6: 115-128. 
 This paper develops a (random/including random data points) multi-period decision model to analyse a continuous 
 wheat cropping system (filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting) by wild oats (Avena fatua L.), in southern Australia. The 
 multi-period solutions is received/got by employing a energetic programming model along with a bioeconomic (testing out) model. An scientifically guessed dose response function 
 is used to get the best herbicide rate. Uncertainties due to (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) effects on 
 the performance of herbicide and crop produces /gives up are modelled and best decision rules 
 received/made from. The results point to/show that big money-based gains can happen/be made real if herbicide 
 dose decisions are taken by (thinking about/when one thinks about) future (money made/good thing received) effects of current decisions, as argued/against 
 to the more common approach of only (thinking about/when one thinks about) the current-period effect. 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 Weeds force (on people) a (large/relatively large) money-based load on the Australian farmer. 
 Total losses due to weeds for 1985 j86 have been guessed to be about A$1500 million (Combellack, 1987). In 1984, farmers in Australia 
 Present/Correspondence Address: Department of Farming-based Money flow and Business 
 Management, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W. 2351, Australia. 
 1 
 
 0169-5150j91j$03.50 © 1991 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved 
 
 116 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 spent over $220 million on herbicides (Blacklow et al., 1984), a large 
 proportion of which was for weed control in wheat. (even though there is the existence of) such huge 
 expense, may important attributes of the crop-weed-herbicide system 
 are not clearly modelled in getting/taking herbicide dose recommendations. 
 For example, in some states of Australia it is illegal to apply any dose of 
 herbicide other than that specified on the label (Pannell, 1989). In other 
 states farmers may legally apply any dose up to that specified on the label 
 but the recommendations are based on simplified singly-period dividing line 
 ideas with on-the-spot changes/recalculations for risks. 
 Doubt in the crop-weed-herbicide system rises mainly from the 
 (quality of changing over time or at different places) in the performance of control measures, (quality of changing over time or at different places) in the weedfree produce and (quality of changing over time or at different places) of weed density. Feder (1979) has possibly 
 (examined closely) the effect of some of these risks on the best dose of the 
 control agent in a plain and common thing/not a brand-name drug (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). Most (things that are given/work that's done) on modelling the 
 effects of risk on pest control decisions are lacking because only one 
 source of risk is modelled at a time, In reality, risks faced by farmers are 
 signs of a few sources of uncertainties and because of this models which 
 change something (to help someone)/take care of someone many sources of risk are likely to have greater relevance. 
 Benefits from weed control have a multi-period dimension due to (a) the 
 effects of current level of control on future (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting) levels, (b) development of herbicide resistance, and (c) herbicide carryover effects. Even 
 though the current (money made/good things received) may not be (good) enough to recover the current costs 
 of treatment, some treatment may be reasonable if the possible prevention 
 of future losses is also taken into account. Crop rotation decisions in many 
 cases are ruled by such long-term (things to carefully think about). (in almost the same way), if resistance 
 to herbicides is likely to develop, recommendations based only on current 
 period effects will be (less-than-best). The models of decision making in weed 
 control must this way be cast in a multi-period (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). 
 The purpose of this paper is to present a systems model for herbicide 
 recommendations taking into account multi-period effects of current weed 
 control decisions, (random/including random data points) influences and farmers' (point of view/way of behaving) towards risk. 
 Our goal was to develop a (random/including random data points) multi-period decision model for 
 weed control which could be solved using energetic programming along with a bioeconomic model and which thought about/believed uncertainties in 
 the performance of herbicide and crop yields in getting/taking best decision 
 rules. An scientifically guessed dose response function is used to get the 
 best dose of the control agent, a non-leftover/extra after-coming into view herbicide. Although all three types of multi-period effects can be built into the 
 model, data limits permitted including only the effect of 
 the current level of control on future (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting). This is done in the 
 big picture  of a continuous wheat cropping system in southern Australia which 
 is (filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting) with wild oats (Avena fatua L.). 
 
 WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L. 
 
 117 
 
 AN ECONOMIC MODEL OF WEED MANAGEMENT 
 
 For the purpose of this study, we have assumed a farm of non-specific 
 size is completely (filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting) with wild oats, is a closed system with very small 
 export or import of weed seeds and is managed by one farmer. The 
 money-based output of the farm is the grain yield of a once-a-year crop. The 
 farmer wishes to (make as big as possible) (money made/good thing received) (or utility) over a planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  of T 
 periods. The profit function is assumed to be unmoving in the sense that its 
 limits/guidelines are constant over time. The decision problem is to get an 
 best plan for the control of wild oats using diclofop-methyl. The 
 solution is the dose of herbicide applied in each time period such that the 
 present value over the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  is (made as big as possible). 
 The solution to the problem can be found by using the tools of the 
 best control explanation. Let B(sDI' X 1 ) define (money made/good thing received) in time period 't' as a 
 function of the seed density in the soil (so) and herbicide dose (X). In the 
 language of the best control explanation, so and X are the state and decision 
 (numbers that change/things that change), (match up each pair of items in order). The change in seed density from one time period to 
 the next depends on the first seed density which decides/figures out the potential 
 for seed production during the current time period and the amount of 
 herbicide used which decides/figures out the (related to the process of making children) output. Let G(so In  X 1 ) 
 be a function measuring the change in seed density. The function G 
 represents the equation of movement. Also, let S(soT) represent the terminal 
 value of the weed seed bank at the end of the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet). The 
 unemotional function, assuming profit (biggest increase/best possible extent), is to (make as big as possible) present 
 value (Pv): 
 T-1 
 
 max 
 
 PV 
 
 = 
 
 E B (SD 
 
 In 
 
 XI) 8 I 
 
 + 8 I s(SD T) 
 
 (1) 
 
 t= 1 
 
 subject to 
 SD 1 + 1 - SD 1 = G(sol' X 1 ) 
 where 8 1 is the discount factor for time period 't'. Applying Pontryagins' 
 Rule/basic truth of Highest value, one of the first-order conditions needs/demands that: 
 
 t=0,1, ... ,T-1 
 
 (2) 
 
 Equation (2) is equal to the usual first-order condition of setting 
 not important (money made/good things received) equal to zero if either A1 + 1 or aG ;aX1 is assumed to be 
 zero. The costate (number or thing that changes) A1+ 1 represents the not important change in present 
 value caused by a not important change in the number of seeds at the beginning 
 of time period 't '. Other things remaining constant, an increase in the 
 current number of seeds (and because of this weeds) reduces future (money made/good things received); hence 
 A1 + 1 &amp;lt; 0. Also, aG ;aX1 &amp;lt; 0 because, ceteris paribus, future weed popula- 
 
 118 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 tion is reduced if the addition to the seed bank is reduced by increasing the 
 current herbicide dose. The second term in equation (2), which measures 
 the not important benefit resulting from the effects of current level of control on 
 future (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting), is because of this non-negative. Due to the helpful of the 
 current level of control on future (money made/good things received), the current not important working well 
 of control inputs is increased. This results in a higher level of control than 
 when current (money made/good things received) are (made as big as possible). 
 DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING MODEL 
 
 Pattern of behavior programming is a (math-based) (producing a lot with very little waste) method for solving 
 the (biggest increase/best possible extent) problem specified in equation (1). The method has been 
 used for getting/taking best weed control plans by Fisher and Lee (1981), 
 Shoemaker (1982) and Taylor and Burt (1984). Its more general application 
 for farming-based useful thing/valuable supply management has been reviewed by Kennedy 
 (1986). The advantage of energetic programming is that risk elements can be 
 more easily incorporated, compared with other programming methods, and 
 around the world best solutions can be found even if the unemotional function is 
 non-curved and (interrupted/not touching). To get a solution the total planning 
 (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  is divided into periods (or 'stages' in the energetic programming 
 language) and the best solution for each stage received/made from. The (dependent on each other) of decision between stages is (taken by force/controlled) by using the idea  of the 
 state as these (numbers that change/things that change) show/represent the nature of the system at the beginning of 
 each stage. This way the effects of decisions in one stage on the following stage 
 is transmitted through the state (number or thing that changes). State (numbers that change/things that change) need to be defined 
 so that all information clearly connected with or related to the current decision problem is hugged/supported by the state (numbers that change/things that change). This needed thing of energetic programming is 
 called the condition of Markovian independence (Nemhauser, 1966). 
 With the after-coming into view herbicide as the control agent, weed density at 
 the time of spraying is one of the state (numbers that change/things that change). If seeds show inactivity, 
 as in the case of wild oats, the number of doable/possible seeds in the soil is another 
 state (number or thing that changes). However, weed density can be ignored if a constant proportion of the seed bank is recruited. So, in the pre-decided model in 
 which all (random/including random data points) (numbers that change/things that change) are replaced by their mean values, the seed 
 bank population is the only state (number or thing that changes). The (random/including random data points) model is properly 
 specified as having two state (numbers that change/things that change). However we used Taylor and Burt's 
 (1984) rotting method since it is (producing more with less waste) for solving the 
 (random/including random data points) model. The rotting procedure is explained in a later 
 section. 
 The uncertain (numbers that change/things that change) included in the model are the effectiveness of 
 herbicide and weed-free yield. All other (numbers that change/things that change) such as crop price, weed 
 density and spray (wasting very little while working or producing something) are assumed to be known for sure. It has 
 
 WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L. 
 
 119 
 
 been the experience of farmers and (people who work to find information) that the (quality of changing over time or at different places) in 
 herbicide effectiveness is one of the most in control/most common sources of risk in weed control. 
 (in almost the same way), weed-free yield is strongly influenced by (related to the Earth's weather) factors and this 
 harms/interferes with the money-making ability of weed control decisions. 
 In the books on pest management, it is usual to think about  pest density 
 as an uncertain (number or thing that changes). Doubt rises both from non-uniform (related to space or existing in space) 
 distribution and with (problems, delays, etc.) in measuring pest density. When the 
 planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  is a single-period, it is straight forward to model (related to space or existing in space) 
 (quality of changing over time or at different places) in weed density. However, in a multi-period (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), it 
 becomes necessary to introduce a state (number or thing that changes) for each part of/amount of land 
 with different weed densities. Such a energetic programming model would 
 be very hard to solve. This way the idea (you think is true) made here is that a farmer 
 would emotionally/personally separate land into (in name only/very small amount) categories according to the 
 density of the weed. The spraying decision for a particular portion then 
 depends on the weed density category. Created this way, the best 
 decision rule for a farmer with more than one dividing wall/section can be easily 
 received/got from a single-state energetic programming solution. 
 The solution procedure involved in the energetic programming model is 
 described by the recursive equation: 
 
 v; (SD 
 
 f' 
 
 Wr) = max [_( E 7T ( SD f' Wr ' xt) + () E v;- 1( SD t - 1 ' Wr- 1 ) ]_) 
 X, 
 
 t=l,2, ... ,T 
 
 (3) 
 
 where v;Csn 0 Wr) is the best value function at stage 't' given seed 
 density (sn) and weed density (W); 7T is the current (money made/good thing received) if decision X is 
 used and E is the expectations operator. Obeying the 
 energetic programming method, time subscripts are specific in reverse 
 order. So, the last year of the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  is labelled as stage 1, the 
 second last year as stage 2, and so on. 
 The length of the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet), T, may be limited or (without limits or an end). In the 
 solution of the (without limits or an end) (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  problem, the best decision rule depends 
 on the value of the state (number or thing that changes) but not on the decision stages. In the case 
 of the limited (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  problem the best decision depends both on the 
 value of the state (number or thing that changes) and the decision state. An (pretty close) solution 
 of a limited (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  problem can be received/made from by first solving the model for an 
 (without limits or an end) (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  such that v; : : : v; _1 and using the best decision rule 
 going along with/matching up to v; for getting/taking solutions for a limited (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  problem. 
 In the pre-decided model, weed density was deleted as a state (number or thing that changes) 
 because it is assumed to be a constant proportion of seed density. In the 
 (random/including random data points) model weed density was kept/held along with seed density giving 
 two state (numbers that change/things that change). The model was solved in two steps. First, the best 
 value function for an (without limits or an end) (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  problem was received/made from by dropping 
 
 120 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 weed density as in the case of a pre-decided model. In the second step, 
 the best value function received/made from in the first step was substituted for v;._ 1 
 and an added cycle solved. The recursive equation for the second 
 step being: 
 
 (4) 
 The two-state changeable problem is solved in the second stage by specifying 
 current (money made/good thing received) as a function of weed density and seed density. Although 
 v;._ 1 is specified as a function of sot-l only, the decision rule received/made from is not 
 narrow-minded/(far things look blurry) because the multi-period effects of current decisions are reflected 
 by the seed bank population which appears in v;._ 1- It is also assumed that 
 weed density in the current period does not have any significant indirect 
 effect on weed density in the next period. 
 For getting/taking number-based solutions, the state and decision (numbers that change/things that change) were 
 represented by 63 and 17 separate values, (match up each pair of items in order). The decision other choices thought about/believed are different doses (including non-use) of diclofopmethyl up to the maximum permitted dose. For each starting value of the 
 state (number or thing that changes), (money made/good things received) and ending values of the state (number or thing that changes) were calculated for all separate decision other choices. For the ending value of the state 
 (number or thing that changes) falling between the two grid points, the best value function was 
 came close to by linear figuring out between the (next-to) grid points. 
 Risk is introduced to the model through random (numbers that change/things that change). Two random 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are needed/demanded to incorporate risk of herbicide effectiveness and weedfree yields. In the guessed weed kill function (see bioeconomic model), 
 herbicide effectiveness depends on soil moisture, which can take one of three 
 ranked values. A separate chance distribution for the soil moisture was 
 received/made from by analysing (related to the Earth's weather) data. Values from this distribution were 
 selected by Monte-Carlo sampling. In the case of weed-free yield, the 
 (like the real thing) values (see bioeconomic model), were used directly as a sample 
 from its distribution. The random (numbers that change/things that change) connected with the soil moisture at the time of spraying and the weed-free yield were sampled independently. This is (done for good reason) because relationship between them is expected to be 
 low. Whereas herbicide effectiveness is highly influenced by soil moisture at the 
 time of spraying, the weed-free yield depends on the moisture government 
 throughout the life of the crop. 
 Bioeconomic (testing out) model 
 
 A bioeconomic (testing out) model was developed to trace the effect of 
 weed control decisions on both the current and the future (money made/good things received). The 
 overall model contains submodels for weed population patterns, 
 
 WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L. 
 
 121 
 
 yield response to weed (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting), weed kill function, weed-free yield of 
 crop, and (related to the Earth's weather) and money-based factors. 
 A life cycle model of wild oats is used for (describing the future) seedling (putting something into use), plant survival, seed production and seed survival. The (putting something into use) of 
 wild oats is not coordinated and happens in waves during its life cycle (Bird 
 and Carter, 1968; Love, 1985). Given that the control agent is a non-leftover/extra after-coming into view herbicide, modelling is helped by dividing seedlings 
 into three groups of people. Plants which come out  before causing/producing belong to the first 
 group of people. The second group of people includes plants newly appearing after causing/producing but 
 before the after-coming into view herbicide is applied. Plants newly appearing after the 
 application of the after-coming into view herbicide make up/be equal to the third group of people. 
 The seed bank is assumed to be (group of things that are all pretty much the same) and (putting something into use) in each 
 group of people is specified as a constant proportion of the seed bank. Values of 
 23%, 12% and 2% (putting something into use) were assumed (match up each pair of items in order) for the three 
 groups of people. All seedlings in the first group of people are assumed to be killed by 
 presowing operations. Due to the competitive effects (used/put into action) by seedlings 
 upon each other, only a proportion of seedlings survive to maturity. 
 Evidence points to/shows that most deaths in the second 
 group of people seedlings happen before the (related to living things) appropriate time for the 
 application of the after-coming into view herbicide (Medd, unpublished data). 
 So, it is assumed that the full effect of density-dependent death is 
 (understood/made real/achieved) before the use of diclofop-methyl. 
 Plant ability to reproduce is also density-dependent and is described by a exaggerated function, where the highest number of seeds produced per plant 
 were 118, 22 and 4 for plants belonging to groups of people one to three, (match up each pair of items in order). Some proportion of new seeds produced, in this case 10%, is 
 assumed to be removed by the combine. Also, a proportion (65%) of the 
 existing seed bank is lost due to natural death. So, the seed patterns 
 can be described by the following identity: 
 
 (5) 
 where snt+l is the size of the seed bank at the start of the period t + 1, sn 1 
 is the starting stock of seed bank, G is the loss due to (putting something into use), M is the 
 loss due to death, and N is the new seed added to the seed bank. Most 
 of the limits/guidelines for the model are received/got from experimental work at 
 Orange, N.S.W. (Medd and Ridings, 1990). Values of the limits/guidelines 
 unavailable from this source were gotten from experimental work in the 
 United Kingdom (Cousens et al., 1986). 
 The yield (Y) of a weedy crop is specified as: 
 
 Y= Y*g(W) 
 
 (6) 
 
 where Y * is a limit/guideline representing the maximum (able to be done or reached) yield in a 
 
 122 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 weed-free situation given the level of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and management 
 inputs, W is the weed density at maturity, and g( ·) is a function often 
 called the 'relative yield response' (Lanzer and Paris, 1981). By definition, 
 g(O) = 1 and g( oo) = c *, where 0 &amp;lt; c * :::; 1. This way the function g( ·) provides 
 a scaling factor. An understood idea (you think is true) contained in this (detailed description of exactly what is required) is 
 that Y * and g( ·) are separatable. This idea (you think is true) seems reasonable and has 
 been widely used to describe the yield response to different factors such as 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water (Doorenbos and Kassam, 1979), fertilisers (Lanzer and Paris, 
 1981), weeds (Cousens et al., 1986) and insect pests (Feder, 1979). 
 It is usual to represent g( ·) in the case of pests by a linear or sigmoidal 
 function of pest density (Feder, 1979; Zimdahl, 1980). Cousens (1985) has 
 argued, however, that g( ·) is more correctly represented as a hyperbola 
 in the case of weeds. The particular form suggested is: 
 
 g(W) 
 
 = 
 
 1- Wj(a- 1 + Wb- 1 ) 
 
 (7) 
 
 where 'a' and 'b' are the limits/guidelines, with values of 104.4 and 1.22, 
 (match up each pair of items in order). The limit/guideline 'a' is a measure of the not important yield loss as 
 the weed density approaches zero. The limit/guideline 'b' is an guess of the 
 maximum (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) yield loss of a weedy crop. Since crops and weeds 
 (use/put into action) competitive effects on each other, yield loss due to weeds also 
 depends on crop density. Based on Australian data, Martin et al. (1987) 
 found 'a' to be (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) crop density and their limit/guideline guesses 
 have been used (in this/within this). 
 Dose response function relates the amount of herbicide applied to the 
 proportion of weeds killed. The dose response relationship has the properties of a chance distribution function (Finney, 1971; Lichtenberg and 
 Zilberman, 1986). Since the response to herbicides is a binomial (number or thing that changes) 
 (with the plants being thought about/believed as dead or alive), probit and logit 
 (moving backwards) are the appropriate methods for (producing a lot with very little waste) guess of dose 
 response relationships (Finney, 1971; Hewlett and Plackett, 1979). The 
 logit (detailed description of exactly what is required) is used in the present study, the clearly stated/particular relationship for 
 diclofop-methyl being: 
 
 (8) 
 where P is the proportion of weeds killed, X is the amount of herbicide 
 applied (up to a maximum dose of 2liters ha - 1), SM and A are measures of 
 soil moisture and (things added to food, or something else) which also affect the performance of herbicide, 
 and u is the random disturbance term. 
 Data from field experiments testing diclofop-methyl for control of wild 
 oats, managed and did/done by Hoechst in Western Australia, Victoria and New South 
 Wales were (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for the effects of natural death using Abbott's 
 formula (Finney, 1971). Based on the description of the soil moisture in the 
 
 WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L. 
 
 123 
 
 trial report as wet, average and dry, the soil moisture (number or thing that changes) was rated as 
 3, 2 and 1, (match up each pair of items in order). The dummy changeable 'A' specified the addition 
 (A = 1) or (something left out) (A = 0) of wetting agent. Guesses of a 0 = -0.88 ± 
 0.23, a 1 = + 1.66 ± 0.24, a 2 = + 0.64 ± 0.12 and a 3 = + 0.45 ± 0.18 (x 2 = 
 151, n = 155) received/got using the computer package GLIM (Unnamed, 
 1986) were all (meaningful numbers) (P &amp;lt; 0.05) and had the expected signs. 
 To take account of factors influencing the weed-free yield of wheat we 
 employed a wheat growth (testing out) model developed at the Western 
 Australian Department of Farming. The model inputs daily (related to the Earth's weather) 
 data and yields for 74 years from 1912 to 1985 were (described the future) for Merredin, 
 W.A. All management-clearly stated/particular inputs were assumed nonlimiting in the 
 (testing out). The yield (described the future) by the model was appropriately scaled 
 down to reflect the average management practices. The average (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 
 yield for the 74 tested out years was 1 t ha- 1- 
 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
 In order to get a pre-decided solution, the weed-free produce and the 
 proportion of weeds killed for a given herbicide dose were set at their 
 (pertaining to each person or thing) average values. As organized and listed under the energetic programming 
 way(s) of doing things, the solution represents the best decision as a function of 
 the state (number or thing that changes), but not of the decision state. Also, although the number 
 of seeds in the soil is the state (number or thing that changes), results are presented in terms of 
 weed density. 
 The best decision rule received/made from by solving the (without limits or an end) (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  problem 
 shows that herbicide dose increases, but at a reducing rate, as weeds 
 2.5 
 
 _...... 
 
 2.0 
 
 Cd 
 
 s 
 
 Q) 
 
 1.5 
 
 "'0 
 "0 
 0) 
 
 "0 
 
 1.0 
 
 'G 
 
 :e 
 0) 
 
 ::r: 
 
 0.5 
 0.0 
 
 0 
 
 100 
 
 200 
 
 300 
 
 400 
 
 500 
 
 Weed density (plants/m 2) 
 Fig. 1. Best pre-decided multi-period decision rule. 
 
 124 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 Initial seed density 5000/m 2 
 ............ ,.......... 
 
 200 
 
 multi-period 
 single-period 
 
 Initial seed density 100/m 2 
 &#126; 
 
 150 
 
 multi-period 
 single-period 
 
 -·-·-·11J·-·-· 
 
 "'_g 
 &#126; 
 "' 
 ::§, 
 
 .q 
 
 100 
 
 "'&#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 "0 
 Q) 
 Q) 
 
 :3: 
 
 50 
 
 5 
 
 10 
 
 15 
 
 20 
 
 Year 
 Fig. 2. Time traces of weed density resulting from the use of multi-period and 
 single-period best decision rules for two initial seed densities. 
 
 become more dense (Fig. 1). The decision rule illustrated is straight 
 forward and is seen as a useful applied decision making tool. A important/famous 
 result of herbicide dose being dependent on weed density is that 
 savings are possible. For instance, a herbicide dose of 1.5 litres ha _, is 
 specified for a wild oat density of 75 plants m- 2 whereas 50 plants m- 2 
 needs/demands a dose of 1.3 litres ha- 1 . Such savings affect (money made/good things received) and the 
 present value of an (without limits or an end) stream of (money made/good things received) is (made as big as possible) if the decision 
 rule is applied every year. 
 Time traces of weed density when the best decision rule (Fig. 1) is 
 applied over and over again are shown in Fig. 2. These traces were received/made from for initial 
 seed densities of 100 and 5000 seeds m- 2 , representing low and high 
 (groups of people/animals/things). The weed density going along with/matching up to a close guess of the steadystate in the case of multi-period optimisation was around 3 plants m - 2 
 compared with 40 plants m- 2 in the single-period case. So, by using the 
 multi-period (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for decision making, the wild oat population is 
 (in a big way) (made small), but not destroyed at the best steady state. 
 The total amount of gain in present value when the multi-period, instead of 
 the single-period decision rule is applied over and over again, is shown in Fig. 3. 
 
 125 
 
 WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L. 
 
 100 
 
 Initial seed density (no/m 2 ) 
 
 100 
 80 
 5000 
 
 .5 
 Q) 
 u&#126; 
 
 60 
 
 c:: "' 
 
 Q).;:: 
 
 '-fh 
 
 &amp;lt;2&#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 "0 
 Q) 
 
 .::: 
 
 C) 
 
 ::&amp;gt; 
 
 "' 
 
 40 
 
 &amp;gt; 
 
 &#126;E 
 
 ::; Q) 
 Q) 
 E "' 
 .... 
 ::&amp;gt; 
 
 u 
 
 0. 
 
 20 
 
 0 
 
 -20 
 
 L&mdash;-&#126;&mdash;1..._--&#126;&mdash;--' 
 
 0 
 
 10 
 
 20 
 
 Year 
 Fig. 3. Total differences in present values between multi-period and single-period 
 solutions for two initial seed densities. 
 
 These results show that the present value of (money made/good things received) is higher under 
 multi-period optimisation and the gain over the single-period solution 
 increases over time, more so at the lower initial seed density. So, in the 
 case of wild oats, significant gains can happen/be made real in future periods by 
 reducing the weed load early in the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  even if current 
 gains from such actions might be negative. 
 In the (random/including random data points) case, where changes are (related to the study of how likely or unlikely things are to happen), solutions were 
 received/made from using the two-step way(s) of doing things described earlier and with the 
 almost the same  proviso that farmers were assumed to (make as big as possible) expected (money made/good things received). 
 These results, along with the single-period best solution are shown in 
 Fig. 4. Here the best solution depends on weed density as well as seed 
 density. For a given weed density, the best herbicide dose decreases 
 with an increase in the seed bank. This is realistic since it is expected that 
 the seed bank could be more easily moved around/misled and tricked by herbicide dose when 
 there are few seeds in the soil to start with. On the other hand, when the 
 initial seed bank is large, changing the addition to the seed bank by killing 
 more weeds is unlikely to affect the seed bank (in a big way). When the seed 
 bank is very large, the multi-period solution approaches that of the singleperiod. 
 
 126 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 Seed density (no/m2) 
 
 500 
 1000 
 3000 
 5000 
 single-period 
 solution 
 
 2.5 
 
 '2 
 
 § 
 
 2.0 
 
 &amp;lt;I) 
 &amp;lt;/) 
 
 0 
 "d 
 
 1.5 
 
 &amp;lt;I) 
 
 "d 
 
 Tl 
 
 :e 
 
 1.0 
 
 &amp;lt;I) 
 
 ::r: 
 
 0.5 
 
 Weed density (plants/m 2 ) 
 Fig. 4. Best (random/including random data points) multi-period and single-period decision rules. 
 
 If farmers are assumed to be (not wanting to do anything dangerous), then both the mean and 
 (quality of changing over time or at different places) of (money made/good things received) enter the unemotional function. If herbicide performance 
 is assumed to be (random/including random data points) but the weed-free yield is pre-decided, an 
 increase in herbicide will reduce the (quality of changing over time or at different places) of (money made/good things received). This way a (not wanting to do anything dangerous) 
 farmer would tend to apply more herbicide compared to a risk-neutral 
 farmer. If herbicide performance is assumed to be pre-decided but the weed-free yield is (random/including random data points), the opposite result will hold because the 
 (quality of changing over time or at different places) of (money made/good things received) increases with an increase in herbicide rate. This is 
 pointed to/showed by the structure of the yield response function specified in 
 equation (6). The expected direction of change is confusing if both the 
 weed-free produce and herbicide performance are assumed to be (random/including random data points) 
 (at the same time). In this big picture, the (big statement based on very little information) usually made in the 
 books that herbicides are 'risk-reducing' (Binswanger, 1978; Feder, 
 1979) is therefore being dishonest to. Our (things to carefully think about) show/tell about that the source of 
 risk and how it is entered into the profit function influence whether or not 
 an input such as herbicide reduces risk. 
 CONCLUSION 
 
 In order to improve decision making about herbicide dose in cropping 
 systems we ended/decided it is necessary to think about  multi-period effects and 
 
 WEED CONTROL DECISION MAKING FOR AVENA FATUA L. 
 
 127 
 
 uncertainties due to (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) effects on crop yield, weed density and 
 herbicide effectiveness. This goal was (accomplished or gained) by combining a method of 
 (random/including random data points) energetic programming with a bioeconomic (testing out) model, to 
 create return matrix and change chances, together with the novel 
 including in something of an scientifically guessed dose response function. The development of such a model enabled the derivation of energetically/changing quickly as needed best dose 
 of a after-coming into view herbicide. The results pointed to/showed that the energetically/changing quickly as needed 
 best solution maintained a lower steady-state weed population and 
 higher money-based returns compared with the single-period solution. From 
 this we decided that a long term approach to weed control is (money-based)/cheaply superior. 
 A limitation of the model is that only one of the long term produces, that is, 
 The effect of current control on future (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting), is clearly modelled. If 
 resistance to herbicide is likely to develop, the policies received/made from here will 
 not be best. However, the strength of the approach developed here is 
 that such long term effects can be easily incorporated if the appropriate 
 relationships can be put into numbers. 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 Money from the Western Australian Wheat Research Committee and 
 the University of Western Australia for Sushil Pandey, and from the Wheat 
 Research Group of people of Australia for the (related to information about people) work of R.W. Medd 
 conducted with the technical help of Kim Jones and Barry Kay at 
 Orange is thankfully admitted/recognized. 
 REFERENCES 
 Love, R.L., 1985. Seasonal coming into view of weeds usually happening in the Victorian cereal 
 belt. Plant Prot. A., 1: 18-20. 
 Unnamed, 1986. The Generalised Linear Interactive Modelling Systems Manual. Number-based Computer codes Group, Oxford, 186 pp. 
 Binswanger, H.P., 1978. Risk and doubt in farming-based development: an summary. In: 
 J.A. Roumasset, J.M. Boussard and I. Singh (Editors), Risk, Doubt and Farming-based Development. Farming-based Development Group of people, New York, pp. 383-397. 
 Blacklow, W.M., Pearce, G. and Humphries, A.W., 1984. Setting apart (when there's not nearly enough of important or valuable things) to 
 weeds research in Australia. In: R.W. Madin (Editor), Proc. 7th Australian Weeds Con(British pounds)., 
 17-21 September 1984, Perth, W.A., Australia, pp. 90-107. 
 Combellack, J.H., 1987. Weeds in cropping - their cost to the Australian (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Plant 
 Prot. Q., 24: 2. 
 Cousens, R., 1985. A simple model relating yield loss to weed density. Ann. Appl. Bioi., 107: 
 239-252. 
 Cousens, R., Doyle, C.J., Wilson, B.J. and Cussans, G.W., 1986. Modelling the money flow/money-based studies of 
 controlling Avena fatua in winter wheat. Pestic. Sci., 17: 1-12. 
 
 128 
 
 S. PANDEY AND R.W. MEDD 
 
 Doorenbos, J. and Kassam, A.H., 1979. Yield response to water. FAO lrrig. Drain. Pap. 33, 
 Food and Farming Organization, Rome, 193 pp. 
 Feder, G., 1979. Bug-killers, information and pest management under doubt. Am. J. 
 Agric. Econ., 61: 97-103. 
 Finney, D.J., 1971. Probit Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 333 pp. 
 Fisher, B.S. and Lee, R.R., 1981. A energetic programming approach to the money-based 
 control of weed and disease (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting) in wheat. Rev. Market. Agric. Econ., 49: 
 175-187. 
 Hewlett, P.S. and Plackett, R.L., 1979. The (understanding/ explanation) of Quanta! Responses in (study of living things/qualities of living things). 
 Edward Arnold, London, 82 pp. 
 Kennedy, J.O.S., 1986. The econometrics of damage control: why (detailed description of exactly what is required) matters. Am. 
 J. Agric. Econ., 68: 261-273. 
 Lanzer, E.A. and Paris, Q., 1981. A new (related to careful studying or deep thinking) (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for the fertilisation problem. 
 Am. J. Agric. Econ., 63: 93-103. 
 Lichtenberg, E. and Zilberman, D., 1986. The econometrics of damage control: why 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) matters. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 68: 261-273. 
 Martin, R.J., Cullis, B.R. and McNamara, D.W., 1987. (statement about the future) of wheat yield loss due to 
 competition by wild oats (Avena spp.). Aust. J. Agric. Res., 38: 487-499. 
 Medd, R.W. and Ridings, H.l., 1990. (ability to be done) of seed kill for control of once-a-year grass 
 weeds in crops. In: E.S. Delfosse (Editors), Proc. 7th Int. Symp. (related to the body function of living things) Control of 
 Weeds, 6-11 March 1988, Rome, Italy, pp. 645-650. 
 Nemhauser, G.L., 1966. Introduction to Pattern of behavior Programming. Wiley, New York, 256 pp. 
 Pannell, D.J., 1989. Money flow and the law relating to flexibility of chemical rates. Plant 
 Prot. Q., 4: 104-106. 
 Bird, P.H. and Carter, O.G., 1968. Survival and seasonal (beginning of growth) of seeds of Avena 
 fatua and A. ludoviciana. Aust. J. Agric. Res., 19: 721-729. 
 Shoemaker, C.A., 1982. Best (having different things working together as one unit) control of Univoltine pest population with age 
 structure. Oper. Res., 30: 40-61. 
 Taylor, C.R. and Burt, O.R., 1984. Near best management plans for controlling wild 
 oats in spring wheat. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 66: 50-60. 
 Zimdahl, R.L., 1980. Weed crop competition: a review. International Plant Protection 
 Centre, Oregon State University, 196 pp. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
