AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 www.elsevier.corn!locate/agecon 
 
 Cash cropping and food crop working well: cooperation or trade-offs? 
 Jones Govereh a, T.S. Jayne b,* 
 Food Security Research Project, Lusaka, Zambia 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, Farming Hall, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1039, USA 
 a 
 
 b 
 
 Received 25 January 2001; received in changed form 24 January 2002; accepted 10 April2002 
 
 Abstract 
 The case for (helping increase/showing in a good way) export-oriented cash crops in Africa has generally been based on their direct possible (thing that's given/work that's done) 
 to farming-based working well and small farmer incomes. A (compared to other things) neglected avenue of research concerns the cooperating 
 effects that cash cropping can have on other household activities, including food production. The ordinary view that cash 
 crops fight against food crops for land and labour neglects the (possibility of/possible happening of)  cash crop big plans/layouts/dishonest plans to make available inputs 
 on credit, management training, and other useful things/valuable supplies that can add/give to food crop working well, which might otherwise 
 not be (easy to get to, use, or understand) to farmers if they did not participate in cash crop programs. This article builds on previous research by 
 guessing key pathways by which cash crops may affect food crop activities and scientifically measuring these effects 
 using the case of cotton in Gokwe North District in Zimbabwe. Analysis is based on instrumental changeable analysis of survey 
 data on 430 (away from cities) families in 1996. Results point to/show that_.after controlling for household valuable things, education and locational 
 differences-families working attensively in cotton production get higher grain yields than non-cotton and not important 
 cotton producers. We also find (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of (related to a large area) spill-over effects within which/by which commercialisation big plans/layouts/dishonest plans cause second 
 round investments in a particular area that provide benefits to all farmers in that area, (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) whether they work at 
 that commercialisation big plan/layout/dishonest plan. The study hints that the potential spill-over benefits for food crops through participation 
 in cash crop programs are important to think about  in the development of plans designed to strengthen African food crop 
 production. 
 © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Africa; Zimbabwe; Cash crops; Cotton; Working well; Food security 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Meeting the challenge of raising (away from cities) incomes in 
 Africa will require some form of change out 
 of the semi-survival/income, low-input, low-working well 
 farming systems that now describe much of 
 (away from cities) Africa. In some areas of eastern and southern Africa, food crop (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) was earlier 
 - Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-517-355-0131; 
 fax: +1-517-432-1800. 
 E-mail address: jayne@msu.edu (T.S. Jayne). 
 
 (helped increase/showed in a good way) through state-led programs (combining different things together so they work as one unit) give money tod credit, input delivery and crop (instance of buying something for money) by 
 state marketing boards that operated even in remote 
 farming areas (Rohrbach, 1988; Byerlee and Eicher, 
 1997; Putterman, 1995). However, these policies 
 eventually piled up large money shortages and became (related to money) impossible to do/impossible to keep going, leading to an often 
 sudden withdrawal of services to farmers and an connected spoiling or decline in the use of cash inputs 
 on food crops (Jayne and Jones, 1997). Farmers in 
 many countries are buying less combination seed and/or 
 less fertiliser for food crops than during the former 
 
 0169-5150/02/$- see front matter© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PIT: S0169-5150(02)00066-X 
 
 40 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 period of controlled marketing. 1 Renewed growth in 
 African farming will require (related to money) (able to last/helping the planet) 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of existing cropland, since most of the 
 high-possible farmland in Africa is already under 
 production. 
 High-value cash crops represent one possible avenue of crop (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from other 
 parts of Africa points to/shows that farm incomes and working well can benefit from working at cash crops 
 with well-developed channels for getting inputs on 
 credit and marketing the crop (Dione, 1989; Goetz, 
 1993; Von Braun and Kennedy, 1994; Kelly et al., 
 1996; Poulton et al., 1998; Dorward et al., 1998). 
 But the active promotion of non-food cash crops 
 in Africa is often stopped by perceptions that they 
 fight against food production and worsen household food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). 2 The effects of moving/changing to more 
 commercially-oriented cropping patterns on the portion of families' useful things/valuable supplies are complex and 
 need to be more fully understood to guide farming-based (creation of written rules and procedures). In addition to the direct effect 
 of cash cropping on household incomes, there may 
 be important indirect effects of cash cropping on the 
 working well of other household activities such as food 
 cropping. These possible cooperation between cash 
 crops and food crops have been generally neglected 
 in food crop research and extension programs, 3 although they may have important effects/results/suggestions for 
 
 1 For (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from eastern and southern Africa, see Jayne and 
 Jones, 1997; Howard and Mungoma, 1997; Kherallah eta!., 2002. 
 2 The World Bank and other (people who give money or other things) have come under renewed 
 criticism from (a community of people living well together) groups arguing that support for 
 cash cropping in Africa benefits mainly foreign marketing firms 
 and reduces the amount of food available for eating/drinking. Think about/believe the following except from a full page advertisement in the 
 New York Times on 18 January 2000, by a lobby group called 
 "Turning Point Project", representing over 60 NGOs and research 
 foundations: "Globalised industrial-style farming does not grow 
 staple foods for the hungry, or for their communities. Worldwide  corporations favour (expensive thing/rich and comfortable condition) high (money made/good thing received) items: flowers, potted plants, 
 sugar cane, beef, shrimp, cotton, coffee, soybeans for export to 
 rich countries. Local people are often left with nothing. In 
 Africa, where extreme hungers happened in the past ten years, newly 
 industrialised farming does not produce staple foods, but record 
 crops of ... cotton and sugar cane! For export. As export crops 
 and animals use up available land, small farmers are forced to 
 use not important, less life-giving lands. Staple food production for local 
 use drops, increasing hunger." 
 3 For interesting exceptions, see Goetz, 1993 and Dione, 1989. 
 
 programs designed to (help increase/show in a good way) smallholder food crop 
 working well growth. 
 This paper studies the cooperation between cash cropping and food crop working well at the household level 
 using the case of Gokwe North District in Zimbabwe. 
 The paper theorises two possible pathways by which 
 cash crop big plans/layouts/dishonest plans may affect food crop working well 
 and then scientifically measures these effects. Results 
 are based on econometric analysis of thin slice 
 household survey data collected in 1996. The study says that, especially under conditions of credit 
 and input market failures, participation in cash crop 
 big plans/layouts/dishonest plans may enable families to get/gain key inputs 
 and skills which they can use to increase the working well of other businesses/projects in their crop mix. A better 
 understanding of why and how these cooperation happen 
 can help in the design of policy plans to strengthen 
 food crop production in Africa. 
 
 2. Idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built): cooperation between 
 cash crops and food crops 
 Money-flow experts have long (fought for/pleaded for) (focusing on doing one thing very well) and 
 commercialisation as part of a wider plan of 
 (serving to compare two or more things) advantage. The hidden (under) reason is 
 that markets allow families to increase their incomes by producing that which provides the highest 
 returns to land and labour, and then using cash to buy 
 household consumption items, rather than being held back to produce all the different products (that are bought and sold)  needed for 
 consumption (Timmer, 1997). While this idea  of 
 (serving to compare two or more things) advantage is well accepted undfu the idea (you think is true) of frictionless markets, in reality the process 
 of commercialisation involving non-food cash crops 
 can be stopped by risks and costs in the food marketing system. Food market failures give rise to the 
 well-understood non-separability of household production and consumption decisions, which accounts 
 for the possible breakdown of farming-based commercialisation plans based on (serving to compare two or more things) advantage 
 (Singh et al., 1986; Fafchamps, 1992). These arguments form a large part of the foundation of the long- . 
 standing opinion of cash crop promotion in Africa. ' 
 However, there are other less well-understood nonseparabilities between crop choice and access to inputs and training and other investment decisions that 
 need to be thought about/believed in understanding the normative 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 and positive effects/results/suggestions of farming-based commercialisation plans. For example, farmers with limited 
 cash income may be able to afford key inputs only 
 if gave/given on credit; and in many areas farming-based 
 credit tends to be available mostly through interlocked cash crop big plans/layouts/dishonest plans (Dorward et al., 1998). The 
 case for cash cropping has generally been based on 
 the direct (thing that's given/work that's done) that these crops can have on 
 farm incomes. A (compared to other things) neglected avenue of research concerns the effects that cash cropping can have 
 on the working well of other household activities. The 
 following sections classify two possible pathways by 
 which cash cropping may affect the working well of 
 other crops: (1) household-level cooperation; and (2) (related to a large area) spill-over effects. 
 2.1. Household-level cooperation 
 Household-level cooperation happen when the household's participation in a money-making crop big plan/layout/dishonest plan 
 enables it to get useful things/valuable supplies that otherwise would 
 not be available, for use on other businesses/projects in 
 the crop mix. There are a few pathways of this 
 type. Under conditions of held back access to farm 
 credit, families' ability to strengthen food crop production may depend on their participation in cash 
 crop big plans/layouts/dishonest plans. Strasberg (1997), for example, finds 
 that under credit and input market failures in northern Mozambique, participation in cotton outgrower 
 big plans/layouts/dishonest plans was the first (or most important) means of owning cash 
 inputs for use in food production. In parts of Central 
 Area of control/area of land, Kenya, smallholders working at coffee production received/got through their coffee co-operatives 
 access to credit, inputs, extension services and equipment for use not only on coffee but also on food 
 crops. The coffee co-operatives' clear support of 
 members' food crop production was based on the 
 reason that this would raise their ability to sustainably and (in a money-making way) participate in coffee production, 
 which would in turn provide longer term benefits 
 to the company (Govereh et a!., 1999). In Zambia, 
 farmer application of bug-killers got through 
 participation in cotton outgrower big plans/layouts/dishonest plans benefited 
 grain produces /gives up as well as cotton due to 'wind drift' 
 (Fereidoon et a!., 1996). Due to crop rotation, maize 
 can benefit from leftover/extra fertiliser got on credit 
 from participation in cotton big plans/layouts/dishonest plans and applied to 
 plots on which cotton was grown the year before 
 
 41 
 
 (Dione, 1989). Access to these inputs on credit was 
 not promised to/certain for families choosing to concentrate 
 their farming activities on food crops alone. These 
 examples point to/show the potential non-separability between crop choice decisions and access to useful things/valuable supplies 
 and opportunities. 
 Farming-based commercialisation may have an indirect hit/effect on food working well via its effects on 
 animal traction adoption. When faced with poorly 
 functioning credit markets, cash cropping can provide a needed source of cash for buying lumpy 
 valuable things such as animal traction equipment and draught 
 power which can also be used to strengthen food crop 
 production. 4 In Mali, 70% of the farmers surveyed by 
 Dione (1989) perceived cotton production and use of 
 fertiliser as the two most important conditions deciding/figuring out the money-making ability of animal traction adoption. 
 Rental markets for oxen and plough usage do exist in 
 many areas but oxen owners usually reserve the perceived best time for animal traction functions for 
 their own plots, leaving renters with the option to rent 
 weakened oxen at sub-best times. Cash-creating 
 crops can help farmers overcome capital restrictions 
 on the (instance of buying something for money) of lumpy valuable things and inputs, which 
 can be used to expand food crop as well as cash crop 
 production (Von Braun and Kennedy, 1994). 
 (related to telling a lot of people about something) support and training of cash crop 
 producers by private firms may also raise the working well of existing household useful things/valuable supplies gave/reserved to 
 food crop working well. In Zimbabwe, the Department 
 of Farming-based and Technical Services (AGRITEX) 
 co-operates with private fertiliser and bug-killer manufacturing firms in training farmers at the Cotton 
 Training Institute. One important part of the training 
 program focuses on pest scouting. Farmers get long/big training in deciding/figuring out the critical stages of 
 money-based injury to a cotton stand. Mariga (1994) argues that cotton puts in control/field of study in farmers because 
 of its strict farming/managing money needed things. Such knowledge not only improves cotton management skills 
 but improves the overall quality of farm farming/managing money. 
 For example, farmers with knowledge of cotton pest 
 
 4 Animal traction's (thing that's given/work that's done) to food crop production has 
 been watched/followed to involve elements of both area (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) (by 
 allowing more land to be helped grow than under hand-hoe plowing 
 technology) and yield improvement (through timeliness of land 
 preparation, planting and weeding). See Govereh, 1999. 
 
 42 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 scouting may be better able to decide/figure out the stage 
 at which maize stalk-borers or grain weevils cause 
 money-based injury. Mariga (1994) defends/expresses that such 
 investments in workers through participation 
 in cash crop programs has had a positive spill-over 
 effect on food crop working well. 
 
 investments that support food crop production). The 
 rest of this paper examines these issues based 
 on the case of cotton in Gokwe North District of 
 Zimbabwe. 
 
 3. Data and sampling frame 
 2.2. (related to a large area) spill-over effects 
 (related to a large area) effects happen when a commercialisation 
 big plan/layout/dishonest plan attracts investments to a area which provide 
 (existing all over a large area) spill-over benefits to all farmers in that 
 area (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) whether they work at that commercialisation big plan/layout/dishonest plan. For example, the promotion 
 of input-intensive cash crops can make key inputs 
 more easily available in the area, for use on food 
 or cash crops. Dione (1989) found that the introduction of obey southern Mali increased the demand 
 for fertiliser, which (after that) stimulated private 
 investment by input manufacturers, distributors and 
 stores. These investments made fertiliser and other 
 inputs more (easy to get to, use, or understand) and money-making not only for use 
 on cotton (which was the first (or most important) driving force for the 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of input supply in these areas) but also for 
 farmers who only produced staple food crops. These 
 examples highlight the possible cooperation between 
 input-intensive cash crops and survival/income crops. 
 (related to a large area) spill-over effects can also happen when farming-based commercialisation spurs private investment in 
 market (set of machines) that improves the working well of 
 other farm activities, including food crop production. 
 It has been watched/followed that private investment in transportation (set of machines) to support cash crop activities 
 has also raised the returns to smallholder grain production and grain traders' operations (Strasberg, 1997). 
 The general inductive argument built up from these 
 cases is that made money from crop production and 
 marketing programs may create important cooperation 
 with more survival/income-oriented crops. These possible cooperation arise from both household-level and 
 (related to a large area)-level spill-over effects. Whether these cooperation actually arise depends on the opinions and 
 approaches that marketing firms put into use toward smallholders (e.g. whether credit is given under terms 
 that are not available in 'open markets', whether the 
 input and output marketing system that develops to 
 support the cash crop causes extra/helping (thing) (people and businesses that are not part of the government) response in services and infrastructural 
 
 The data used in this study is based on a multiple 
 visit survey of 480 (away from cities) families in 1996. The survey was designed and used under the Project 
 on (Combined different things together so they worked as one unit) Test of Trypanosomosis Control 
 Plans and Their Hits/effects. This part of the 
 overall project was a team effort between The International Animals Research Institute, The University 
 of Zimbabwe, The (related to a large area) Tsetse and Trypanosomasis Control Program and The Department of Veterinary Services, Tsetse Control Branch of Zimbabwe. 
 Gokwe North District was selected for putting into use the survey. Gokwe is a major cotton producing 
 area and has been a destination for internal people (who enter a country) 
 looking (for) the fortunes connected with cotton. The inflow of people (who enter a country) into Gokwe is often dubbed "the 
 white gold rush". A four-stage layered sampling procedure was adopted to select study places/locations within Gokwe 
 North. The first stage involved purposive selection of 
 three group-related areas that experienced early, mid and recent tsetse fly clearance. Each group-related area falls under 
 Natural Area III (moderately high agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 potential). They are found along the major drainage 
 systems with soils that are moderately well drained, 
 sandy clay soil  or clay. These soils have high farming-based (possible greatness or power) and no farmers in the sample applied 
 any additional/helping (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.). The most limiting input 
 was animal traction because the soils (vertisols) are 
 hard and hard to work manually. 
 During the second stage, two wards were purposively selected from each of the group-related areas. Selection of two wards per group-related area gave/given an 
 opportunity to identify differences in local management that could have affected the settlement process. In 
 the third stage, two villages were purposively selected 
 within each ward: one village had the best access to 
 services in 1996 and the other village had the worst 
 access to services at that time. At the fourth stage, 
 a random sample of 40 families, representing about 15-25% of the village population, was 
 drawn from each village. The resulting sample size 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 was 482 families. Families were interviewed 
 for information on (information about people/combinations of different kinds of people), farm and non-farm 
 activities, farming-based practices and valuable thing holdings. 
 
 4. Research questions and method of analysis 
 The idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) in Section 2 suggests 
 that the strength of cotton production in Gokwe 
 North may possibly influence the working well of a 
 farmer's other crops. This section develops a model 
 for measuring (1) the (things that decide other things) of cotton commercialisation at the household level, and (2) the 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) of cotton commercialisation to food crop 
 produces and production. 
 Some key descriptive features of the data are important in guiding model (detailed description of exactly what is required). Cropping patterns in Gokwe North are (focused mental and physical effort) on two crops. 
 Maize accounts for 47.4% of cropped area, while cotton accounts for 45.2%. 5 However, there are clear differences in the reasons for growing these crops: 100% 
 of the cotton production was marketed, while 93.8% 
 of the maize production was ate/destroyed on the farm. 
 Cotton sales added/gave 83.6% of the value of marketed crop income. In this area of Zimbabwe, farming-based commercialisation is almost sounding the same as/equal to 
 expanding cotton (producing crops/helping something grow). 
 The major inputs in the cotton system that may 
 give rise to household-level cooperation with food 
 crops are draught equipment, herbicides, bug-killers 
 and sprayers. These (instances of buying things for money) are made from cotton 
 traders who are in local village centres or from larger 
 dealers in town centres. The key technologies in the 
 maize production system are combination seed and animal 
 traction. Fertiliser is not commonly used in these areas because the soils do not have nutrient shortages 
 that require the use of (not living) fertiliser. Traction is 
 a key production input because the soils are heavy and 
 hard to work with a hand hoe. Traction equipment 
 is important both in expanding the household's cultivable land and in allowing for more good planting. 
 Given our guess that a household's grain crop 
 working well may be related to its involvement in 
 cotton production, we develop an indicator of cotton 
 commercialisation. We define the household's cotton 
 5 The remaining 8% of cropped area is loyal to/is dedicated to groundnuts, 
 flower, millet and (grass grown for food). 
 
 43 
 
 commercialisation index, CCI;, as the value of cotton sales over total crop production for household i. 
 This index is neutral with respect to farm production, 
 and measures the household's involvement in cotton 
 relative to its total farm output. This index ranged 
 from zero (for 19% of the cases) to 96% across the 
 sampled families, with a mean of 42%. We model 
 cotton commercialisation as a function of (coming from the outside of something) 
 household (features/ qualities/ traits), X;, and (related to managing and running a company or organization) zone 
 dummy (numbers that change/things that change), D;: 
 CCI;= ao 
 
 + a1X; + a2D; + e; 
 
 (i = 1, ... , 453 families) 
 
 (1) 
 
 We specify models of Y; and Y;/A;, the gross value 
 of food output per household and per hectare output 
 of food crops 6 , as: 
 
 (2) 
 
 y. 
 A'; 
 
 = b&#126; + b&#126; X; + b;cci; + b&#126;RSi + b&#126;D; + u; 
 (3) 
 
 where RS;, represents (related to a large area) spill-over produces; e;, 
 u; and u;' are leftover/extra terms. 
 Because cotton commercialisation and food production are endogenously decided/figured out, an instrumental 
 (numbers that change/things that change) approach was used to guess both (2) and 
 (3). The appropriateness of this approach, however, is 
 depending on finding (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) that are related 
 with CCI; but not food production or yields. Instrumental (numbers that change/things that change) for cotton commercialisation were: 
 the distance from each household to the nearest cotton buying outlet and the number of cotton sprayers 
 owned by the household. Definitions ofthe clearly stated/particular (coming from the outside of something), endogenous and instrumental (numbers that change/things that change) and 
 their expected signs are found in Table 1. 
 What is the guessed pathway by which food 
 crop working well in (3) is related to the strength 
 of household cotton production? The presence of 
 household-level cooperation is measured by the effects of cotton commercialisation in (2) and (3). The 
 6 This is a partial measure of land working well, but 
 it was not possible to construct more fancy (or smart) measures of 
 multi-factor working well due to the shortage of information on land 
 rental values and seasonal wages. 
 
 44 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 Table I 
 Description of (numbers that change/things that change) included in models 
 Expected sign 
 Commercialisation 
 index (CCI;) 
 Endogenous (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Cotton commercialisation index-value of cotton production 
 divided by value of total crop production (%) 
 (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) (X;) 
 Farm size: combined size of all plantable plots including the 
 garden (ha) 
 Family size: total household number of adult equals 
 (people) 
 Education: household-head's years of formal education 
 (years) 
 Farm capital: value of working farm tools and 
 draft animals (Z$) 
 Traveling worker settler: dummy (number or thing that changes) = I if family moved to 
 Gokwe North since 1950 
 Certified farmer: dummy (number or thing that changes) = I if household member 
 has completed an intensive public extension program 
 (male/female status): dummy (number or thing that changes) = I if female headed household 
 Village-level mean cotton yield (kg/ha) 
 Locational dummy (numbers that change/things that change) (D;) 
 Zone 1: dummy (number or thing that changes) = 1 if household lives in village 
 cleared of tsetse flies in the early period (1965-1976) 
 Zone 2: dummy (number or thing that changes) = 1 if household lives in village 
 cleared of tsetse flies in the mid period (1976-1984) 
 (related to a large area) spill-over effects (RS;) 
 Cotton traders: number of cotton input traders and buyers 
 based in each village in 1996 
 Instrument (numbers that change/things that change) (Z;) 
 Sprayers: number of cotton sprayers owned by household 
 Distance to marketing depot: average distance from village 
 to the cotton marketing depot (km) 
 
 measurement of (related to a large area) spill-over effects, RSi, needs/demands a (coming from the outside of something) village-level indicator of cotton 
 commercialisation. The (number or thing that changes) chosen to represent 
 (related to a large area) spill-overs was the number of retail dealers 
 distributing cotton inputs and buying seed cotton, 
 and is meant to measure the extent of village-level 
 investment in cotton-related services. We 
 guesse that as the density of cotton-related services increases, such services will more and more benefit 
 food crop production in that area. However, to the 
 extent that the density of cotton traders and grain 
 output are both driven by hidden (under) agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 factors, RS; could be endogenous. We include (related to managing and running a company or organization) zone dummy (numbers that change/things that change), D;, in each model 
 
 Grain 
 production (Y;) 
 
 Grain production 
 per hectare (Y;IA;) 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 + 
 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 IV 
 IV 
 
 IV 
 IV 
 
 to control for unseen agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and infrastructural effects across locations, but there may still 
 be some difference/different version within zones so the results should 
 be understood/explained carefully. In recognition of this, we 
 guess models (1), (2) and (3) both with and without including the (related to a large area) spill-over term (the 
 village-level number of retail cotton dealers) to examine the strength of the model. Also, we 
 guess a separate maize yield model that includes 
 mean village-level cotton yields to further control for 
 unseen locational factors. 
 Unfortunately, data on families' portion of 
 fertiliser and other inputs on food crops were not 
 available, because of this we must model the effects of cotton 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 45 
 
 Table 2 
 Household (features/ qualities/ traits) according to cotton commercialisation index in Gokwe North District, Zimbabwe, 1995-1996 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 
 Sample size (n) 
 Land size (ha) 
 Unplanted area (ha) 
 Family size (number) 
 Farm money-giving (Z$) 
 Animal draft teams (number) 
 Used animal draft power (%) 
 Family head years in school (years) 
 Master farmer certified (%) 
 Female headed (%) 
 Grain yield (kg/ha) 
 Grain output (kg per person) 
 Total crop income/ha cropped (Z$) 
 Total crop income per person (Z$) 
 Grain independent (%) 
 Grain selling families (%) 
 Distance to market (km) 
 
 Cotton commercialisation indexa 
 Non-cotton 
 growers (0%) 
 
 First tercile 
 (1-66%) 
 
 Second tercile 
 (67-82%) 
 
 Third tercile 
 (&amp;gt;82%) 
 
 Total 
 
 80 
 4.39 
 1.29 
 5.9 
 2254 
 0.36 
 42 
 4.5 
 2 
 21 
 1165 
 481 
 1690 
 639 
 59 
 20 
 27.5 
 
 118 
 5.62 
 0.78 
 6.4 
 4353 
 1.09 
 74 
 5.9 
 6 
 II 
 1443 
 495 
 2271 
 1492 
 81 
 42 
 25.2 
 
 110 
 5.66 
 0.71 
 6.8 
 5120 
 1.20 
 75 
 6.0 
 12 
 
 122 
 7.87 
 0.78 
 6.6 
 6806 
 1.65 
 79 
 6.8 
 
 430 
 6.04 
 0.85 
 6.5 
 4855 
 1.14 
 70 
 5.9 
 8.4 
 13.0 
 1167 
 385 
 2396 
 1732 
 57 
 27 
 24.5 
 
 11 
 
 11 
 11 
 
 1037 
 331 
 2340 
 1525 
 50 
 25 
 23.5 
 
 1007 
 263 
 3001 
 2822 
 41 
 21 
 22.6 
 
 Source: Own calculations using (how money affects people's lives) Hit/effect Test of Tsetse and Trypanosomosis Control Surveys, Gokwe North District, 
 Zimbabwe, 1995-1996. 
 a Cotton commercialisation is defined as value of cotton sales divided by value of total crop production; this changeable ranges from zero 
 (i.e. household does not grow cotton) to 100% (cotton makes up/is equal to 100% of the household's crop output). 
 
 commercialisation on food production and draw guesses about the causes rather than model the effects 
 of cotton commercialisation on food crop input use 
 clearly. 
 
 5. (features/ qualities/ traits) of money-making smallholder 
 farmers 
 As a introduction to the econometric analysis, we provide some descriptive ideas on four categories of 
 farmers: those families not growing cotton (about 
 19% of the sample), and three (compared to other things) equal groups 
 of the remaining families layered into terciles 
 according to their involvement in cotton production 
 as pointed to/showed by the cotton commercialisation index 
 (Table 2). We see that mean land holding size is 
 greater for cotton growers than non-cotton families, and that land holdings increase with the strength of cotton production. Unplanteded area, on the 
 other hand, is greater for non-cotton families. Cotton growers have piled up more draught animals 
 
 and farm capital valuable things (mostly draught and bug-killer 
 equipment) which enable greater area to be put under 
 (producing crops/helping something grow). To get draught (cows, bulls, etc.)  in Gokwe North 
 District, 53% of the farmers use income from cotton, 
 20% use a combination of cotton and maize income 
 and 18% use wage savings. Strength of cotton production also appears to be higher for families having a 'master farmer' ,7 those that are male-headed, 
 and those located (compared to other things) close to a cotton buyer. 
 We also find (clear and obvious) support for the well-known 
 statement that cash crops are grown at the expense 
 of household food production. Results in Table 2 point to/show that per person grain production is highest for 
 the non-cotton families and the lowest tercile of 
 cotton producers. These families produce roughly 
 85% more grain per person than families in the 
 most intensive cotton production tercile. Almost 60% 
 of the non-cotton producers are grain independent 
 instead of 41% for families in the top cotton 
 7 These are families that have passed an farming-based farming/managing money training course by the national extension service. 
 
 46 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 production tercile. However, the fact that farmers in 
 the highest tercile still manage to produce 263 kg of 
 grain per person on average points to/shows that even the 
 most intensive cotton producers secure at least some 
 part of/amount of their food needs through own production. 
 More than that, the results in Table 2 also show that 
 household cotton commercialisation is related to 
 higher gross per person crop income. Families in 
 the top cotton tercile have about four times the crop 
 income per person and almost double the crop income 
 per (helped to grow) hectare as non-cotton producers. While 
 families not growing cotton tend to have higher 
 levels of grain production, clearly the money-making 
 cotton producers are in a better position to buy their 
 leftover/extra food needs from local markets using cotton 
 money/money income. They are also in a better position to afford 
 cash inputs for food crop production from local dealers who sell almost completely on a cash basis only. 
 These (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) are agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) found 
 in other studies of farming-based commercialisation (Von 
 Braun and Kennedy, 1994; Strasberg, 1997). However, 
 these bivariate figures do not provide any clear ideas of the effects of cotton commercialisation on 
 household grain production or working well, which we 
 address in Section 6. 
 
 6. Econometric results 
 6.1. (things that decide other things) of cotton commercialisation 
 Many factors are involved in accounting for the 
 wide differences watched/followed in cotton commercialisation 
 across the sample. As shown in Table 3, column (a), 
 the proportion of cotton in total production (CCI) is 
 positively connected with farm size, education of the 
 household head, the value of farm capital, the number of cotton sprayers and a (compared to other things) early clearing 
 of tsetse from the village in question. Family size, 
 families that are female-headed and distance from 
 the nearest cotton buyer are negatively related to cotton commercialisation. (even though there is the existence of) their (meaningful numbers), differences in farm size, family size and farm 
 capital all have (compared to other things) small effects on the CCI, 
 holding other factors constant. 
 The most important factors connected with cotton 
 commercialisation are probably educational levels, the 
 distance from the farm to the nearest cotton buyer 
 
 and villages that were cleared of tsetse fly (compared to other things) 
 early. A difference of 5 years education is connected 
 with roughly a 9% difference in the (described the future) CCI. 
 A difference of 10 km distance to the nearest cotton 
 buying outlet is related to a 6.8% decline in the 
 CCI. The share of cotton in total crop production for 
 families in villages that were cleared of tsetse fly 
 (compared to other things) early in the settlement of Gokwe North was 
 about 10% higher than in families in areas cleared 
 (compared to other things) (not very long ago). This may be because areas with 
 early tsetse fly clearance have had more time to pile up draught animals and traction equipment, which 
 are shown to be significantly connected with the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of cotton production. 
 
 6.2. Effects of commercialisation on food production 
 Columns (b) and (c) of Table 3 show the instrumental (number or thing that changes) (IV) models for household grain 
 production. The IV results point to an (not being there; not being present) of 
 household-level cooperation between cotton and grain 
 production. The share of cotton in total crop production is related to neither a strong increase nor a 
 decline in total grain production. While cotton commercialisation (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) does not add/give to grain 
 production, there must be opposing positive effects on grain output that offset the substitution of 
 land from grain to cotton. We examine this issue in 
 Section 6.3. 
 As expected, household grain production is significantly connected with farm size and the value of saved farm valuable things. An added hectare of land 
 owned is related to about Z$ 150 more grain 
 production (equal to about 120 kg of maize), 
 other factors constant. The relationship between maize 
 produces and farm size is even stronger when all other 
 household (numbers that change/things that change) are tested at their means for 
 different farm size categories within the sample. We 
 calculated the mean values for all other household 
 (numbers that change/things that change) for farms within the 20-30th percentile 
 of farm size (2.80-3.66 ha) and for farms within 
 the 70-80th percentile (6.28-9.71 ha). The (described the future) 
 maize production for the two groups, based on model 
 results in Table 3, column (c) are 972 and 1602kg, 
 (match up each pair of items in order), a difference of roughly Z$ 800. 
 Families tend to have higher levels of grain production in locations that were (not very long ago) cleared of tsetse 
 fly. Families in the early and mid clearance areas 
 
 Table 3 
 Model results for commercialisation, food crop working well and output equations 
 Model 1: cotton 
 commercialisation index 
 (OLS) 
 
 Model 2: value of grain production per 
 household in Z$ (IV) 
 
 (a) 
 
 (h) 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-Statistics 
 
 Instrument (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Sprayers 
 Distance to cotton 
 buyer (km) 
 Constant 
 S.E. 
 N 
 Adj. R2 
 
 (c) 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-Statistics 
 
 (e) 
 
 (d) 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-Statistics 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-Statistics 
 
 (f) 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-Statistics 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-Statistics 
 
 &#126; 
 &#126; 
 
 Endogenous (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Commercialisation index 
 (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Farm size (ha) 
 Family size (number) 
 Education of head (years) 
 Traveling worker settlers 
 (male/female status) 
 Value farm capital (Z$) 
 Certified farmer 
 Early cleared grad 
 Mid cleared grad 
 Cotton traders 
 Cotton yield, villagelevel mean (kg/ha) 
 
 Model 3: value of grain production per hectare (Z$/ha) (IV) 
 
 -2.79 
 
 -0.19 
 
 1.09 
 
 0.08 
 
 14.13 
 
 2.04* 
 
 15.31 
 
 2.18* 
 
 12.15 
 
 1.23 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 , 
 
 &#126; 
 
 1.18 
 -0.8 
 1.72 
 -3.31 
 -7.96 
 0.39 
 4.28 
 9.58 
 4.56 
 
 3.23* 
 -2.25* 
 4.87* 
 -1.26 
 -2.25* 
 2.24* 
 0.98 
 3.17* 
 1.4 
 
 8.34 
 -0.6 
 
 4.03* 
 -2.74* 
 
 60.37 
 
 8.97* 
 
 162.97 
 28.82 
 1.41 
 596.9 
 -292 
 50.12 
 -422.75 
 -641.16 
 -1738.8 
 
 5.15* 
 1.05 
 0.04 
 3.00* 
 -1.04 
 3.16* 
 -1.27 
 -2.49* 
 -6.53* 
 
 14D.48 
 36.24 
 -6.8 
 675.16 
 -279.71 
 44.72 
 -314.31 
 -633.35 
 -1931.5 
 75.5 
 
 4.37* 
 1.34 
 -0.19 
 3.41* 
 -1.01 
 2.92* 
 -0.95 
 -2.62* 
 -7.13* 
 2.84* 
 
 -69.45 
 20.22 
 -10.67 
 2.45 
 -41.65 
 7.72 
 36.97 
 -171.96 
 -838.51 
 
 -4.62* 
 1.55 
 -0.63 
 O.D3 
 -0.31 
 1.05 
 0.23 
 -1.41 
 -6.63* 
 
 -76.29 
 22.45 
 -13.17 
 26.23 
 -37.92 
 6.61 
 69.92 
 -178.71 
 -897.03 
 22.94 
 
 -4.88* 
 1.70** 
 -0.77 
 0.27 
 -0.28 
 0.86 
 0.44 
 -1.45 
 -6.81* 
 1.78** 
 
 -70.47 
 20.46 
 -7.95 
 18.64 
 -64.9 
 7.99 
 89.12 
 -172.13 
 -870.05 
 21.91 
 0.09 
 
 -3.56* 
 1.51 
 -0.47 
 0.24 
 -0.45 
 1.02 
 0.53 
 -1.36 
 -4.97* 
 1.65** 
 0.30 
 
 sis' 
 "'&#126; 
 
 "":::!...., 
 1: 
 
 &#126; 
 
 a 
 &#126; 
 
 c;s 
 c 
 
 &#126;" 
 Co 
 "' 
 
 "N 
 0 
 &amp;; 
 '- 
 
 w 
 
 23.884 
 424 
 0.264 
 
 1547.3 
 
 2.12* 
 1738 
 424 
 0.263 
 
 1032.7 
 
 1.391 
 1713 
 424 
 0.278 
 
 910.4 
 
 2.62* 
 826.5 
 424 
 0.193 
 
 754.02 
 
 2.09* 
 832.7 
 424 
 0.194 
 
 909.55 
 
 1.92** 
 813.7 
 424 
 0.204 
 
 10 
 
 t!, 
 
 0 
 
 Source: Own calculations using (how money affects people's lives) Hit/effect Test of Tsetse and Trypanosomosis Control Surveys, Gokwe North District, Zimbabwe, 1996-1997. 
 - Represents (meaningful numbers) (one-tailed test) at the 5% level. 
 -- Represents (meaningful numbers) (one-tailed test) at the 10% level. 
 
 :!::i 
 
 48 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne/ Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 produced 1.5-3 tonnes less grain than families in 
 locations cleared (not very long ago). As shown in model (1), 
 smallholders in the early clearance areas have strengthened/got worse into obey a greater extent, helped by the 
 (compared to other things) longer period of time in which (cows, bulls, etc.)  and 
 traction equipment could be saved. 
 When the number of cotton input traders is included 
 in the model (column c), this (number or thing that changes) is positively and 
 significantly related to household grain output. 
 The coefficients of the other (meaningful numbers) covariates remain (compared to other things) unchanged. While the main 
 money-based activity in most of these villages is cotton 
 production, the presence of cotton traders had positive 
 spill-overs on smallholder grain production. In 25% of 
 the villages sampled, there were three or fewer cotton 
 traders, while eight or more cotton traders were found 
 in the top 25% of villages. Many of the inputs sold by 
 these traders can also be applied to food crops. A shift 
 from three to eight traders was connected with a Z$ 
 375 increase in household grain production (the mean 
 level over the whole sample was Z$ 1665 in 1996 Z$). 
 As pointed to/showed earlier, it is reasonable that there is an 
 hidden (under) association between the number of cotton 
 traders in a village and the agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) potential 
 of that area. While we cannot rule out that this affects our results, we tried to control for agroecological (possible greatness or power) in  the village sample selection 
 process (Section 3) and further control for differences 
 in tsetse fly clearance which reflect the timing of 
 draught animal introduction into an area. More than that, 
 we control for household-level (features/ qualities/ traits) that 
 would tend to also reflect (land-area-based/location) differences in 
 productive potential (e.g. farm capital valuable things, landholding size, family size). Given including these 
 location and household-level (numbers that change/things that change) controlling for 
 grain production (possible greatness or power), it would seem reasonable 
 to decide that the association between the number 
 of cotton traders and household grain crop production 
 mostly reflects the positive spill-over produces that services investments for cotton have on grain 
 crop production. 
 6.3. Effects of cotton commercialisation on food 
 working well 
 Results in Table 3, model 3, highlight the (completing/matching) relationship between cotton commercialisation and household grain produce. Four results in column 
 
 (d) show that the effect of the household commercialisation index on food working well is positive and significant. Moving from the 25 to 75th percentile of the 
 cotton commercialisation index is related to a Z$ 
 370/ha increase in grain yields (equal to 296kg 
 at winning/most common maize price levels), a 25% increase over 
 mean grain yields in the whole sample. We cannot say 
 exactly why families with intensive cotton production get higher grain yields than non-cotton and 
 not important cotton farmers because data on input usage 
 on fields gave/reserved to food crops is not available. However, as we have pointed to/showed earlier, cotton producers 
 have access to key inputs such as credit and training 
 through the cotton big plans/layouts/dishonest plans that are either not (easy to get to, use, or understand) on credit terms to non-participating farmers, or 
 simply not available to them at all. 
 Farm size has a significant and negative effect on 
 maize yields. Other factors held constant, smaller 
 farms were more productive in the use of land than 
 large farms. The results suggest that maize produces 
 decline by Z$ 44/ha (3.6% of mean yield levels in 
 the sample) as (areas of owned land) increase by 1 ha, ceteris paribus. The inverse relationship between maize 
 produces and farm size also holds up when all other 
 household (numbers that change/things that change) are tested at their means for 
 different farm size categories. 8 
 Family size makes a positive but sloppyly guessed (thing that's given/work that's done) to grain yields. And families in 
 areas cleared (compared to other things) (not very long ago) from tsetse fly (situation where something is filled with lots of something harmful or disgusting) tend to have higher grain yields than families 
 in early-clearance areas, maybe reflecting declining 
 life-creating ability due to the longer length of time of (producing crops/helping something grow) in 
 the last thing just mentioned areas. (related to information about people) attributes such as family 
 size, (male/female status) of the household head, and settler status 
 do not have any important effects on grain working well. Farmers that received master farmer training get higher grain yields than other farmers, but this 
 effect is not (meaningful numbers). 
 Including the (related to a large area) spill-over (number or thing that changes) in 
 model 3 (column e) makes only a not important (thing that's given/work that's done) to the (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R 2 and has little effect on the coefficient guesses of the significant (numbers that change/things that change) in column 
 (d). Anyway, the effect of the (related to a large area) spill-over 
 8 Following the procedure explained in Section 6.2, the (described the future) 
 maize yields for those families between the 20th and 30th 
 percentiles of farm size against/compared to/or those between the 70th and 80th 
 percentile, based on model results in Table 3 column (e), are 726 
 and 462 kg/ha, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 J. Govereh, TS. Jayne I Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 (number or thing that changes) on food crop working well is positive and significant at P = 0.08. Everything else constant, an added cotton input store in the area boosts grain 
 output by Z$ 22.9/ha. When village-level cotton yields 
 are introduced in column (f) to further control for unseen village factors, the CCI coefficient declines 
 (a) little and is sloppyly guessed. The effect of an 
 added/more cotton trader in the area has about the 
 same effect as in column (e), and is barely significant 
 at P = 0.10. Because the cotton stores provide a 
 range of services for farmers growing food crops, including inputs used in maize production, the growth 
 of cotton appears to be connected with increased grain 
 working well. 
 
 7. Ends/end results and effects/results/suggestions 
 This paper addresses the (possibility of/possible happening of)  cash crop 
 production to (help increase/show in a good way) food crop working well. We 
 argue that in addition to the direct stimulus that cash 
 cropping can have on household incomes, there may 
 be important indirect effects of cash cropping on the 
 working well of other household activities such as food 
 cropping. We have classified two possible pathways 
 by which these benefits happen: household-level cooperation, in which a farmer's participation in a money-making crop big plan/layout/dishonest plan enables her to get useful things/valuable supplies 
 that would otherwise not be (easy to get to, use, or understand) for use on 
 other crops; and (related to a large area) spill-over effects, which 
 happen when a commercialisation big plan/layout/dishonest plan attracts new 
 investments to a area by that/in that way providing benefits to 
 all farmers in that area, (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) whether they 
 work at the commercialisation program. We find 
 that farmers got good things from both of these pathways in 
 the case of cotton production in Gokwe North District 
 in Zimbabwe, although the case for household-level 
 cooperation is less clear-cut. Specifically, the econometric results point to/show that-after controlling for household valuable things, education and training and locational 
 differences-families that work attensively in 
 cotton production tend to have higher grain yields than 
 non-cotton and not important cotton producers. But because they set apart (compared to other things) less of their land to food 
 crops, the intensive cotton farmers produce about the 
 same amount of grain as the non-cotton farmers, other 
 factors constant. We also find a strong connection between the number of cash crop traders in a given vill- 
 
 49 
 
 age and the value of grain output produced per household and per hectare in that village, although these 
 results should be understood/explained carefully due to the 
 possible endogeneity of cotton traders in the models. 
 These findings call into question the often 
 heard statements that cash crop production comes at 
 the expense of household food security. Certainly 
 there are events in which such problems have happened, but our findings point to/show that this cannot be 
 thought about/believed a clear and definite result. Especially in the 
 presence of credit market failures (which often 
 happen in many areas of Africa where credit repayment 
 is interfered with by firms' inability to control the output 
 market), low-useful thing/valuable supply farmers' ability to get inputs is held back. Participation in cash cropping 
 programs may allow farmers to overcome such market failures facing food crop input and credit supply. 
 However, whether these complementarities actually 
 appear depends on whether cash cropping firms 
 can continue to recover their up-front costs and 
 support farmers through (instance of buying something for money) of the cash crop. A 
 useful analysis of the (related to a plan to reach a goal) interactions between 
 smallholders and cash crop trading firms is contained 
 in Dorward et al. (1998). 
 The possible cooperation or trade-off between cash 
 crops and food crops have been generally neglected 
 in food crop research and extension programs, although they may have important effects/results/suggestions for 
 programs designed to (help increase/show in a good way) smallholder food crop 
 working well growth. Mostly, farming-based 
 and nutrition policies in the area have (in the past) 
 created (away from cities) development plans with a food 
 crop focus and have completely/in a hinting way or sometimes clearly regarded (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into non-food cash crops 
 as harmful to household food security goals. 
 Our study says that, to the opposite, there is 
 some (possibility of/possible happening of)  high-value cash crops to (help increase/show in a good way) 
 food crop working well. We hope that this article will 
 succeed in stimulating further analysis of the complex 
 interactions between smallholder commercialisation 
 involving non-food crops and household food security 
 and income growth in sub-Saharan Africa. 
 
 Responses 
 The authors thankfully admit/recognize/respond to money available for 
 this research by the Food Security II Co-operative 
 
 50 
 
 J. Govereh, T.S. Jayne I Farming-based Money flow 28 (2003) 39-50 
 
 Agreement (PCE-A-00-97-00044-00) between AID/ 
 Worldwide  Bureau, Office of Farming and Food Security, and The Department of Farming-based Money flow 
 at Michigan State University. The Farming, Natural Useful things/valuable supplies and (away from cities) Business/project Division, Office of 
 (able to last/helping the planet) Development, Bureau for Africa, USAID 
 (AFR/SD/ANRE) also supported this work. Added/more money-based help was given by The International Animals Research Institute, The University of 
 Zimbabwe, The (related to a large area) Tsetse and Trypanosomosis 
 Control Program, and The Department of Veterinary 
 Services Tsetse Control Branch of the Ministry of 
 Farming, Government of Zimbabwe. This article 
 has gotten good things from the useful comments of Takashi 
 Yamano, Maxwell Mudhara, Edward Mazhangara, 
 Colin Poulton, David Tschirley and two unnamed 
 reviewers. 
 
 References 
 Byerlee, D., Eicher, C. (Eds.), 1997. Africa's Newly appearing Maize 
 Revolution. Lynn Reinner Publishers, Big rock, CO. 
 Dione, J., 1989. Informing Food Security Policy in Mali: Interactions Between Technology, Institutions and Market Changes. 
 Unpublished PhD Speech/story, Michigan State University, East 
 Lansing, MI. 
 Dorward A., Kydd, J., Poulton, C. (Eds.), 1998. Smallholder 
 Cash Crop Production Under Market (easing government rules). CAB 
 International, New York. 
 Fafchamps, M., 1992. Cash crop production, food price dangerous nature/wild up and down prices, 
 and (away from cities) market (combination of different things together that work as one unit) in the third world. Am. J. Agric. 
 Econ. 74 (!), 90-99. 
 Fereidoon, J., Mulila-Mitti, J., Mitti, G., Phiri, E., 1996. Integrated 
 Crop Management: A Guide for (able to last/helping the planet) Smallholder 
 Farming. (Combined different things together so they worked as one unit) Crop Management/Food (pea, bean, lentil, etc.) Project, 
 Department of Farming, Ministry of Farming Food and 
 Fisheries, Zambia. 
 Goetz, S., 1993. (connected, like chain links) markets and the cash crop-food crop 
 debate in land-plentiful (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) farming. Econ. Dev. Cultural 
 Change 41, 343-361. 
 Govereh, J., 1999. Hits/effects of Tsetse Control on (entering a country) 
 and Household Collection of Capital: Zambezi Valley, 
 
 Zimbabwe. Unpublished PhD Speech/story, Michigan State 
 University, East Lansing, MI. 
 Govereh, J., Nyoro, J., Jayne, T., 1999. Smallholder Commercialisation, (connected, like chain links) Markets, and Food Crop Working well: 
 Cross Country (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from eastern and southern Africa, 
 Paper Presented at the Fourth Farming-based Change 
 Workshop, Nairobi, Kenya. USAID/Africa Bureau/Sustainable 
 Development Division, Washington, DC. 
 Howard, J., Mungoma, C., 1997. Zambia's Stop-and-Go Maize 
 Revolution. In: Byerlee, D., Eicher, C. (Eds.), Africa's Newly appearing 
 Maize Revolution, Lynn Reinner Publishers, Big rock, CO. 
 Jayne, T., Jones, S., 1997. Food marketing and pricing policy 
 in eastern and southern Africa: a survey. World Dev. 25 (9), 
 1505-1527. 
 Kelly, V., Diagana, B., Reardon, T., Gaye, M., Crawford, E., 1996. 
 Cash Crop and Food Grain Working well in Senegal: Historical 
 View, New Survey (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), and Policy Effects/results/suggestions, MSU 
 Staff Paper 95 (05). 
 Kherallah, M., Delgado, C., Gabre-Mahin, E., Minot, N., Johnson, 
 M., 2002. Reforming Farming-based Markets: (challenging things accomplished or completed) 
 and Challenges. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 
 MD. 
 Mariga, I., 1994. Cotton research and development. In: Rukuni, M., 
 Eicher, C. (Eds.), Zimbabwe's Farming-based Revolution. Harare 
 University of Zimbabwe Press, pp. 219-233. 
 Poulton, C., Dorward, A., Kydd, J., 1998. The (coming back to life or popularity after a long time) of 
 smallholder cash crops in Africa: public and private roles in 
 the provision of finance. J. Int. Dev. 19 (1), 85-103. 
 Putterman, L., 1995. Money-based reform and smallholder farming 
 in Tanzania: a discussion of recent market (easing government rules), road 
 healing/fixing, and technology spreading around efforts. World Dev. 
 23 (2), 311-326. 
 Rohrbach, D., 1988. The Growth of Smallholder Maize Production 
 in Zimbabwe: Causes and Effects/results/suggestions for Food Security. 
 Unpublished PhD Speech/story, Michigan State University, East 
 Lansing, MI. 
 Singh, I., Squire, L., Strauss, J., 1986. Farming-based Household 
 Models: Extensions, Applications, and Policy. Johns Hopkins 
 University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
 Strasberg, P.J., 1997. Smallholder Cash-Cropping, Food-Cropping 
 and Food Security in Northern Mozambique. Unpublished PhD 
 Speech/story, Michigan State University, East Lansing. 
 Timmer, C.P., 1997. Farmers and markets: the political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 of new ways of thinking. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 79, 621-627. 
 Von Braun, J., Kennedy, E., 1994. Farming-based Commercialisation, 
 Money-based Development, and Nutrition. Johns Hopkins 
 University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
