AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 Nonparametric analysis of technical, total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical, and scale 
 (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for food crop production in East Java, Indonesia 1 
 Richard V. Llewelyn *,Jeffery R. Williams 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA 
 
 Accepted I August 1996 
 
 Abstract 
 Non parametric analysis of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for watered farms in the Madiun regency in the west-central part of East Java, Indonesia 
 is conducted using linear programming ways of doing things. This procedure allows the relative technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for each farm to be decided/figured out 
 and for inefficiencies to be rotten into total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical inefficiency and scale inefficiency and does not require restrictions or 
 ideas (you think are true) (related to/looking at/thinking about) functional form to be placed on the data. 
 Farmers in Madiun generally are (producing a lot with very little waste) relative to each other. Farmers operating inefficiently do so more often because of scale 
 inefficiencies rather than total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical inefficiencies. A rnajority of the farms operate in the area of decreasing returns to scale rather than 
 increasing returns to scale. Farmer age, the level of (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) of cropping activities, and high school education were found to be related 
 to technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the rainy season under watered conditions. Other (how money affects people's lives) factors were not (meaningful numbers). 
 The results suggest that inefficient farms use too much/too many levels of inputs, especially nitrogen (material that makes plants grow better). This is maybe due to the (staying around; not going away) 
 effects of past input subsidization policies, especially of (material that makes plants grow better)s, in Indonesia, or to risk-reducing behavior. The results also suggest that 
 current government policies to encourage (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) of cropping practices in Java may lead to greater technical inefficiencies in 
 production. Also, extension education targeted to younger farmers with low levels of formal education would improve (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 
 Nonparametric analysis of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for 
 watered farms in the Madiun regency of East Java, 
 Indonesia is conducted using linear programming 
 ways of doing things. Though common in high income countries, (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis in poor 
 countries has been slowed by lack of data and 
 poor understanding of the production process and 
 often is limited to analysis of a single crop. Whole- 
 
 ' Corresponding author at: Kutisari Indah Selatan IV 148, 
 Surabaya, Indonesia. 
 1 (thing that's given/work that's done) no. 96-308-J from the Kansas Farming-based Experiment Station. 
 
 farm analysis of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) that includes 
 multiproduct production is rare. The use of nonparametric ways of doing things makes it possible to test technical, total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical, and scale (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for multiproduct farms in Madiun and to then identify factors 
 connected with inefficiencies. 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) may be described as the relation between ends and means (Afriat) and has application in 
 production analysis as well as consumption explanation 
 and demand analysis. Money-flow experts widely distinguish 
 between technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and allocative or price 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something), following discovering work by Farrell in 
 1957. The idea  of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) relates to 
 whether a firm uses the best available technology in 
 its production process (Chavas and Cox, 1988). In 
 
 0169-5150/96/$15.00 Copyright© 1996 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PI! S0169-5150(96)01202-9 
 
 114 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 0996) 113-126 
 
 money-based terms, technical inefficiency refers to failure to operate on the production edge of something/unexplored area and generally is assumed to reflect inefficiencies caused by the 
 timing and method of use of production inputs (Byerlee, 1987). Potential causes of technical 
 inefficiency are not enough information or not enough (abilities to do particular job-related tasks well). 
 A variety of methods have been used to measure 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). The idea  of the (producing a lot with very little waste) edge of something/unexplored area has 
 often been used, where mistakes from the edge of something/unexplored area 
 are assumed to represent inefficiencies. Different types 
 of edge of something/unexplored area (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis exist. These methods 
 differ with respect to the ideas (you think are true) on the outer 
 bound of the edge of something/unexplored area, which may be pre-decided or 
 (random/including random data points), and to the method of measurement, parametric or non-parametric. 
 For the parametric approach, guess of production functions (or (money made/good thing received) or cost functions) consists of specifying a parametric form for the function 
 and then fitting it to watched/followed data by (making small) 
 some measure of their distance from the guessed 
 function. This method attributes difference/different version from the 
 (producing the most with the least waste) farms to technical inefficiency. As 
 Chavas and Aliber (1993) note, the parametric approach provides a consistent (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for carefully studying (wasting very little while working or producing something), however, this approach has an important weakness, in that the maintained guess of 
 parametric form can never be detected directly 
 (Varian, 1984; Banker and Maindiratta, 1988). This 
 method this way forces restrictions on the technology 
 that may not hold and that affect the distribution and 
 measurement of the (wasting very little while working or producing something) terms (Chavas and 
 Aliber, 1993). An advantage of the parametric approach is that it can separate mistakes from the 
 edge of something/unexplored area technology into the planned or actual inefficiencies of the firm and the random parts/pieces, 
 such as weather, that are (random/including random data points) and not due to 
 operator inefficiency. Some (random/including random data points) creations 
 of edge of something/unexplored area production functions have been developed 
 that sort out the effects due to random errors from 
 those caused by technical inefficiencies. 
 An different approach is to apply nonparametric 
 ways of doing things to carefully study production (wasting very little while working or producing something). A pre-decided nonparametric edge of something/unexplored area model was developed 
 by Farrell (1957) in his new work. This 
 model cannot separate mistakes from the edge of something/unexplored area 
 technology into their planned and random parts/pieces and so, attributes all mistakes from the 
 
 edge of something/unexplored area technology to inefficiency of the watched/followed 
 firm and may overstate inefficiencies. However, this 
 way(s) of doing things has the advantage of (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) no a 
 priori parametric restrictions on the hidden (under) technology, because it does not require a specific functional form for the edge of something/unexplored area to be specified. Therefore, it does not (force (on people)/cause an inconvenient situation) inappropriate structure on the 
 technology that might create a distortion in the (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures (Hire et al., 1985). Also, it can 
 handle disaggregated inputs and multiple output 
 technologies and can be used in testing technical, 
 allocative, scale and scope (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste). 
 This study uses nonparametric ways of doing things to 
 provide a direct analysis of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 
 watered food-crop production in East Java, Indonesia. A nonparametric, whole-farm, production edge of something/unexplored area that includes many outputs is guessed for 
 each farm in each of three clear/separate cropping seasons: 
 rainy, middle, and dry. The crops included in this study are paddy rice, com, soybeans, peanuts, mungbeans, cassava, and a pepper-onion intercrop. Relative overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for each farm is 
 serious and stubborn as well as total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and 
 scale (wasting very little while working or producing something). (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices received/got from the 
 nonparametric analysis are then moved backward on (how money affects people's lives) (numbers that change/things that change) to help identify factors connected 
 with technical inefficiencies. 
 
 1. Farming-based production and (wasting very little while working or producing something) in Indonesia and Asia 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis of farming-based production in 
 Indonesia has focused mostly on watered rice 
 production (Widodo, 1986; Erwidodo, 1990) using 
 (random/including random data points) parametric approaches. Widodo used a 
 (random/including random data points) production function way(s) of doing things with 
 panel data to guess average technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste), 
 found to be between 83% and 96%. These values are 
 like those found by Dawson et al. (1991) in the 
 Philippines for lowland watered rice. In a almost the same 
 study, Erwidodo used two (random/including random data points) production 
 functions, the Cobb-Douglas and the translog, to 
 examine farm-level (wasting very little while working or producing something) in West Java. Technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for (land with a layer of water) rice production averaged 
 93.5% and ranged from 88% to 96.4%. This way(s) of doing things showed/told about no a big difference in the level 
 of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between small and large farms. 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 Byerlee refers to six other studies that have taken 
 place in Asia, five of which examined watered rice 
 production and one that looked at com production, 
 all using (random/including random data points) production edge of something/unexplored area way(s) of doing things. 
 Average (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for rice production ranged from 
 47% to 80% in India, the Philippines, and Pakistan. 
 For com, the average (wasting very little while working or producing something) in a study by Peng 
 and Chen in Taiwan (referred to by Byerlee, 1987) was 
 72%. The major factors explaining differences in 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) were (numbers that change/things that change) that dealt with farmers' 
 information and skills, such as education, experience, and contact with extension agents. 
 A study of watered, high-cooperating with/producing/giving up rice varieties in 
 India by Kalirajan (1981) used Cobb-Douglas technology in guessing a profit function to test the 
 relative (wasting very little while working or producing something) of large and small farmers who 
 had adopted modem varieties. He decided that 
 small farmers were as (producing a lot with very little waste) in putting into use the new 
 technologies as large farmers in terms of both technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 In a study of rice production in the Philippines, 
 Berns ten ( 1977) included a measure of farmers' 
 technical knowledge in the production function. The 
 effect of this (number or thing that changes) was significant and positive. 
 He also found that age, experience, and extension 
 contact were significant factors in farmers' (wasting very little while working or producing something), but education was not significant. 
 Dawson et al. (1991) tested technical, allocative, and overall money-based (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for 22 rice 
 farms in the Philippines with panel data from the 
 International Rice Research Institute using a edge of something/unexplored area 
 production function approach. Overall (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) 
 ranged from 84% to 95% across the farms. Azhar 
 ( 1991) found technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in rice and wheat 
 production in Pakistan to be related positively and 
 very significantly to education levels, with first (or most important) 
 education providing the greatest increase in (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Little has been done concerning (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 
 secondary food-crop production in Indonesia. Also, the use of nonparametric ways of doing things to 
 Indonesian farming is almost (not existing at all), and 
 these ways of doing things have (possibility of/possible happening of)  providing 
 useful information (related to/looking at/thinking about) technical and scale (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) in production as well as factors connected 
 with inefficiencies that may exist. These ways of doing things 
 are useful where data are more limited and production technologies not well understood, since they do 
 
 115 
 
 not require good  (detailed description of exactly what is required) of a functional 
 form. 
 
 2. Way(s) of doing things and model development 
 Although the use of parametric ways of doing things is 
 common, the use of nonparametric ways of doing things is 
 more limited, especially in poor countries, 
 even though nonparametric ways of doing things 
 can be used as it wasations where data is more limited 
 and where production technologies are less well 
 understood. There are two nonparametric approaches 
 to production analysis. One is based on the works of 
 Afriat, 1972; Hanoch and Rothschild, 1972; and 
 Varian, 1984. This approach deals with four types of 
 concerns in the neoclassical explanation of production: 
 consistency, restriction of form, recoverability, and 
 prediction, without maintaining any guesses of 
 functional form. This way(s) of doing things is applied to time 
 series data and has been used in a few studies to 
 test technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in farming (e.g. 
 Chavas and Aliber, 1993; Chavas and Cox, 1988). 
 Or, Farrell rotten (wasting very little while working or producing something) into 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something). Hire et 
 al. ( 1985) introduced a nonparametric method of 
 calculating (wasting very little while working or producing something) across farms, which extended 
 Farrell's approach by relaxing the (serving to severely limit or control) ideas (you think are true) of constant returns to scale and of strong 
 disposability of inputs, the major criticisms of the 
 method. 
 Fare et al. note that (wasting very little while working or producing something) by a firm in inputs 
 does not suggest that the firm is necessarily (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 in outputs. Technical, allocative, and other (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 measures of outputs cannot be known from corresponding (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures of inputs or crime 
 versa because output and input (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) focus on 
 different parts of production. The type of (wasting very little while working or producing something) that is being tested should be clearly 
 specified. 
 Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) may be defined as the ability 
 of a firm to produce as much output as possible with 
 a specified level of inputs, given the existing technology. Graphically, this is illustrated in Fig. I. Six 
 watched/followed data points with connected levels of input 
 and output are shown. The edge of something/unexplored area for this production process is defined by the line ABC. (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) A, B, and C lie on the edge of something/unexplored area while observa- 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn. J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 116 
 
 Output(Y) 
 
 yl 
 
 Input (JI.') 
 
 xl 
 
 Fig. I. Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) illustrated. 
 
 tions D, E, and F lie within the edge of something/unexplored area. A ray from 
 the origin is unrelated topic to the edge of something/unexplored area at Point B. This 
 ray represents constant returns to scale for the technology represented by these data (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements). In 
 this example, (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) B is overall (compared to other things) 
 technically (producing a lot with very little waste), which hints that this firm is 
 also purely technically (producing a lot with very little waste) and scale (producing a lot with very little waste). It 
 lies on the edge of something/unexplored area and has constant returns to scale. 
 Although a firm may be technically inefficient in 
 an overall sense, it is possible for it to be purely 
 technically (producing a lot with very little waste), while experiencing inefficiencies in scale. This is also illustrated in Fig. 1. 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) A and C are purely technically (producing a lot with very little waste), since they lie on the edge of something/unexplored area, but show scale 
 inefficiencies. (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) D is both scale inefficient 
 and purely technically inefficient since it lies below 
 the edge of something/unexplored area. Possibly, the same level of input 
 could be used to (accomplish or gain with effort) a higher level of output, 
 which would allow this producer to be on the edge of something/unexplored area between Points B and C. (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) E is purely 
 technically inefficient since it is not on the production edge of something/unexplored area, but is scale (producing a lot with very little waste), because it produces at input level x2, the scale-(producing a lot with very little waste) level of 
 input. 
 The model used in this study is based on a 
 model developed by Grabowski and Pasurka ( 1987) 
 to examine relative (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farms in the north- 
 
 em and southern United States before the Civil 
 War. Using this way(s) of doing things, overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for a farm is serious and stubborn and then is rotten into total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) for multiproduct, farm-level, crop production 
 in Madiun, Indonesia. With this approach, a nonparametric production edge of something/unexplored area is built, with 
 inefficiency being measured by the extent to which 
 firms operate below the edge of something/unexplored area. Using this approach, the cause of the inefficiency can be set apart and given out 
 as either inappropriate scale (scale inefficiency) or 
 off-isoquant production (pure technical inefficiency). 
 It should be noted that this procedure involves 
 relative technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), that is, the production 
 edge of something/unexplored area is built from the data and each farm's 
 performance is compared with the edge of something/unexplored area to point to/show 
 overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of the individual farm. 
 Risk is not included clearly in the model. The 
 model assumes that the degree of risk disgust is 
 the same across all farms in the sample, but does 
 not assume the degree of risk disgust, that is, 
 whether this group of farmers are risk-taking, riskneutral, or risk disliking. If this idea (you think is true) of constant 
 risk preference does not hold, the guessed inefficiencies will be overstated. Some say that 
 risk preferences may be different especially between large and small farms. However, the regres- 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 sion analysis conducted to test factors connected with inefficiency includes farm size as a possible factor, but as shown later, this is not (related to numbers) 
 related to inefficiency. 
 This analysis also assumes (group of things that are all pretty much the same) inputs. 
 Land is not included clearly in the model and it is 
 assumed that differences/different versions in soil types and life-creating ability do 
 not exist. This is a rather strong idea (you think is true), but 
 necessary in order to go ahead. Though data for difference/different version in land quality were not collected, the data for 
 each of the four villages surveyed were tested separately to test whether there might be large differences in land quality. These results are reported 
 below, but no a big differences in technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) are found to exist between villages. Evenness of other inputs, including labor, chemicals, seed, and management, is assumed also. 
 Differences in labor and management quality would 
 be very hard to decide/figure out and include in the 
 model. 
 In the model, it is assumed that x represents a 
 vector of n inputs, x = (x 1, x 2, ... , xn) E R&#126;; that 
 y represents the output vector of m outputs, y = (y 1, 
 y 2 , &mdash;_: , Ym) E R&#126;; and that there are k farms. It is 
 also assumed that firms face output prices pk E R&#126;, 
 input prices rk E R&#126;, target cost Ck &amp;gt; 0, and 
 money/money income Rk &amp;gt; 0. The matrix of watched/followed inputs, X, 
 of dimension (n,k) and the matrix of watched/followed outputs, Y, of dimension (m,k) form a change 
 set written as: 
 
 (1) 
 where z is the vector of strength (numbers that change/things that change) of activity (x;, y). The change set goes along with 
 the total product curve and shows maximum (able to be done) 
 output for a function showing constant returns to 
 scale. 
 For (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) (x;,y), overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) can be illustrated as follows: 
 
 (2) 
 where () is the level of inefficiency and 0; Y; is the 
 actual output of the ith farm. The farm is technically 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) if () equals 1. () can be understood/explained as the 
 ratio of possible ability to  actual output or (using other choices), 
 11 () is the ratio of (wasting very little while working or producing something) relative to the potential 
 edge of something/unexplored area output. Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) can be deter- 
 
 117 
 
 mined by solving the following linear programming 
 problem: 
 
 Max() 
 subject to: 
 
 +x,2z2 + ... +x,kzk &#126;xli 
 X21 z, + X22 Z2 + ··· + x2k zk &#126; X2; 
 x"z' 
 
 Xn1Z1 +xn2Z2 
 
 + ... +xnkZk&#126;Xn; 
 
 (3) 
 
 y,,z, +y,2z2+ ... +ylkzk-ylifJ&#126;O 
 Yz1 z, + Y22 Z2 + ··· + Y2k zk- Yz;O &#126; 0 
 Ymi z, 
 
 + Ym2 Z2 + ··· + Ymk Zk- Ym;O &#126; 0 
 
 where there are n input restrictions and m output 
 restrictions. The output restriction ( Yi! z 1 + Y; 2 z2 + ... 
 +Y;k zk) measures the output level of the (possible) overall technically (producing a lot with very little waste) farm for a particular 
 output. This is the maximum output that can be 
 produced by the ith farm, given its actual level of 
 inputs. For a single output situation, only one output 
 restriction is needed. 
 The term, Ym;O, is the actual production of output 
 m for the ith farm multiplied by the level of inefficiency, fJ. In a multi-output situation, Ymk is the 
 level of m output produced by firm k. Multi-input, 
 multi-output analysis of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is conducted for each firm in each of the three seasons. 
 This analysis tests overall (wasting very little while working or producing something) of the farm 
 and not (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the production of individual 
 outputs. If the farm is overall technically (producing a lot with very little waste), 
 then () = 1. However, if the farm is technically inefficient, ()) 1. When this is the case, the possible 
 maximum output is greater than the actual output of 
 the ith farm, making the ith farm inefficient relative 
 to the production edge of something/unexplored area by a factor of 1I(). 
 This model allows for the rotting of technical inefficiency between scale inefficiency (not 
 producing at constant returns to scale) and pure 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (operating off of the isoquant). 
 To decide/figure out the source of the inefficiency, a new 
 change set is needed: 
 
 T' = {( x,y):y &#126; Yz,Xz &#126; x,z E Rk+ ,Lk'.'Z; = 
 
 1} 
 ( 4) 
 
 where the strength (numbers that change/things that change), z, are restricted to 
 being summed to 1. This change allows for 
 increasing and decreasing returns to scale. 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Ecorwmics 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 118 
 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) (x;.Y) 
 can be shown as: 
 A* ( X;,y;) =max{ A:( X;,Ay;) E T'} 
 
 (5) 
 
 and is figured out by/decided by solving the following linear 
 programming problem: 
 
 The calculation of (wasting very little while working or producing something) for (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) (x;. 
 
 y) is now: 
 y* (x;,y;) = maxy{:(x;.'YY;) E 
 
 Max A 
 
 Maxy 
 subject to: 
 
 Z1 
 
 + X22 Z2 + ··· + x2k zk :5: X2; 
 
 + Xn2 Z2 + ··· + Xnk Zk :S; Xni 
 YllZt + Y12Z2 + ... + Y!kZk- yliA &#126; 0 
 Y21Z1 + Y22Z2 + ... + Y2kZk- Y2;A &#126; 0 
 Xn1 
 
 Yml Zt 
 
 Z1 
 
 xll Z1 
 X21 Z1 
 
 (6) 
 
 Ym1Z1 
 
 where the last restriction restricts the strength (numbers that change/things that change) to sum to 1. If A* = 1, the firm is purely 
 technically (producing a lot with very little waste) and operating on the production 
 edge of something/unexplored area, pointing to/showing that any inefficiencies that exist 
 are due to scale inefficiencies, that is, the wrong 
 level of input use along the edge of something/unexplored area. This measure 
 tests the ratio of possible ability to  actual output based 
 on the change set, T'. Using (} - and A*, it is 
 possible to decide/figure out scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) for (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) 
 (x;. y), which can be written as follows: 
 
 (7) 
 When (]&amp;gt; * ( x i- y) is equal to 1, the ith farm 
 operates at constant returns to scale. If(]&amp;gt; - (x;.Y;)-:/= 
 1, the firm is operating at nonconstant returns to 
 scale. However, using this measure, it is not possible 
 to know whether a farm operating at nonconstant 
 returns to scale is operating at increasing or decreasing returns to scale. So, another measure is needed. 
 To do this, the change set is changed again by (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) nonincreasing returns to 
 scale. The new change set can be written as: 
 T* = {( x,y) :y :5: Yz,Xz :5: x,z E Rk+ ,}:k-&#126; 1 z; :s; 
 
 1} 
 (8) 
 
 where the sum of the value of the strength (numbers that change/things that change), 
 z, is restricted so that it is less than 1. 
 
 + X12 Z2 + ··· + xlk zk :5: xli 
 + X22 Z2 + ··· + x2k zk :5: X2; 
 
 + xn2 Z2 + ··· + Xnk Zk :5: Xni 
 Ytt Z1 + Y12Z2 + ... + YtkZk- Y!i'Y&#126; 0 
 Y21 Zt + Y22 Z2 + ... + Y2k Zk- Y2;'Y &#126; 0 
 Xnl 
 
 + Ym2 Z2 + ··· + Ymk Zk- Ym;A &#126; 0 
 z 1 +z 2 + ... +zk= 1. 
 
 (9) 
 
 where y * can be calculated by using the following 
 linear programming problem: 
 
 subjectto:x 11 z 1 +x 12 z 2 + &mdash;_: +xlkzksxli 
 X21 
 
 T*} 
 
 Zt 
 
 ( 10) 
 
 + Ym2Z2 + ... + YmkZk -ymi'Y&#126; 0 
 z 1 + z 2 + ... + zk s 1. 
 
 This problem points to/shows that if (]&amp;gt; * =F 1, two other choices exist. If (]&amp;gt; * -:/= 1 and (} - = y *, the farm 
 produces at increasing returns to scale. If (]&amp;gt; * =F 1 
 and (} * =F y * , then the farm operates at decreasing 
 returns to scale. A firm operating at increasing returns to scale should increase input use in order to 
 (accomplish or gain with effort) (making a lot of an item so each item costs less). This would mean moving from Point A to Point B in Fig. 1 to increase 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). A situation in which farms are operating 
 at decreasing returns to scale hints that small 
 farms are doable/possible and that large farms would be better 
 off to decrease input levels or at least not increase 
 them, because to do so would be to further increase 
 inefficiency connected with returns to scale. 
 Money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) tests only test actual 
 working well relative to possible working well and do 
 not suggest weird thinking on the part of farmers who are 
 inefficient. The failure of farmers to use the most 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) ways of doing things of production may be due to the 
 cost of the purchase/getting/learning of information for an individual farmer being greater than the benefits or maybe 
 due to fixed valuable things, property rights, and (living somewhere), as 
 well as non-money-based goals of the farmers 
 (Byerlee, 1987). 
 To help identify possible factors related to inefficiencies, the (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices decided/figured out from the 
 linear programming problems are moved backward on ex- 
 
 R. V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 0996) 113-126 
 
 planatory (numbers that change/things that change) of age, education, farm size, and 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) using a Tobit analysis to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the effect 
 of these (numbers that change/things that change) on the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of the 
 individual farms. 
 This analysis can be helpful in targeting extension 
 activities to deal with technical inefficiencies in production. The linear Tobit moving backward in Eq. (II) is 
 used to identify possible factors connected with inefficiency. Tobit analysis is used because the (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)), overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), pure 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), and scale (wasting very little while working or producing something), are changed (numbers that change/things that change), having an upper limit of I.OO. Each 
 of these indices is moved backward on the explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change) of age, education, farm size, percent of 
 land owned, and (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing). Dummy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are used for education, representing junior high 
 school and high school. The limits/guidelines, B3 and 8 4 , 
 provide an idea of how much added/more levels of 
 education after the first (or most important) level affect (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 The changeable percent of land owned is an attempt to 
 test the effects of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) on technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 2 
 
 + j3 3 ED2; 
 + f3 4 ED3; + j35 FS; + j36 0L; + j31 DV; + E; 
 
 EFF; =a+ j3 1 Age;+ j32 ( Age;) 
 
 (11) 
 where: 
 EFF; is (wasting very little while working or producing something) index for farmer i. 
 Age; is Farmer age in years. 
 ED2; is Education dummy (number or thing that changes) = I if junior 
 high education, 0 otherwise. 
 ED3; is Education dummy (number or thing that changes) = I if high 
 school education, 0 otherwise. 
 is Farm size in hectares for firm i. 
 is Percent of operated land owned by farmer 
 i. 
 
 is (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) (number or thing that changes) expressed by 
 Herfindahl index. 
 is Limits/guidelines. 
 a,B 
 E; 
 is Error term. 
 It is guessed that younger, better educated 
 farmers are more technically (producing a lot with very little waste), due to better 
 skills and access to information. Farm size may 
 positively affect (wasting very little while working or producing something), if farmers can 
 (accomplish or gain with effort) some (making a lot of an item so each item costs less). (wasting very little while working or producing something) may be 
 higher for farmers who own their land, because of 
 greater (rewards or reasons for doing something) for (wasting very little while working or producing something) relative to those who 
 
 119 
 
 are renting. Farmers who produce only one crop in a 
 season may be more technically (producing a lot with very little waste) in production than those who are more (branched out/done different things). 
 
 3. Description of data and study area 
 The study area is the Madiun regency in the 
 west-central part of East Java, Indonesia, about 170 
 km west of Surabaya. The total area is 101 086 ha, of 
 which 44 122 ha were tilled with 32 407 ha being 
 watered in 1992. Dryland farming accounts for 
 about 24% of cropland in this regency (Kantor 
 Statistik, 1993). Land holdings are small, averaging 
 0.72 ha (Kantor Statistik, 1993). Once-a-year rainfall 
 during 1988-1992 ranged from 1511 mm in 199I (a 
 drought year) to 2329 mm in 1989. There are three 
 cropping seasons every year on watered land, March 
 to June, July to October, and November to February. 
 Data from 77 farms collected from interviews in 
 four villages in the Madiun regency of East Java, 
 Indonesia in 1994 are used in carefully studying technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of food crop production. A nonparametric, 
 whole-farm, production edge of something/unexplored area that includes many crops is guessed for each farm in each of the 
 three clear/separate cropping seasons: rainy, middle, and 
 dry. The crops included in this study represent the 
 major valuable things grown in this area: paddy rice, 
 com, soybeans, peanuts, mungbeans, cassava and a 
 pepper-onion intercrop. 
 Average age of all people who responded was 44.4 years 
 and ranged from 26 to 76 years. A total of 78% of 
 the people who responded had an elementary school education 
 or less, 16% were junior high school graduates, and 
 6% were high school graduates. Average farm size 
 for the survey was 0.82 ha, (a) little larger than the 
 regency average of 0.72, and varied from 0.13 ha to 
 2.28 ha. Of the 77 total farms, I4 farms (18%) 
 included nonirrigated cropping, and these are tested separately. A total of 87.0% of the farmers 
 owned land and 50.6% had land that was cash rented 
 whereas only 9.I% had a share rent arrangement, 
 figures similar with those found in other studies 
 (Brotonegoro et al., 1986; Sendjaja and Choliq, 
 1986). 
 The nine crops in this study covered 72% of the 
 plantable land in the Madiun regency in I992 (Kantor 
 Statistik, 1993). A comparison of the proportion of 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Ecorwmics 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 120 
 
 crop lands for the whole regency and for the 
 farmer sample is shown in Table 1. Rice is the most 
 commonly planted crop both in the sample and 
 across all farms in the regency. Com, soybeans, and 
 sugar cane are the next most important crops in 
 terms of collected land both in the sample and 
 for all farmers in the regency. The regency data do 
 not provide information about multicropping. 
 
 Table I 
 Proportion of crops grown in Madiun Regency and in the survey 
 sample 
 Madiun Regency (source: Kantor Statistik, 1993) 
 
 Rice 
 Com 
 Soybeans 
 Peppers I onions 
 Peanuts 
 Mungbeans 
 Cassava 
 Sugarcane 
 
 Plantable land area 
 (%) 
 
 Food crops grown 
 (%) 
 
 42 
 6 
 9 
 &amp;lt;I 
 3 
 2 
 3 
 7 
 
 58.1 
 6.4 
 12.4 
 0.5 
 4.5 
 2.8 
 5.6 
 9.4 
 
 Crops in sample 
 (%) 
 
 Land in sample 
 (%) 
 
 Survey farmers 
 
 Rainy season 
 Rice 
 Com 
 Peppers/onions 
 Sugarcane 
 Com/cassava 
 Middle season 
 Rice 
 Com 
 Sugarcane 
 Soybeans 
 Soybeanjmungbean 
 Soybean/peanut 
 Cassava 
 Dry season 
 Rice 
 Pepper/ onion 
 Soybeans 
 Com 
 Com-soybean 
 Com-mungbean 
 Com-peanut 
 Unplanted 
 Sugarcane 
 Other 
 
 The inputs used for crop production include seed, 
 measured in kilograms; three (material that makes plants grow better) inputs: urea, 
 TSP, and an grouped (material that makes plants grow better) input of other 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s used, all in kilograms; an grouped 
 chemical input in kilograms of active ingredient per 
 hectare; grouped labor input in man-days; and 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water in hours per crop. Output data for the 
 model is yield in kilograms per hectare for each 
 crop. These values also were decided/figured out from the 
 data collected from the farmer interviews. A more 
 described/explained description of the data is included in Llewelyn (1995). 
 Data for the moving backward analysis are also from the 
 farmer interviews. Farmers were questioned (related to/looking at/thinking about) age, education and farm size. Education was 
 recorded as elementary school (6 years or less), 
 junior high school (9 years), and high school ( 12 
 years). None of the farmers interviewed had attended 
 (after high school) education. Farm size is recorded in 
 hectares of land operated, both owned and rented. 
 The (number or thing that changes) for (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) is measured in terms of the 
 percentage of land owned (i.e. zero to 100). (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) was measured using the Herfindahl index 
 represented as: 
 n 
 
 DV 
 
 = 
 
 EP/ 
 
 ( 12) 
 
 i= 1 
 
 68 
 12 
 9 
 14 
 5 
 
 58 
 13 
 6 
 16 
 7 
 
 38 
 21 
 14 
 17 
 3 
 6 
 3 
 
 35 
 18 
 16 
 19 
 4 
 6 
 2 
 
 II 
 14 
 23 
 18 
 14 
 10 
 8 
 18 
 14 
 2 
 
 9 
 8 
 18 
 16 
 10 
 6 
 5 
 12 
 16 
 
 where P; is the proportion of the farm land 
 involved in a particular business/project. A value approaching 1.0 points to/shows (focusing on doing one thing very well) whereas smaller values reflect increasing (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing). For this sample, values ranged from 0.405 to 1.0 in the rainy and 
 middle seasons and from 0.337 to 1.0 in the dry 
 season and averaged 0.919, 0.879, and 0.814 for the 
 rainy, middle and dry seasons (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 4. Analysis and results 
 
 Using the linear programming way(s) of doing things organized and listed earlier, nonparametric analysis of relative technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is performed for food crop production on watered farms in each of the three seasons. 
 Three linear programs (Eq. (3), Eq. (6), and Eq. 
 (10)) are solved to provide the values of 0, A, and 'Y 
 for each individual farm. Table 2 summarizes the 
 crops tested in each seasonal analysis and the 
 
 R. V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) 113-126 
 
 number of farms in the sample which produce each 
 crop. A total of 61 farms is tested for technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in this analysis. 
 Average, lowest value, and highest overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), and scale 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) are reported for each season in Table 3, as 
 well as the number of farms operating at constant, 
 increasing, and decreasing returns to scale. The average overall (wasting very little while working or producing something) is calculated by dividing 1I 8 
 for each farm to get the overall (wasting very little while working or producing something) level 
 for that farm. This level of (wasting very little while working or producing something) then is averaged over all the farms in the sample. A farm that is 
 technically (producing a lot with very little waste) has an (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 100%. Average total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is calculated by dividing 1/ A for each farm and averaging these values, 
 and average scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) is figured out by/decided by dividing A/ (J for each farm and averaging these values 
 for the whole sample. Scale (producing a lot with very little waste) farms operate at 
 constant returns to scale in inputs (input level x2 on 
 Fig. 1), whereas those with decreasing returns have 
 input levels that are too high and those with increasing returns to scale have input levels that are too 
 low. Scale-inefficient firms may be purely technically (producing a lot with very little waste) (operating on the edge of something/unexplored area) but are not 
 using the correct level of input. 
 
 Table 2 
 Crops by season and number of farms tested for technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Number of farms 
 Rainy season 
 Rice 
 Corn 
 Peppers/ onions 
 Middle season 
 Rice 
 Corn 
 Soybeans 
 Soybeanjmungbeans 
 Soybeanjpeanuts 
 Dry season 
 Rice 
 Corn 
 Soybeans 
 Corn/ soybeans 
 Peppersjonions 
 Com/peanuts 
 Soybeanjmungbean 
 Cornjmungbean 
 
 53 
 9 
 7 
 33 
 14 
 13 
 2 
 5 
 9 
 14 
 18 
 11 
 11 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 
 121 
 
 Table 3 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis results 
 
 Rainy season 
 Overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) a 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number technically (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) b 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number technically (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 Scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) c 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number CRS farms d 
 Number IRS farms d 
 Number DRS farms d 
 Middle season 
 Overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number technically (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number technically (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 Scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number CRS farms 
 Number IRS farms 
 Number DRS farms 
 Dry season 
 Overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number technically (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number technically (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 Scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Minimum 
 Maximum 
 Number CRS farms 
 Number IRS farms 
 Number DRS farms 
 a 
 b 
 c 
 d 
 
 Mean 
 
 SD 
 
 0.981 
 0.844 
 1.000 
 44(72.1%) 
 0.988 
 0.876 
 1.000 
 50 (82.0%) 
 0.992 
 0.904 
 1.000 
 45 (73.8%) 
 I ( 1.6%) 
 15 (24.6%) 
 
 0.043 
 
 0.029 
 
 0.019 
 
 0.955 
 0.646 
 1.000 
 41 (67.2%) 
 0.977 
 0.749 
 1.000 
 48 (78.7%) 
 0.977 
 0.711 
 1.000 
 43 (70.5%) 
 8(13.1%) 
 10 (16.4%) 
 
 0.083 
 
 0.977 
 0.738 
 1.000 
 50 (82.0%) 
 0.989 
 0.745 
 1.000 
 58 (95.1 %) 
 0.987 
 0.746 
 1.000 
 50 (82.0%) 
 I (1.6%) 
 10 (16.4%) 
 
 0.063 
 
 Calculated using Eq. (3). 
 Calculated using Eq. (6). 
 Calculated using Eq. (7). 
 Decided/figured out using Eq. (7) and Eq. (I 0). 
 
 0.054 
 
 0.058 
 
 0.045 
 
 0.040 
 
 122 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) I 13-126 
 
 Results of the (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis in the rainy 
 season are summarized in Table 3. Overall and pure 
 technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) are high, as are scale (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste). The average overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 
 98.1% is (a) little higher than but almost the same as 
 values in other studies in Indonesia and Asia that 
 used a parametric approach in testing rice production (Widodo, 1986; Erwidodo, 1990; Dawson et 
 al., 1991). This study had a much larger sample size 
 than Dawson et al., and (a) little larger than the other 
 two studies. In a small sample, a few inefficient 
 farms would influence the results more than in a 
 larger sample. 
 The range in overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is between 84.4% and 100%, with 44 of the 61 farms 
 (72.1 %) being overall technically (producing a lot with very little waste), that is 
 8 = 1. An added six farms are purely technically 
 (producing a lot with very little waste), meaning they operate on the production 
 edge of something/unexplored area but not at constant returns to scale. The 
 average total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 98.8%, with a 
 minimum of 87.6%, pointing to/showing that the most purely 
 technically inefficient farm could only increase output by about 12.4% through (producing more with less waste) use of 
 inputs. Average scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 99.2% with a 
 minimum of 90.4%. Little difference/different version in these measures is obvious, with the standard mistakes ranging 
 from 0.019 to 0.043. Constant returns to scale are 
 obvious for 45 of the farms. Increasing returns to 
 scale hold for only one farm and 15 farms experience decreasing returns to scale. 
 In the middle season, average overall (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 
 95.5% with the highest (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 64.6%, as 
 shown in Table 3. Forty-one farms are technically 
 (producing a lot with very little waste), with seven of the remaining farms being 
 purely technically (producing a lot with very little waste). Forty-three farms have 
 constant returns to scale, whereas eight have increasing returns to scale and ten have decreasing returns. 
 The lower (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) connected with the middle 
 season for these farms may be explained by a situation where rainfall may change/differ  across farms leading to 
 production responses which would not be captured 
 by the (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis. The low rainfall in the dry 
 season is consistent for all parts of the regency, 
 while in the rainy season, rainfall is more consistent 
 across all farms than in the middle season. Rainfall 
 data by village are not available for analysis. 
 Relative technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the dry season is 
 summarized in Table 3. Average (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 97.7%, 
 
 with the highest (wasting very little while working or producing something) at 73.8%. Fifty of the 
 farms are overall technically (producing a lot with very little waste), with all but 
 three farms being purely technically (producing a lot with very little waste). Average total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 98.9%, and average 
 scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 98.7%. The 50 overall technically 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) farms operate at constant returns to scale, 
 whereas 10 of the 11 remaining farms have decreasing returns to scale, and one farm shows increasing 
 returns to scale. 
 Higher (material that makes plants grow better) use, especially of urea, seems 
 to be connected with the least (producing a lot with very little waste) farms in each 
 season, with average urea use of farms found to be 
 overall technically inefficient higher than the average 
 for the whole sample, with the least (producing a lot with very little waste) farm in 
 each season having the highest use of urea. High 
 (material that makes plants grow better) use may reflect a risk sneaky action, though 
 some studies have found that producers with higher 
 levels of risk disgust would be less likely to prefer 
 high levels of nitrogen (the adding of things to soil to make plants grow better) (Williams et al., 
 1992; SriRamaratnam et al., 1987). 
 Because of the idea (you think is true) of evenness of 
 inputs, especially of land quality, the (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 analysis was conducted for each of the four villages 
 where data were collected. If (group of things that are all pretty much the same) land 
 quality is wrongly assumed and land differences 
 actually account for the measured inefficiencies found 
 in the above analysis, the average (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for 
 each village should be 100% or nearly so, since the 
 edge of something/unexplored area for each individual village would be less 
 than or equal to the group production edge of something/unexplored area for 
 all farms. 
 However, in each season, the average (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) 
 for each individual village are only (a) little higher 
 than the averages for the group sample and none 
 are equal to 100%. In the rainy season, the average 
 overall technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for the four villages are 
 98.2%, 98.8%, 98.7%, and 98.4%, (match up each pair of items in order), 
 compared with the average for the whole sample of 
 98.1 %. The overall technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) by village 
 in the middle season average 95.7%, 96.1 %, 96.1 %, 
 and 95.8%, (match up each pair of items in order), while the average overall 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for the dry season for each village is equal to 97.9%, 97.8%, 98.2%, and 98.4%. 
 The average overall (wasting very little while working or producing something) for the whole sample 
 is equal to 95.5% for the middle season and 97.7% 
 for the dry season. The results are almost the same  for pure 
 technical and scale (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) for each village as 
 well. This points to/shows that assuming (group of things that are all pretty much the same) land 
 
 123 
 
 R. V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams j Farming-based Money flow 15 (/996) 113-126 
 
 Table 4 
 Moving backward analysis testing inefficiency for rainy-season farms 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 
 0.946 
 (4.84) ' ' 'a 
 0.0359 
 ( 17.55) &mdash;_: 
 -0.0004 
 ( - 15 .45) ' - ' 
 0.0071 
 (0.42) 
 -0.0003 
 (- 1.36) 
 0.1388 
 (3.32) ' -- 
 0.0057 
 (0.24) 
 0.0274 
 (0.82) 
 0.0603 
 ( 11.05) 
 84.77 
 61 
 
 0.952 
 (2.97) ' ' ' 
 0.0356 
 (19.87) ' . ' 
 -0.0003 
 ( -17.41) ... 
 0.0031 
 (0.21) 
 -0.0003 
 (- 1.38) 
 0.1497 
 (4.08) ' ' ' 
 0.0014 
 (0.07) 
 0.057 
 ( 1.95) ' 
 0.0528 
 ( 11.05) 
 92.77 
 61 
 
 0.993 
 (3.15) ' -- 
 0.0359 
 (20.38) &mdash;_: 
 -0.0003 
 (- 17.89) &mdash;_: 
 0.0017 
 (0.12) 
 -0.0002 
 ( -0.86) 
 0.1396 
 (3.87) -- ' 
 0.0086 
 (0.43) 
 0.053 
 ( 1.84) - 
 0.0519 
 ( 11.05) 
 93.83 
 61 
 
 Age 
 Age 2 
 Farm size 
 Percent owned land 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 (Herfmdahl index) 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 Junior High School 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 High School 
 Sigma 
 Log chance 
 Number of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 Numbers in parentheses are /-statistics. 
 ', Points to/shows importance at a = 0.1 0. ' ' ' Points to/shows importance at a 
 
 a 
 
 = 
 
 0.0 1. 
 
 Table 5 
 Moving backward analysis testing inefficiency for middle-season farms 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 
 0.928 
 (4.12) -- ,. 
 0.0372 
 (11.65) -- ' 
 -0.0004 
 (-10.61). ' . 
 -0.0145 
 (- 0.43) 
 -0.0002 
 (- 0.53) 
 0.0920 
 (I .45) 
 0.0183 
 (0.49) 
 0.0633 
 (1.00) 
 0.0977 
 ( 11.05) 
 55.27 
 61 
 
 0.993 
 (5.73) &mdash;_: 
 0.0391 
 ( 16.17) - ' - 
 -0.0004 
 (- 14.64) - ' - 
 -0.0057 
 ( -0.22) 
 -0.1030 
 (- 0.35) 
 0.0419 
 (0.87) 
 0.0177 
 (0.62) 
 0.0917 
 ( 1.92) - 
 0.0741 
 (11.05) 
 72.21 
 61 
 
 1.002 
 (6.29) &mdash;_: 
 0.0358 
 (14.11) - ' - 
 -0.0004 
 (- 12.89) ' ' ' 
 -0.0146 
 ( -0.55) 
 -0.0001 
 ( -0.33) 
 0.1493 
 (2.95) &mdash;_: 
 0.0188 
 (0.63) 
 0.0435 
 (0.87) 
 0.0777 
 (11.05) 
 69.25 
 61 
 
 Age 
 Age 2 
 Farm size 
 Percent owned land 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 (Herfindahl index) 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 Junior High School 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 High School 
 Sigma 
 Log chance 
 Number of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 Numbers in parentheses are /-statistics. 
 ' Points to/shows importance at a = 0.1 0. ' ' ' Points to/shows importance at a = 0.0 I. 
 
 a 
 
 124 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1996) I 13-126 
 
 quality across the regency for this sample of farms 
 does not distort the results for no good reason. 
 
 5. Factors connected with inefficiency 
 A changed moving backward or tobit model is used in 
 each of the above multiproduct situations to test 
 the factors connected with technical inefficiencies. 
 The Tobit moving backward defined in Eq. (11) is guessed 
 using the Tobit procedure in TSP Version 4.2B (TSP 
 International, 1993 ). (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures are moved backward on age, farm size, percent of owned land, a 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) dummy (number or thing that changes), and two dummy 
 (numbers that change/things that change) representing education levels. Results for 
 rainy season watered farms are presented in Table 4. 
 In the rainy season, farmers' age shows a significant quadratic relationship with all three measures of 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). (wasting very little while working or producing something) increases with age, then eventually decreases. Also, (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing), represented by the Herfindahl index described in Eq. (12), 
 is shown to have a significant relationship with 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). The value of the guessed coefficient is positive, pointing to/showing that greater (focusing on doing one thing very well) in production is related to higher relative 
 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). As (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) increases and more 
 crops are grown, (wasting very little while working or producing something) declines. It is possible 
 that the increased inefficiency with (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 may be short-lived as farmers improve their ability to 
 grow new crops. Both the age and (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are (meaningful numbers) at a = 0.05. 
 High school education is found to be related significantly in a positive way with total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical and 
 scale (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) at a = 0.1 0. A (related to studying numbers) relationship is not found to exist between education and 
 overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). All of the other (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are (related to numbers) not significant for any of the (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices. 
 In the middle season, age again is related significantly to (wasting very little while working or producing something) (Table 5). However, the (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) (number or thing that changes) is found to be connected only with 
 scale (wasting very little while working or producing something), with greater (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) leading 
 to lower scale (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste). Also, the dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 for high school education is found to be significant 
 at a = 0.10 for the equation with total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). No other (numbers that change/things that change) are (meaningful numbers). 
 The results for the dry season are just like those 
 of the rainy season, as found in Table 6. Farmers' 
 age again shows a (meaningful numbers) quadratic 
 
 Table 6 
 Moving backward analysis testing inefficiency for dry-season fanns 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Pure technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 
 1.045 
 (7.27) ' ''a 
 0.0328 
 (I 1.63) ' ' ' 
 -0.0003 
 ( -10.35) -- ' 
 0.0323 
 (1.23) 
 -0.000005 
 ( -0.02) 
 0.1948 
 (3.52) ' ' ' 
 -0.0038 
 (- 0.12) 
 0.0660 
 (1.34) 
 0.0858 
 (I 1.05) 
 63.24 
 61 
 
 1.011 
 (5.80) ' -- 
 0.0345 
 (14.20) ' ' ' 
 -0.0003 
 (- 12.64) -- ' 
 0.0336 
 ( 1.48) 
 0.0001 
 (0.39) 
 0.1525 
 (3.21) -- ' 
 -0.0096 
 ( -0.35) 
 0.0624 
 (1.48) 
 0.0737 
 (I 1.05) 
 72.46 
 61 
 
 1.045 
 (6.98) &mdash;_: 
 0.0350 
 (15.57) ' '. 
 -0.0003 
 (-13.84) ... 
 O.OI22 
 (0.58) 
 -0.1441 
 ( -0.06) 
 0.1604 
 (3.64) ' . ' 
 0.0098 
 (0.39) 
 0.0675 
 (1.73) - 
 0.0683 
 (11.05) 
 77.13 
 61 
 
 Age 
 Age 2 
 Fann size 
 Percent owned land 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 (Herfindahl index) 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 Junior High School 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) 
 High School 
 Sigma 
 Log chance 
 Number of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 a 
 
 Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. 
 
 * Points to/shows importance at a = 0.1 0. ' * ' Points to/shows importance at a = 0.0 I. 
 
 R.V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 ( 1996) 113-126 
 
 type of relationship with (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures. Greater 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) is found to be connected with lower 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) for all three (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices, and high 
 school education has a significant (a= 0.1 0) relationship with scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) but not with overall 
 technical or total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Other (numbers that change/things that change), such as farm size, percent of land owned, or 
 junior high school education, are not found to have a 
 significant association with technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) as 
 measured for this sample of farmers. 
 
 6. Summary and ends/end results 
 Nonparametric analysis of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for 
 watered farms in Madiun, Indonesia is conducted 
 using models based on ways of doing things developed and 
 used by Grabowski and Pasurka (1987). This procedure allows the relative technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for each 
 farm to be decided/figured out and for inefficiencies to be 
 rotten into total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical inefficiency (operating off of the isoquant or production edge of something/unexplored area) and 
 scale inefficiency (not producing at constant returns 
 to scale in input use). This way(s) of doing things also allows 
 for multi-input, multi-output situations and does not 
 require restrictions or ideas (you think are true) (related to/looking at/thinking about) functional form to be placed on the data. This analysis 
 provides information on the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 
 multiproduct food-crop producing farms in Indonesia 
 and some of the factors connected with inefficiency. 
 Testing farms for each season under watered 
 conditions shows that average overall technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 98.1% in the rainy season, while in the 
 middle season it is 95.5% and is (a) little higher at 
 97.7% in the dry season. In each case, the majority 
 of farms are technically and scale (producing a lot with very little waste), operating 
 at constant returns to scale. Most farms that are scale 
 inefficient are operating at decreasing returns to scale, 
 pointing to/showing too much/too many input levels. 
 Tobit analysis to test inefficiency shows that 
 farmers' age and the level of (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) are the 
 most (meaningful numbers) factors connected with 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures. A quadratic relationship between age and (wasting very little while working or producing something) exists in each season, with (wasting very little while working or producing something) increasing with age at first, 
 then decreasing. Greater (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) is connected 
 with lower (wasting very little while working or producing something) levels in the rainy and dry 
 seasons for each of the three (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices. The 
 
 125 
 
 same relationship happens in the middle season only 
 for scale (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Also, having a high school education is 
 related positively to higher levels of total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the rainy and middle seasons and with 
 scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the rainy and dry seasons but at a 
 lower confidence level than age or (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 (a= 0.1 0). None of the other (numbers that change/things that change), including 
 farm size, (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) arrangements, or junior high school 
 education is (meaningful numbers) in any season. 
 Farmers operating inefficiently are doing so more 
 often because of scale inefficiencies rather than pure 
 technical inefficiencies, and most of these 
 farmers are operating at decreasing returns to scale 
 in inputs rather than increasing returns to scale, often 
 using higher levels of (material that makes plants grow better), especially nitrogen, 
 than (producing more with less waste) farmers. In Indonesia, (compared to other things) 
 high (material that makes plants grow better) payments have been in place until the 
 early 1990s and since have (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) by over 20%. 
 The data in this study were collected in 1994, after 
 the reduction in the (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment began. Some 
 farmers may still be using higher levels of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 than are (producing a lot with very little waste), maybe due to continuing production ways of doing things which began when (material that makes plants grow better)s were 
 paid-for. This may account for the decreasing 
 returns to scale found to exist. Another possibility is 
 that this is a risk-reducing plan, Williams et al. 
 ( 1992) and SriRamaratnam et al. ( 1987) have shown 
 this may not be true. It should be noted that the 
 majority of farms in this sample operate at constant 
 returns to scale, pointing to/showing that they are using correct 
 levels of inputs, relative to other farms in the sample. 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) increases, then eventually (lowers in number/gets worse) with 
 age. This is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with what would be expected. 
 Targeting younger and older farmers for extension 
 activities could increase their levels of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) relative to middle (old/allowed to get old/got older) farmers. 
 Higher levels of (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) in cropping practices are related to lower technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), 
 especially in the rainy and dry seasons. Farmers 
 who are more (made to do one thing very well) with only one or two crops 
 grown in a season have higher levels of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). So, government programs that have 
 tried to (change to flow on a different path/change to point to, or focus on, something else) cropland away from rice production toward secondary food crop production may 
 actually lead to increased technical inefficiency in 
 production. 
 Having a high school education is related to 
 
 126 
 
 R. V. Llewelyn, J.R. Williams/ Farming-based Money flow 15 U996) 113-126 
 
 higher technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in production in this study. 
 Only 7% of the sample of farmers have a high 
 school education, but these farmers (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) are 
 able to operate at much higher technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) than other farmers. These results suggest that 
 extension education could be effective, especially if 
 targeted to farmers who have had limited educational 
 opportunities. Those with college levels 
 may have access to information that farmers with 
 only elementary or junior high school education do 
 not. Providing access to information to farmers with 
 lower levels of education may help them to increase 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in production relative to farmers 
 with higher levels of education. 
 
 Responses 
 
 The authors wish to admit/recognize/respond to the University 
 of Merdeka, Madiun and especially Ir. Wuryantoro 
 for the help in collecting data for this study. 
 The helpful comments of Allen Featherstone and 
 Mich<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
