WP 2003-30 
 September 2003 
 
 Working Paper 
 Department of Applied Money flow and Management 
 Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853-7801 USA 
 
 (away from cities) Poorness Patterns: 
 Development Policy Effects/results/suggestions 
 
 Christopher B. Barrett 
 
 It is the Policy of Cornell University actively to support (state where all things are equal) of educational 
 and employment opportunity. No person will  be denied  to any 
 educational program or activity or be denied employment on the basis of any 
 legally prohibited (unfair treatment based on skin color, age, etc.) involving, but not limited to, such factors as 
 race, color, belief, religion, national or (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) origin, sex, age or handicap. 
 The University is committed to the maintenance of helping 
 programs which will promise the continuation of such (state where all things are equal) of opportunity. 
 
 Rural Poorness Patterns: 
 Development Policy Effects/results/suggestions 
 Christopher B. Barrett* 
 
 September 2003 Rewriting/redoing 
 Prepared for invited presentation to the 
 25th International Conference of Farming-based Money-flow experts 
 Durban, South Africa 
 * Department of Applied Money flow and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 
 14853-7801 USA; email: cbb2@cornell.edu This paper has benefited greatly from 
 conversations, group efforts and/or comments from Larry Blume, Doug Brown, 
 Michael Carter, Paul Cichello, Alain DeJanvry, Bruce Gardner, Ravi Kanbur, Dan 
 Maxwell, John McPeak, Bart Minten, Chris Moser, Andrew Mude, Festus Murithi, Ben 
 Okumu, Willis Oluoch-Kosura, Frank Place, Tom Reardon, David Sahn, David Stifel, 
 Brent Swallow and Erik Thorbecke, and from data collection and analysis help 
 from Solomon Desta, Travis Lybbert, Paswel Phiri, Jean Claude Randrianarisoa, Jhon 
 Rasambainarivo and Justine Wangila, although none of them bear any responsibility for 
 any remaining errors of mine. This work has been made possible, in part, by support 
 from the United States (service business/government unit/power/functioning) for International Development (USAID) Grant No. LAGA-00-96-90016-00 through the BASIS CRSP, and the Plans and Analyses for Growth 
 and Access (SAGA) cooperative agreement through Africa Bureau, USAID. The views 
 expressed here are mine and do not represent any official (service business/government unit/power/functioning). 
  Copyright 2003 by Christopher B. Barrett. All rights reserved. Readers may make word for word copies of this document for (not business-related) purposes by any means, gave/given that this copyright (see/hear/become aware of) appears on all such copies. 
 
 Rural Poorness Patterns: 
 Development Policy Effects/results/suggestions 
 ABSTRACT 
 This paper summarizes a few key findings from a rich and growing body of research on 
 the nature of (away from cities) poorness and, especially, the development policy effects/results/suggestions of 
 (compared to other things) recent findings and (happening now) work. Maybe the most basic lesson of 
 recent research on (away from cities) poorness is the need to distinguish short-lived from long-lasting 
 poorness. The existence of (existing all over a large area) long-lasting poorness also raises the possibility of 
 poorness traps. I discuss some of the scientific and possible challenges of identifying 
 and explaining poorness traps. In policy terms, the difference between short-lived and 
 long-lasting poorness hints a need to tell the difference between "(things carried by a ship, etc.) net" and "safety net" 
 helping actions and a central role for effective targeting of helping actions. 
 
 1 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 "Most of the people in the world are poor, so if we knew the 
 money flow/money-based studies of being poor we would know much of the money flow/money-based studies 
 that really matters. Most of the world=s poor people earn their 
 living from farming, so if we knew the money flow/money-based studies of farming 
 we would know much of the money flow/money-based studies of being poor." 
 - T.W. Schultz (1980) 
 T.W. Schultz's words are no less true today than they were when he opened his 
 1979 Nobel Prize in Money flow acceptance lecture with them almost a quarter century 
 ago. Money flow has anyway advanced significantly in its understanding of poorness 
 since Schultz's important (things that are given/work that's done). This paper tries to summarize a few key findings 
 from a rich and growing body of research over the 25 years since Schultz about the 
 nature of (away from cities) poorness and, especially, the development policy effects/results/suggestions of 
 (compared to other things) recent findings and (happening now) work. 
 As will be explained in greater detail below, money-flow experts have begun to focus 
 more exactly on the useful difference between short-lived and long-lasting poorness. Each 
 has a different hint/result/effect for poorness help policy. Policymakers' and 
 (people who work to find information)' greatest concern revolves around long-lasting poorness, which seems to result 
 from low initial gifts of productive valuable things, inability to create high returns 
 from the valuable things one owns, extreme shocks that wipe out saved wealth, or some 
 combination of these. Valuable thing stocks appear central to the story of long-lasting poorness 
 because returns on valuable things can be endogenously increasing for any of a few reasons and 
 because (money-related) market failures can stop the poor's ability to invest in productive 
 valuable things to get on top of/win dividing lines at which the returns on valuable things are increasing. This has 
 significant effects/results/suggestions for both the design of research to identify such dividing lines and 
 for the targeting and focus of policies meant to address long-lasting poorness. 
 RURAL POVERTY DYNAMICS: WHAT WE KNOW 
 Poorness is a complex, (caused by more than one thing) idea  reflecting a low level of well-being. 
 We money-flow experts tend to use income or expense flows as a substitute for welfare and so 
 to use basically and mostly random - although often carefully/strictly/in a high-quality way built - poorness lines to define 
 who is and is not poor. This approach is appropriately (argued over) within the social 
 sciences, and there has been (large/relatively large) advance in the use of multidimensional 
 2 
 
 poverty measures (Bourguignon and Chakravarty 2002, Duclos et al. 2003). But for the 
 sake of simpleness, here I accept income as our discipline's most in control/most common welfare measure 
 and move on. 
 Although the measurement of poorness is an important technical concern, my 
 interest lies not in where one locates a poorness line, nor in exactly how many people 
 fall below it, nor how far below it, at a given point in time. Although these are 
 clearly important issues, they are basically and mostly static concerns. Rather, I wish to 
 focus on the patterns of measures of well-being, and only loosely relative to a poorness 
 line - who climbs above it, lowers/moves downward/originates below it or swings around it - because poorness 
 patterns is the more basic policy concern. 
 The reason for poorness patterns' importance is that some but not all of the poor 
 need help through policy. As the rest of this section explains more fully, policy research 
 needs to tell the difference between short-lived and long-lasting poorness. One class of policies - 
 safety nets - can effectively block the transitorily poor's lowering/downward movement/family origins into long-lasting poorness. 
 Another class of helping actions - which I term (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets, for reasons explained below - 
 can help the almost always poor find a pathway out of poorness. Picking the right policy to 
 help a given poor subpopulation depends on an correct understanding of (away from cities) 
 poorness patterns. 
 At this point, a brief topic change into the simple mathematics of income patterns 
 may help frame the resulting discussion with a bit more quality. Let me take the 
 standard approach of using income as an ((not totally pure/not totally correct)) measure of well-being. For any 
 individual (related to watching or recording something) unit (a person, household, village or nation), measured 
 income, Y, is only the sum of earned returns from productive valuable things, (lasting for a short time) 
 income shocks and measurement error, 
 Y = A`R + _T + _M 
 
 (1) 
 
 where A is a vector of productive valuable things controlled by the household, R is a vector of 
 returns on the valuable things in A, _T represents short-lived (coming from the outside of something) income that is 
 independent of valuable thing working well (e.g., lottery winnings, gifts),1 and _M represents 
 (person who works to find information) measurement error. Returns are (random/including random data points), this way 
 R = r + _R 
 
 (2) 
 
 1 
 
 Payments from traveling worker household members would fall under A'R, as it relates to an portion of valuable things (labor 
 power) to a particular activity and location. 
 
 3 
 
 where r is the expected return and _R is an (coming from the outside of something) shock to physical working well 
 (e.g., due to rainfall or pests) or input or output prices. Assume all shocks (_M , _R and 
 _T) are mean zero, constant variance and (one after the other)ly independent. This (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) shows 
 income as a function of valuable thing holdings, casting it in a familiar (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection) management 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). The mean and variance of income are this way simply 
 E[Y] = A`r 
 
 (3) 
 
 V[Y] = A'V[_R]A + V[_T] + V[_M], 
 
 (4) 
 
 (match up each pair of items in order). Expected income depends basically on one's gift of 
 productive valuable things and the sorts of returns one can collect  from those valuable things thanks to 
 production technologies and markets. Income (quality of changing over time or at different places) results not just from 
 (random/including random data points) returns to land, labor, (money-related) savings and other productive valuable things, but also 
 due to dangerous nature/wild up and down prices both in unearned short-lived income and, in an econometrician's 
 sample, in measurement error. 
 Substituting (2) into (1) and then totally (making different) produces an expression for 
 income change as a function of change in valuable thing stocks, change in expected returns on 
 valuable things, and different shocks2: 
 dY = dA`R + A`dr + A`d_R + d_T + d_M 
 
 (5) 
 
 Of course, because the errors are all mean zero and (one after the other)ly independent, ex ante 
 expected income change reduces to just 
 E[dY] = dA`r + A`dr 
 
 (6) 
 
 This equation clearly shows/includes the core of poorness reduction plans over at least the past 
 half century. In the first term on the righthand side of equation (6), dA reflects 
 (dis)investment patterns, including accidental/not by choice valuable thing shocks due to, for example, theft, 
 natural disasters, injuries or permanent illness. For many years, anti-poorness policy has 
 focused on changing Y through dA, via land reform to move (from one place to another) land to the poor, 
 education and health programs to build up the poor's workers, after-drought 
 animals restocking to build up again groups negatively/badly (changed by/affected by) (related to the Earth's weather) shocks, etc. 
 Over the past fifteen to twenty years, increasing attention has been paid to the second 
 term, focusing on dr, the change in expected returns to productive valuable things. 
 
 2 
 
 This simple separations is almost the same as Dercon's (2000) new and interesting approach, but without the need of 
 (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) the ideas (you think are true) that there is a (like nothing else) curved production technology, that markets are complete and 
 competitive, or that families (make as big as possible) (money made/good things received) (equally, that families' consumption and production 
 decisions are separatable). Those ideas (you think are true) basically and mostly rule out the poorness trap things to which I turn 
 temporarily. 
 
 4 
 
 Policymakers and development smart people  have expressed renewed concern about 
 (related to computers and science) advance for smallholder farmers - latestly in the form of 
 sciencenological and agroecological approaches to boosting yields - and about marketoriented part/areaal and macroeconomic changes meant to improve the output/input 
 price ratios net of market access costs faced by the (away from cities) poor. 
 Short-lived and long-lasting poorness 
 Recent research has highlighted, however, that much poorness is short-lived in 
 nature.3 Put differently, because the errors in equations (1) and (2) are mean zero, many 
 (understandings/achieving goals) are necessarily negative, leading to lower-than-expected incomes that push 
 people a bit below the poorness line for a (compared to other things) short time, although their 
 expected incomes lie above the poorness line. More than that, (for a short time) poors are 
 sometimes chosen by people as part of a long-term collection plan, as almost 
 any graduate student knows from personal experience. The incomes of the transitorily 
 poor - whether (lasting for a short time) poorness is by chance or by choice - (after that) recover as 
 new draws are made on income's (random/including random data points) elements (_R, _T) or as they begin to enjoy 
 the payoff from (without being forced) previous/unavoidable income, often without any external help 
 from (organizations that help people) or governments. While even short-lived poorness is plainly undesirable - 
 and safety nets to keep the transitorily poor from falling into long-lasting poorness are 
 critically important, as we discuss below - the obvious ability (to hold or do something) of the transitorily poor 
 to pull themselves up by their (helping things) means that policy helping actions on their 
 behalf are not always needed. In fact, expensive government helping actions that risk 
 disturbing their independence may sometimes be undesirable. 
 One must be careful, however, not to jump to the wrong end/end result that 
 helping actions for the poor are therefore unnecessary or undesirable. For one 
 thing, exit rates from (and entry rates into) poorness tend to be overstated due to 
 measurement error, which can accidentally lead to overestimation of short-lived 
 poorness and a policy bias against helping action to help the poor. The basic problem is 
 that d_T, the change in short-lived income, d_R, the change in returns on valuable things, and d_M, 
 the change in measurement error, all necessarily lead to moving backward toward the mean in 
 panel data. While the former two make up/be equal to true change in short-lived income - due to 
 3 
 
 See in particular one of the original studies in this vein, by Grootaert and Kanbur (1995), the excellent 
 recent volume by Baulch and Hoddinott (2000), and the different studies referred to (in there/within that). 
 
 5 
 
 interruptions in interhousehold moves (from one place to another) or to crop yield shocks, for example - they 
 cannot be easily separated in data from changes in measurement error across periods 
 due to list of questions rewritings/redoings, person who responded tiredness or replacement, new field 
 enumerators, etc. Because d_T and d_R are mostly impossible to identify separately 
 from d_M, measurement error tends to inflates guesses of short-lived poorness by 
 creating (not made by nature/fake) (quality of changing over time or at different places) in incomes, leading to upward bias in guesses of the share 
 of the poor people who can pull themselves out of poorness unassisted (Baulch 
 and Hoddinott 2000, Luttmer 2002).4 
 Safety nets and (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets 
 The problem of getting guesses of short-lived poorness rates correct matters 
 because the almost always poor5 cannot climb out of poorness on their own without external 
 help. Such help can come directly, in the form of moves (from one place to another), or indirectly, in 
 the form of policy changes that relax restrictions on the choice sets faced by the 
 almost always poor, enabling them to take advantage of (before that/before now) (unable to be used or understood) 
 opportunities and to exit poorness freely. 
 Helping actions to combat long-lasting poorness can take one of two forms: (done before) 
 and (related to becoming a better person). The first, (done before) helping actions, are safety nets, which aim to 
 prevent the non-poor and transitorily poor from falling into long-lasting poorness. Because 
 people can become transitorily poor up to some dividing line level and still recover on their 
 own, often quickly, the role of safety nets is to keep them from crossing that dividing line, 
 from becoming almost always poor. Safety nets restrict entry into the ranks of the 
 almost always poor. In the previous/coming before note, safety nets cut short the lower tails of the 
 distributions of _T and _R. Emergency feeding programs, crop or unemployment 
 insurance and disaster help are common examples of formal safety net 
 helping actions by governments and outside (services businesses/government units). Social friendship networks and 
 4 
 
 In sample, there are added/more problems of guessing connected with possible/likely bias due to 
 nonrandom (lower numbers) from the sample over time due to person who responded death, refusal to participate in later 
 survey rounds, residence-based sampling after endogenous household division or union, and failure to 
 trace traveling worker families. The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is quite mixed as to how significant a problem these things 
 present/cause. See the Spring 1998 issue of the Journal of (Hiring, training, and firing department), Politician et al. (2000), Falaris (2003) 
 and Rosenzweig (2003) for details. 
 5 
 I use the terms "almost always" and "constantly" poor interchangeably. Some analysts like to try to 
 tell the difference between the two based on frequency of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) below a poorness line or mean income 
 over a period relative to the poorness line. This paper, however, is not the place to dig into these 
 technical details. 
 
 6 
 
 systems informal back and forth/equal between people insurance often provide safety nets internal to communities. 
 The common partial displacement of the last thing just mentioned by the former should serve as a caution 
 on the design of safety nets, however, to (make small) the crowding out of informal 
 safety nets.6 
 The second, (related to becoming a better person) form of poorness reduction helping action is meant to lift 
 people or to help them climb out of poorness. I refer to these as (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets. Safety nets 
 catch people, keeping them from falling too far; then people step off the net and climb 
 back up on their own. (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets, very differently, are used to help climbers get on top of/win 
 (blocking or stopping things) or even to lift objects, overcoming the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) forces(gravity, in the case of 
 literal (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets) that would otherwise keep them down. In the note we are using, 
 (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets shift A and r. Familiar examples of (things carried by a ship, etc.) net policies include land reform, 
 targeted school feeding programs, targeted microfinance or farming-based input 
 subsidization projects, etc. Safety nets block pathways into long-lasting poorness for the nonpoor and transitorily poor. Well-designed and used (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets can set people 
 onto pathways out of long-lasting poorness. 
 Identifying and explaining long-lasting poorness 
 Because different people need different types of help through policy or 
 project helping actions, (people who work to find information) and policymakers must be able to sort between them. 
 The descriptive job  of telling apart the almost always poor from the transitorily poor is 
 a significant challenge. One can establish ex post whether people recovered after falling 
 below a poorness line, gave/given one has (good) enough time series data on the same 
 people or families. But at the time when policymakers need to decide on 
 possible/likely helping actions, it can be hard to (describe the future) ex ante from data who will 
 recover and who will not. So the attention paid over the past ten years to identifying 
 the related things of "long-lasting" or "(constant/not going away)" poorness.7 Analysts can use past panel data to 
 identify good (describe the future)ors of future well-being in order to be able to (describe the future) which of 
 today's poor are likely to become non-poor by some future date. If done correctly, 
 such guess can provide a basis for targeting helping actions among the poor, 
 enabling policymakers to tell the difference between the non-poor and the transitorily poor, 
 6 
 
 See Cox and Jimenez (1992), Dercon and Krishnan (2003) and Albarran and Attanasio (honest/appearing soon) for scientific 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on such crowding out effects. 
 7 
 See, for example, Baulch and Hoddinott (2000), World Bank (2000), Carter and May (2001) or the papers 
 in Hulme and Guard/guide (2003). 
 
 7 
 
 for whom (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets - as clear/separate from safety nets - are unnecessary and possibly even 
 accidentally harmful, and the almost always poor who need direct help if they are 
 to escape poorness. 
 The trick therefore lies in our ability to rot poorness between those who 
 are, to use Carter and May's (2001) words/word choices, "(related to what holds something together and makes it strong)" poor - that is, expected 
 to remain almost always poor unless they receive help - and those who are 
 "(randomly/including random data points)" poor, who one would expect to exit poorness freely before 
 long, (in other words), the transitorily poor. This sort of rotting has great possible ability to be/possible ability as  a tool 
 for informing policy design because governments, (people who give money or other things) and operational (services businesses/government units) 
 (e.g., NGOs, or many-sided (services businesses/government units) of the United Nations) faced with large numbers of 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) poor people or families face a clearly different challenge than do 
 those serving large numbers of (randomly/including random data points) poor people. Once we know how to 
 tell apart the  transitorily or (randomly/including random data points) poor from the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) or almost always 
 poor using panel data econometric methods, the next challenge is to identify the 
 (machines/methods/ways) that lead to long-lasting poorness in order that helping actions can treat causes 
 rather than only signs of sickness. 
 Some people are born into poorness and have difficulty escaping because they do 
 not enjoy the education, health or nutrition needed/demanded to pile up important physical 
 height and thinking-related ability (to hold or do something) early in life (Lowery 1981, Strauss and Thomas 1998, Basu 
 1999), because they do not inherit land or capital (good) enough to add value to their human 
 capital, or because they cannot effectively employ the valuable things they own to create 
 income (Carter and May 1999). There is no good evidence of which I am 
 aware on (between parents and children) earnings transmission in poor (away from cities) settings. 
 Hopefully, before too much longer we will have good data and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on this 
 question from Africa, Asia, Latin America or Central and Eastern Europe. In the 
 meantime, the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from higher income countries such as Finland and the United 
 States hints that even where governments offer (compared to other things) generous support for 
 children's education, health and nutrition and where (money-related) markets are (compared to other things) 
 (easy to get to, use, or understand) even to poor people, guessed elasticities of (between parents and children) earnings 
 transmission are high, on the order of 0.6-0.8, and mostly (named after/discovered by/caused by) credit 
 restrictions rather than to born-in ability.8 
 8 
 
 See Lucas and Pekkala (2003) for an especially interesting study using an long/big data set from 
 Finland. They find low transmission from parents' earnings to those of their children, but high 
 
 8 
 
 A version of the "very simple (or too small) (something valuable you get when older relatives die)" explanation of long-lasting poorness looks at 
 somewhat larger scales to explain long-lasting poorness on the basis of (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.), both at the 
 macro scale of nation states and subcontinental areas (Bloom and Sachs 1998, Gallup 
 and Sachs 1998) and at intra-national scale (Hentschel et al. 2000, Elbers et al. 2001, Jalan 
 and Ravallion 2002, Ravallion and Datt 2002). Valuable things from nature such as soils, forests, 
 water and wildlife are a basic input to (away from cities) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), health shocks due to 
 climate-dependent disease (that can spread from person to person) are a first (or most important) threat to jobs, local 
 control influences patterns of public products (that are bought and sold)  provision, and the (likelihood to go bad in a short time) and low 
 value-to-bulk ratio of raw valuable things makes market access important to making money. 
 Because of the coordination problems built-in to many valuable things from nature management 
 and marketing decisions, a meso-level poorness trap can come out  where the total 
 gift is weak and (machines/methods/ways) to resolve coordination problems do not yet exist 
 (Barrett and Swallow 2003). (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) plainly matters to patterns of poorness and 
 poorness patterns. 
 Where some face poorness because of very simple (or too small) (something valuable you get when older relatives die) and a bad start to life, 
 others start off luckier but fall into poorness because of an bad shock or series of 
 shocks. Natural disasters and civil battle(s)/tension are sad not just because of the (lasting for a short time) 
 displacement and (not having something wanted or needed) they bring but, most all, because they can wipe out in a 
 moment what families have labored years to pile up through controlled/punished 
 savings and investment. Brief disturbances can have (constant/not going away) effects (Hoddinott and 
 Kinsey 2001). These two effects are often (to both people or groups equally) reinforcing as those who start off 
 with a bad lot are far more likely to suffer serious bad shocks that knock them back 
 down as they struggle to climb out of poorness (Dercon 1998, Barrett and Carter 2001). 
 Easterly (2001, p. 197) reports that "between 1990 and 1998, poor countries accounted 
 for 94 percent of the world's 568 major natural disasters and 97 percent of disasterrelated deaths." Worldwide, the poor are a few times more likely to suffer injury or 
 illness than are the rich (Prasad et al. 1999). 
 
 transmission rates from total family income to children's earnings, suggesting (money-related) liquidity rather 
 than built-in ability is the most likely cause. Recent research on the United States hints that about 65 
 percent of fathers' earnings differentials relative to the wider population is transmitted to their children 
 (Mazumder 2001), with that transmission rate growing over the past couple of 20 years (Levine and 
 Mazumder 2002). 
 
 9 
 
 RURAL POVERTY DYNAMICS: WHAT WE STILL NEED TO LEARN 
 Explanations of long-lasting poorness to date have this way revolved around (i) 
 individual, household or community-level valuable thing gifts (Dercon 1998, Carter and 
 May 1999, Maluccio et al. 2000, Haddad and Ahmed 2003), (ii) (coming from the outside of something) changes in 
 returns to valuable thing gifts (Gunning et al. 2000, Maluccio et al. 2000), or (iii) the 
 hit/effect of shocks and their toughness on welfare (Glewwe and Hall 1998, Hoddinott 
 and Kinsey 2001, McPeak and Barrett 2001, Elbers et al. 2002, Gertler and Gruber 2002, 
 Yamano and Jayne 2002, Barrett et al. 2003, Dercon 2003). The last thing just mentioned class of 
 explanations, however, offers an important clue toward an visible area of research 
 that is of particular importance to understanding (away from cities) poorness patterns. 
 Shocks can have (constant/not going away) effects only in the presence of hysteresis that 
 creates irreversibility or differential rates of recovery. These effects suggest 
 important (not going in a straight line)ities in the relationship between valuable things stocks and income growth, 
 (not going in a straight line)ities commonly connected with the idea  of poorness traps. This is a 
 growing area of research in which many of us are now engaged. There remains 
 much to learn about the scientifics and explanation of poorness traps. 
 Uncovering poorness traps and dividing line effects 
 The important feature of poorness traps is the existence of one or more critical 
 dividing lines of wealth that people have a hard  time crossing from below.9 As a 
 consequence poorness (continues to exist/continues to do hard or annoying things) for a long time, often measured in generations. Above the 
 dividing line, endogenous growth processes carry people toward a high-working well 
 steady state, while below the dividing line, people sink toward a low-working well 
 survival/income balance.10 These dividing lines give rise to the important honor/difference 
 between (things carried by a ship, etc.) nets and safety nets. The appropriate positioning of safety nets lies just 
 above dividing lines at which natural path patterns break in different directions. 
 The idea of multiple equilibria in this general big picture  has been around for at least 
 75 years, dating to Young (1928), Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and Myrdal (1957), if not 
 9 
 
 A important point, and one commonly misunderstood, is that these dividing lines are not pre-decided. Rather they 
 reflect the point at which the expected path patterns divide into two, where E[dA] or E[dY] - depending on whether one 
 is working in valuable thing or income space - switches signs. (intelligent/obvious) examples of such dividing lines include homelessness or 
 permanent physical disability. 
 10 
 There may be more than two stable energetic equilibria. See Zimmerman and Carter (2003) for an example with 
 three stable energetic equilibria. 
 
 10 
 
 earlier. Over the last few years, however, money-flow experts have begun to (agree to--and promise to follow--certain rules, procedures, etc.) such ideas 
 and to appreciate the central role of dividing line effects that create divided into two welfare 
 patterns, with some people staying or climbing out of poorness and others stuck in a 
 long-term poorness trap. (not there; not present) such dividing lines, all poorness would be short-lived with 
 everyone coming together toward a single balance income level, as suggested/said by 
 neoclassical money-based growth explanation (Solow 1956). (very big/very strong) evidence 
 against such absolute/without any limits coming together (has given a reason to do something) (large/relatively large) research over the 
 past fifteen or so years on "new" explanations and scientifics of money-based growth.11 To date, 
 this work has focused heavily at the macroeconomic level of nation states, but the logic 
 applies equally at meso and micro levels, where it may actually prove more useful for 
 policy purposes (Barrett and Swallow 2003). 
 The idea of multiple energetic equilibria and its hint/result/effect of dividing line effects 
 becomes especially important because it gives rise to significant potential endogenous 
 change in returns to valuable thing gifts. There are at least three clear/separate (machines/methods/ways) by 
 which this can happen. First, risk avoidance behavior can cause endogenous selection of 
 low return (mixes of stocks, bonds, etc./document collections) that have (compared to other things) low (quality of changing over time or at different places) in returns (Rosenzweig and 
 Binswanger 1993, Zimmerman and Carter 2003). Second, credit market mistakes 
 can hold back the (able to be done) matching of changeable input choices with almost-fixed factors of 
 production (i.e., valuable things), leading to a positive relationship between an agent's ex ante 
 valuable thing stock and the rate of return on those valuable things (Bardhan et al. 2000). Third, there can 
 be locally increasing returns due to separate choices of technologies or occupations 
 (Banerjee and Newman 1993, Barrett and Blume 2003). 
 By any of these three (machines/methods/ways), as valuable thing stocks increase, expected returns on 
 valuable things, r, increase, creating an added boost to income beyond that connected with 
 adding to valuable thing stock at a constant (much less reducing) rate of return. This is a 
 significant good manners/improvement of the most in control/most common recent approach which, as (before that/before now) described, 
 has focused on causing (coming from the outside of something) changes in returns to the poor's productive valuable things 
 due, for example, to market (easing government rules) policies. Poorness traps depend 
 basically on endogenous change in returns on valuable thing holdings, so that income is at 
 least locally increasing in valuable thing stocks. We have learned over the last few years that returns can 
 in fact prove endogenous, at the micro level of people or families, growing 
 11 
 
 Easterly (2001) offers an especially (easy to get to, use, or understand), even entertaining treatment of the (change over time) of growth explanation and 
 the evidence on money-based growth. 
 
 11 
 
 with one's valuable thing stock, at the meso level of communities, due to interhousehold 
 externalities and coordination, or at the macro level of countries, due to political 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) effects. 12 The net effect are patterns of (constant/not going away) poorness that copy 
 themselves across many scales, termed "fractal poorness traps" by Easterly (2001) and 
 Barrett and Swallow (2003). 
 The possible endogeneity of returns to valuable things can be easily seen by returning 
 briefly to the mathematics of income patterns. To establish the effect of changing valuable thing 
 stocks on income, we completely/in a hinting way (make different) equation (5) with respect to A and take 
 expectations: 
 E[dY/dA] = r + A`E[dr/dA] 
 
 (7) 
 
 Equation (7) points to/shows that income growth can happen not just due to (coming from the outside of something) change 
 in rates of return - dr from equation (6) - or to growth in the valuable thing stock with a constant 
 rate of return - the first term of equation (7) - but also due to caused growth in rates of 
 return as people pile up valuable things. This is a testable guess. Because we watch/notice 
 neither r nor dr/dA, we need to guess them: 
 dY/dA = _+ _'A + _ 
 
 (8) 
 
 where our guess of _ provides a best guess of r and our guess of _ represents 
 the E[dr/dA] vector with what is likely to prove a heteroskedastic moving backward error, _. 
 Rejection of the null guess that _=0 provides strong (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) in favor of the 
 endogeneity of rates of return, with rejection in favor of the alternate guess that at 
 least one element of _>0, and none negative, signaling locally increasing returns 
 (typical and expected) of dividing line effects connected with poorness traps.13 These returns can be 
 to scale - of a single valuable thing - or to scope, reflecting (when two things work together equally well) across valuable things that 
 endogenously boosts working well and so income. This can maybe be seen most 
 easily by specifying (9) with respect to each of the multiple valuable thing stocks held by 
 families or people in the (connected/related) population: 
 dY/dAi = _i+ _j _ijAj + _i 
 
 (9) 
 
 (happening together) guess of the system of equations represented by (9), each for a 
 different valuable thing, Ai, would establish the valuable things for which overall returns appear to be 
 endogenously increasing, enabling development professionals to focus more exactly 
 on the valuable things that most matter to helping the poor to climb out of long-lasting poorness. 
 12 
 
 This honor/difference similar things that between internal and external (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) in the international trade books. 
 (in the opposite way), if at least one element of _ is negative and none positive, this would suggest coming together, based 
 on decreasing returns to scale. 
 13 
 
 12 
 
 Furthermore, comparison of the expected not important returns to each valuable thing could establish 
 the relative expected income gains (able to be done) from moves (from one place to another) of or de novo investment 
 in each type of valuable thing. Such guesses establish expected benefits, which can then be 
 compared against cost guesses for different types of helping actions to improve the 
 likely yield from rare/not enough  money invested in valuable thing collection among the poor. 
 Of course, equations (8) and (9) are equal to endogenizing r in equation (3) 
 and guessing income levels, rather than changes in income, as a polynomial function 
 of A. A second-order example would be the simple moving backward model 
 Y = A`r = _ + _i _iAi+ _i_j_ijAiAj + _ 
 
 (10) 
 
 where curviness of E[Y] in A signals endogenously increasing returns on valuable things 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the existence of a poorness trap, and curviness would point to/show 
 coming together. 
 Beginning and building on the existence of endogenously increasing rates of return to valuable things is 
 only one part of the research challenge. The more practical - and harder - job  is 
 to identify the dividing lines at which welfare patterns appear to divide into two. These are the 
 points where one can usefully tell the difference between the transitorily poor who remain 
 above the dividing line and therefore should recover on their own, and the (maybe 
 newly) almost always poor who were born or have fallen below the dividing line and whose 
 path patterns will carry them toward a very simple (or too small), survival/income balance in the (not being there; not being present) 
 of help. 
 Dividing lines can sometimes be found via autoregressions of welfare measures 
 such as valuable things, income or expenses on past values of the same measure. The 
 methodological problem, however, is that the autoregressions have to allow for 
 (compared to other things) high-order polynomial relations in order that one can feasibly find dividing lines. 
 Such dividing lines can be tricky to identify, especially using parametric guess 
 methods because in your mind one should find few (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) around the unstable 
 energetic equilibria that define dividing lines. This needs/demands (good) enough sample sizes, not 
 only in thin slice but maybe especially in the time domain, in order to (record by a camera or computer) low 
 chance (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) in the neighborhood of dividing line points. Without (good or well enough) 
 dense data or flexible estimators, change/effect points will usually be washed out in worldwide 
 parametric guess off of just two or three (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) per unit, more likely 
 showing/presenting themselves more slightly/(in a detailed way) as heteroskedastic and positively autocorrelated 
 errors. If (large/relatively large) within-sample mixed-up nature in (coming from the outside of something) conditions causes the 
 
 13 
 
 location of dividing lines to change/differ  much between families within the population 
 under study, then uncovering them scientifically becomes harder still. In sum, detection 
 of dividing lines connected with multiple energetic equilibria and poorness traps can be 
 very hard, even if they exist. As U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld 
 famously (for bad reasons) defended/expressed before the 2003 Iraq war, the (not being there; not being present) of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is not the same 
 as (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of (not being there; not being present). The methodological challenges of exactly identifying poorness 
 traps and dividing line effects remain difficult/strong. 
 
 Figure 1: Nonparametric guesses of expected herd size changes in southern Ethiopia 
 
 Nonparametric methods can be very effective in locating dividing lines, as 
 demonstrated in Figure 1, taken from Lybbert et al. (2002). This graphic shows the 
 nonparametric autoregression of the natural logarithm of household herd size one and 
 ten years ahead on current values using 17 years' herd history data on 55 (person who raises many sheep, cattle, etc.) 
 families from the Borana Flat area of southern Ethiopia. The solid, 45-degree line 
 represents changing state of balance, points where current and expected future group sizes 
 are the same. The S-shaped valuable thing patterns show/tell about a dividing line household herd size - 
 reflecting an unstable changing state of balance - of about 12-15 (cows, bulls, etc.). Below that 
 level, (people who raise many sheep, cattle, etc.) effectively become sedentarized because the lactating group is too 
 small to split to support both moving herders and a nonmigratory base camp of 
 women, children, the old and the sick. Below the dividing line herd size, animals 
 holdings tend to collapse toward an balance of about one head of (cows, bulls, etc.)  because of 
 
 14 
 
 optimal (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection) rebalancing - clear/understandable/show  as net sales of animals - and frequent 
 agroclimatic chocks to which they cannot respond through traveling . Above the 
 dividing line, the group can be split, enabling traveling long/big grazing of the dry group 
 (and a few lactating animals used to feed traveling herders) in response to 
 spatiotemporal (quality of changing over time or at different places) in search and water availability, by that/in that way (accomplishing or gaining) a higher 
 changing state of balance herd size of 50-75 head. Because the density of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) just 
 below the dividing line is low, second and third order polynomial parametric (moving backwards) 
 did not at first uncover this relationship. So the value of nonparametric methods 
 for scientific question (or investigation) into poorness traps. 
 Note as well the important difference from the ordinary scientific approach of 
 looking for differences in growth rates across quantiles of a wealth or income 
 distribution. Possible/likely differences in collection patterns differ relative to the 
 dividing lines that define the edge of a poorness trap, not relative to the seams between 
 distribution quantiles. As a result, unless the quantile divides just happen to 
 correspond with those dividing lines - which they almost surely will not - the quantilebased approach will generally miss dividing line effects connected with poorness traps. 
 (not numbers-based) research methods more familiar to the other social sciences can prove 
 especially helpful in uncovering the dividing lines that support long-lasting poorness (Hulme 
 and Guard/guide 2003). Exactly because there should be few (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) in the area 
 of unstable energetic equilibria, the job  of identifying dividing lines can often disobey 
 (related to studying numbers) methods based on (related to watching or recording something) data. Yet the poor can often identify in openended conversations what it takes to be able to move/change to a different production 
 technology (e.g., from sedentarized (cows, bulls, etc.)  farming/managing money to long/big pastoralism in the 
 previous/coming before example), a different job plan (e.g., from silly trade to 
 wholesaling), or to move to a place offering brighter prospects. If asked, the poor can 
 often clearly identify the valuable thing(s) responsible for endogenous returns. Money-flow experts are slowly 
 warming to the (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of (not numbers-based) data collection with our more familiar 
 (numbers-based) methods, creating a promising union for policy-oriented poorness research 
 (Kanbur 2003). 
 An indirect signal of dividing line effects can sometimes be found in distributional 
 data. Because poorness traps give rise to birfurcated welfare patterns, people who 
 at first start out close to one another can follow sharply (different/branching out into different) paths. In the 
 presence of dividing line effects, therefore, the habit/desire over time will be for people to 
 
 15 
 
 cluster around a small number of stable equilibria that serve as local (bowls/areas drained by a river) of 
 coming together, with visible troughs between these points. This will be seen/obvious in 
 thin sliceal income (or expense or other welfare measures) distribution data as 
 many modes around energetic equilibria, leading to what Quah (1996) has termed 
 "twin-peakedness", which might be more generally thought of as "multi-peakedness". 
 We see two examples of twin-peakedness in Figures 2 and 3, which present 
 nonparametric density guesses of two different welfare distributions. Figure 2 plots 
 the 1989 per person daily incomes of a sample of families in Madzuu, a village in 
 Kenya's western highlands where good soils, plentiful rainfall and medium-level access to 
 city-based  markets (such as Kisumu) create some, although limited opportunities for upward 
 money-based ability to move around. Poorness rates anyway remain very high, with 61 percent below 
 a $0.50/day per person poorness line in both 1989 and 2002 and only 9 percent above it in 
 both periods.14 Figure 3 displays the density of 1997 per person group sizes among 
 (people who raise many sheep, cattle, etc.) on the Borana Flat area of southern Ethiopia, a area of (compared to other things) good 
 agroecological (possibility of/possible happening of)  (people who raise many sheep, cattle, etc.), therefore also offering some chance for 
 upward money-based ability to move around among a subpopulation usually far poorer than national 
 averages. In each case, there's a most in control/most common mode at a low level, around $0.50/day per 
 capita income in Madzuu and 1-2 (cows, bulls, etc.)  per person in Borana, and a secondary mode at 
 a much more desirable level, about $1.30/day per person in Madzuu and 15-20 animals 
 per person in Borana. These sorts of bimodal distributions suggest the existence of 
 dividing line effects that lead to birfurcated welfare patterns, with some people heading 
 toward a low-level stable balance and others toward a higher one. 
 
 0.20 
 
 1.0 
 0.15 
 0.8 
 
 0.6 
 
 0.10 
 
 0.4 
 
 0.0 
 0.00 
 
 0.50 
 1.00 
 1.50 
 2.00 
 2.50 
 2002 per person daily income (US$_$), Madzuu 
 
 3.00 
 
 Rosenblatt-Parzen density 
 
 Rosenblatt-Parzen density 
 
 14 
 
 0.2 
 
 0.05 
 
 0.00 
 0 
 
 5 
 10 
 15 
 20 
 1997 household per person herd size, Borana, Southern Ethiopia 
 
 The daily per person income figures are in inflation-(changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 2002 US dollar terms. 
 
 16 
 
 Figure 2: Bimodal income in western Kenya 
 
 Figure 3: Bimodal (cows, bulls, etc.)  wealth in southern 
 Ethiopia 
 
 Of course, in many very poor communities, we find unimodal distributions, not 
 because dividing lines do not exist, but more likely because too few people cross them to 
 create (good) enough density at higher equilibria to find these effects in the data.15 Such 
 places reflect (land-area-based/location) poorness traps (Jalan and Ravallion 2002). Where the 
 hidden (under) agroecological conditions, market access, or sociopolitical (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) - or some 
 
 Rosenblatt-Parzen density 
 
 3 
 
 2 
 
 1 
 
 0 
 0.00 
 
 0.50 
 1.00 
 1.50 
 Per person daily income (2002 US$_$), 1996 (dotted) and 2002 (solid) 
 Fianarantsoa, Madagascar 
 
 combination of these - are such that there exist few pathways out of poorness in the 
 (not being there; not being present) of significant external helping actions. 
 Figure 4 shows one such example, from Madagascar's poorest area of control/area of land, 
 Fianarantsoa. The graphic shows clearly unimodal distributions of daily per person 
 income distribution (again in constant 2002 US dollars) of families surveyed in 1996 
 and again in 2002, with a mode of only $0.20-0.25/day per person. In communities as 
 (very much/in a very upset way) poor as these, income appears unimodal because almost everyone is 
 caught in a (land-area-based/location) poorness trap. The clear/separate leftward (press or force into a smaller space)ion of the income 
 distribution in 2002, relative to 1996, reflects the effect of a sharp covariate shock, the 
 eight month national problem that happened to Madagascar following the violently argued against 
 presidential elections of December 2001. 
 15 
 
 In (compared to other things) rich communities in which few people face serious (blocking or stopping things) to wealth collection, welfare 
 distributions (in almost the same way) appear unimodal, because (compared to other things) little of people/of the group falls below a dividing line connected 
 with a poorness trap. Because the focus of this paper is poorness, we do not discuss this case any further. 
 
 17 
 
 Figure 4: Intertemporal moves/changes in unimodal income distributions 
 To summarize, (existing for a long time) guesses about multiple equilibria are receiving 
 renewed attention in the scientific books on development microeconomics. Highly 
 interesting (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is newly appearing that in fact Myrdal, Rosenstein-Rodan and Young 
 may have been correct about the existence of clear/separate collection paths, one or 
 more of which are related to long-lasting poorness. If confirmed through further 
 ((not numbers-based), (numbers-based) or mixed methods) scientific research and explained 
 well enough with one or more explanations of poorness traps related to the contexts from 
 from where the data start, these findings would have significant effects/results/suggestions for 
 development policy. Especially, scientific proof of the existence of poorness 
 traps would signal the need of renewed (using action and strong words to support or oppose something) by (people who give money or other things) and governments to 
 address shortage of valuable thing holdings among the long-lasting poor. 
 Explaining poorness traps 
 There are many pathways out of (away from cities) poorness, so one needs to be aware of 
 presenting too overly-simple or mechanical a description. For some, the best pathway is 
 through farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) and (making something available for lots of people to buy). For others, it lies in 
 traveling to an city-based  area. For others, the right plan involves slow change out 
 of farming and into (away from cities) non-farm activities.16 Some will use a combination of these 
 plans. The key is not the particular path to be followed, which may change/differ  very (much) 
 across space, time and even among people in the same location and moment. 
 Rather, the key is the existence of some pathway out of poorness, a plan in which 
 current best choices (in an expected way/in a way that was known beforehand) lead to the collection of (good) enough productive 
 valuable things so that the household can (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) expect to earn an investible extra above 
 and beyond immediate consumption needs, enabling continued collection and 
 
 16 
 
 The role of the (away from cities) non-farm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in helping escape from poorness has been widely 
 (assigned too low a value to) in farming-based and development money flow/money-based studies. A range of studies over the last few years have 
 uncovered a positive relationship between non-farm income and household welfare indicators, in 
 particular, that greater nonfarm income (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) causes more fast growth in earnings and 
 consumption (Barrett et al. 2001b). In places where the ranks of landless or near-landless poor are 
 swelling quickly, the (away from cities) non-farm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) will become very important to poorness reduction plans (Jayne 
 et al. 2003). 
 
 18 
 
 steady growth in all or most welfare measures. A poorness trap exists when a 
 household's best plan does not lead to such collection, when the (able to be done) 
 choice set mostly prevents collection. 
 Why might this be? A range of fancy (or smart) possible models have come out 
 over the past twenty years to explain the big thing/the important event of poorness traps.17 This is not the 
 place to try to review this books, not least of which because I could not begin to do 
 justice to the beauty of some of the models. Instead, let me focus on two key features 
 that support the logic of poorness traps in almost every published model: 
 endogenously increasing returns and (money-related) market failures. 
 If returns on valuable things increase in wealth, this (somewhat in a word-wasting way) hints 
 increasing returns to scale due to some (machine/method/way), often modeled as resulting from 
 externalities or people-related level coordination problems such as collection (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 The key becomes understanding why any low-level changing state of balance would exist in 
 the presence of increasing returns. The important feature seems to be (separate nature). If 
 (related to working on the job) or technology choice is separate - if people cannot combine different jobs 
 or production technologies at randomly fine scales, slowly moving/changing from the lower 
 return one to the higher return one - and there exist nontrivial fixed or sunk costs to 
 making the shift, an entry (blocking thing) comes out that will separate a population into those 
 who can clear the poorness trap dividing line and those who cannot. 
 One hint/result/effect of this is the possible importance of what Barrett and Blume 
 (2003) term "change technologies", options that are inferior to the highest return, 
 (the best design available now) technologies, but superior to the lowest return options now chosen 
 and - most importantly - (easy to get to, use, or understand) to those now choosing lowest return plans. 
 Like the ideas of multiple equilibria and poorness traps, the idea of intermediate 
 technologies has been around for a long time. Formal (coming up with explanations about the way things work) is, however, new and 
 may shed light on its importance. In a perfect world, (middle-position) technologies build in their own 
 death by causing people onto an improved collection path that, in time, 
 leads them to move/change from the (middle-position) technology to a still-better option, which may 
 actually (come before/came before) the (middle-position) technology but which was (before that/before now) (unable to be used or understood) 
 without the (middle-position) step. Moser and Barrett (2003) find some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of 
 "technology adoption ladders" of this sort, with Malagasy poor people proving more likely 
 17 
 
 An incomplete listing of important papers would include Lowery (1981), Romer (1986), Lucas (1988), Azariadis and 
 Drazen (1990), Krugman (1991), Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and Zeira (1993), Mookherjee and Ray 
 (2002) and Zimmerman and Carter (2003). 
 
 19 
 
 to adopt a high-cooperating with/producing/giving up rice (producing crops/helping something grow) practice if they first adopt off-season cropping 
 of tubers in their rice fields, mainly because off-season cropping helps resolve seasonal 
 cash liquidity restrictions to adoption of the new practice. 
 This particular example also highlights the (very important nature) of (money-related) market 
 failures to the logic of poorness traps. If people could borrow freely, then everyone of 
 like hidden/covered up ability could make best investments for their facts or conditions (that surround someone) and there 
 would be no significant difference/different version in between-people welfare within places/locations in balance. 
 (may or may not happen, depending on something) coming together would be to steady states that change/differ  only by born-in ability. 
 Plainly, that is a fantasy world. In the real world, limits on credit and insurance access 
 argue with the almost always poor with binding restrictions that limit their ability and 
 desire to invest today in order to collect  higher steady state income in the future. 
 Valuable thing collection failures are the (expected/able to be known beforehand) result (Dercon 1998, Carter and 
 Zimmerman 2000, Gunning et al. 2000, Carter and May 2001, Mude et al. 2003). 
 The problem is even more destructive than mere collection failures. 
 Working well suffers too because when people do not have access to credit or insurance 
 to enable them to move consumption across periods, they unavoidably find 
 other choice markets through which they can get expensive almost-credit. For example, 
 farmers will sell crop at low prices immediately after harvest, fully expecting to buy 
 back the same crop months later at a much higher price. Given an immediate 
 need for cash for any of many  reasons, but missing access to credit or cash savings, 
 farmers commonly "borrow" through product markets. This appears to us money-flow experts 
 as significant allocative inefficiency, although it can be an best plan for a 
 very much credit held back household. Other<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
