 Farming-based Money flow, 2 ( 1988) 123-137 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 123 
 
 A Pattern of behavior (change to make better/related to changing something) Model for U.S. 
 Farming: 1948-79 
 Utpal Vasavada 1 and V. Eldon Ball 2 
 1 Department 
 
 of Farming-based Money flow, University of Georgia, 
 Conner Hall, Athens, GA 30602 (U.S.A.) 
 
 2 1nputs, 
 
 Technology and Working well Branch, USDA Money-based Research Service, 
 Washington, DC (U.S.A.) 
 
 (Accepted 11 January 1988) 
 
 Abstract 
 Vasavada, U. and Ball, V.E., 1988. A energetic (change to make better/related to changing something) model for U.S. farming: 1948-79. 
 Agric. Econ., 2: 123-137. 
 A multioutput model is developed within the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) to carefully study the structure of energetic changes/recalculations in U.S. farming during the (after the war) period. An important feature 
 of this model is that the econometric model is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with energetic money-based explanation. Ups and downs in capital stocks, changeable inputs, and outputs are explained by changing opportunity costs. 
 Scientific results pointed to/showed that (able to last through tough conditions) equipment, farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s, and family labor 
 showed significant stiffness in (change to make better/related to changing something) as a response to (coming from the outside of something) shocks. Surprisingly, the 
 guess that real estate was a changeable input could not be rejected. The univariate flexible 
 (device that speeds something up) guess, which is widely maintained in most farming-based (change to make better/related to changing something) studies, is 
 not agreeing with/not matching with the data. 
 
 Introduction 
 
 In a energetic farming-based (process of people making, selling, and buying things), firms usually break down and rebuild their useful thing/valuable supply 
 portion decisions as a response to changing relative prices. For this reason 
 it is meaningful to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the (change to make better/related to changing something) process going along with the rewriting/redoing of best production plans. An important feature of the money-based climate faced by U.S. farming-based producers is time-related difference/different version in relative prices 
 of inputs and outputs. Price changes are caused sometimes by the operation 
 of macroeconomic shocks; in other events, a variety of factors including, but 
 not limited to, the influence of technical change and shifting person tastes 
 The research was given money by cooperative agreement #58-3J23-0035 with the Food Marketing and 
 Consumption Money flow Branch, Money-based Research Service, U.S. Department of Farming. 
 
 0169-5150/88/$03.50 
 
 © 1988 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 124 
 
 work to create unstable relative prices. (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) the source of time-related 
 price difference/different version, useful thing/valuable supply portion decisions are constantly changed to (accomplish or gain with effort) 
 money-making production. In the same way/in that way, this study focuses on the creation and 
 rewriting/redoing of production plans in an money-based (surrounding conditions) seen as 
 changing opportunity costs. 
 The maintained (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) guesses about U.S. farming-based production 
 permit short and long-run money-based responses to diverge. Such a separation 
 clearly recognizes the energetic nature of farming-based input and output markets. Inputs and outputs may not immediately (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to their desired 
 long-run values. When this happens, input and output markets are in shortrun unbalance. As this situation is unlikely to continue over any length 
 of time, actual values eventually occur with desired values when long-run 
 balance is reached. Two features of the (change to make better/related to changing something) problem are examined 
 in some detail. First, an attempt is made to identify forces deciding/figuring out longrun balance values of farming-based inputs and outputs. Naturally, opportunity costs must figure as most important candidates here. Second, the (change to make better/related to changing something) process involved in the change from current to long-run balance values is 
 highlighted. 
 Section 1 describes two important (related to careful studying or deep thinking) guesses employed in the 
 later scientific (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). A brief description of the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost 
 guess and a reason for the use of multioutput technologies are included. These guesses are then (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) into a (clearly visible/clearly understood) optimization 
 problem with the clear intent of getting/taking econometric equations (Section2). 
 Section 3 is concerned with the development of scientific supply, changeable factor demand, and stock (change to make better/related to changing something) equations. Care is taken to make sure that these 
 equations confirm to a (clearly visible/clearly understood) optimization problem. The maintained 
 model is rich enough to include a few nested structures as other choice guesses. A difficult/strict/high quality guess testing procedure is identified in Section 4. 
 Results of the early/incomplete scientific (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) involving the use of U.S. 
 group farm-related time series data spanning the time period 1948-79 are 
 contained in the next-to-the-last section. Ends/end results and possible extensions of 
 the present effort are the subject matter of the final section. 
 1. (change to make better/related to changing something) costs, multioutput technologies and U.S. 
 farming 
 
 The (change to make better/related to changing something) cost guess provides an appealing (reasons) for 
 the separation of actual from desired values of a production input. Supporters 
 of this guess argue that it is expensive for the decision- maker to quickly (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) 
 stocks of production inputs to their long-run balance values (Penrose, 1959; 
 Arrow, 1982). If this is true, then the decision-maker has an (reward or reason for doing something) to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) 
 slowly rather than quickly to (make small) the penalty connected with fast (change to make better/related to changing something). Slow (change to make better/related to changing something) of inputs suggested by the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost guess 
 
 125 
 
 provides the needed/demanded bridge between short and long-run money-based analyses. 
 Without (change to make better/related to changing something) costs this honor/difference is (without any point or purpose). The firm 
 can respond immediately to changing market conditions since fast (change to make better/related to changing something) is not punished. 
 A clear example may show this point further. Starting from an initial 
 balance position, suppose that the relative price of corn increases. Under 
 (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) conditions, this will stimulate both long-run corn supply and inputs 
 used in the production of corn. When there are no obstacles to (change to make better/related to changing something), 
 actual supply and input usage match desired values immediately. Slow 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) is ruled out in this example because the firm has no (reward or reason for doing something) to 
 (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) slowly without (change to make better/related to changing something) costs. Under these facts or conditions (that surround someone), 
 the difference between short and long-run supply and input demand response 
 does not exist. Purely static production models do not (combine different things together so they work as one unit) the pretty/interesting 
 feature of fell behind (change to make better/related to changing something) because they completely/in a hinting way (force (on people)/cause an inconvenient situation) the strict idea (you think is true) of zero (change to make better/related to changing something) costs. This makes (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost guess to explain energetic behavior in input and output markets 
 a reasonable guess to maintain. 
 While the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost guess contains a powerful (reasons) 
 for the number of falls behind  in money-based response, it serves another useful purpose also. This guess has been (in a way that produces a lot) used to carefully study group 
 investment behavior (Berndt et al., 1979). It introduces a new dimension into 
 ordinary production money flow/money-based studies problems. Under this guess, the portion decision of the firm involves (happening together) choice of changeable inputs, supply of outputs, and best investment. By including the investment decision 
 with other decision (numbers that change/things that change), this guess defines a wider class of 
 problems. 
 To give clearly stated meaning to the idea of (change to make better/related to changing something) costs, some important 
 honors/statements of differences good quality/good qualities talk about/say. (change to make better/related to changing something) costs can be internal or external. When 
 the penalty charged for changing input stocks are money-related in nature, the costs 
 are termed external. Nonpecuniary costs counted in terms offoregone output 
 or (number or thing that changes) factors are internal costs. Either of them could be a maintained 
 guess although it is easy to establish that, from a modeling (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), 
 external costs are a special case of internal costs (Mortenson, 1973). The present study adopts internal (change to make better/related to changing something) costs for U.S. farming. Besides being 
 the less (serving to severely limit or control) guess, this practice is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the development 
 of previous farming-based investment studies (Vasavada and Rooms, 1986). 
 Examples of (change to make better/related to changing something) costs in farming include search cost, relocation 
 cost, reorganization costs, and (mind-related/spirit-related) costs. 
 Another important feature of the present study is the focus on multioutput technologies. A few reasons are available for using this guess. First, the data employed in guess were highly aggregative in nature. 
 Described/explained data available on outputs could be productively used in the model (detailed description of exactly what is required). The multioutput (detailed description of exactly what is required) was also flexible enough to test some 
 
 126 
 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) guesses such as (state of always working or appearing the same way) in grouping andjointness. A single (made up of different things) output measure prevents this possibility. 
 The dual maintained guesses of multioutput technologies and (change to make better/related to changing something) costs are (having different things working together as one unit) into the analysis by changing the ordinary production function. To illustrate this procedure, some note must be 
 introduced. Let L represent the vector of changeable inputs, K the vector of quasifixed inputs, I the vector of gross investments in almost-fixed inputs, and Y is 
 the output vector. Each of these (numbers that change/things that change) must be indexed with a time subscript. The time subscript is dropped in our analysis mainly to avoid tiring 
 note. Almost-fixed inputs are fixed in the short run but (number or thing that changes) in the long 
 run. To contrast, amounts of changeable inputs can freely be varied at all times. 
 One way to represent the restrictions suggested by technology is the changed 
 multioutput change function: 
 Q.&amp;gt;( Y, L, K, I) =0 
 
 (1) 
 
 Including investment in the change function reflects (change to make better/related to changing something) costs and warrants some description. To see how including investment in (/) ( · ) is equal to (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost guess, think about/believe 
 the derivative, oYj811 . It is easy to get an expression for this derivative in 
 terms of the derivatives of Q.&amp;gt; ( - ) by total (using different things) of ( 1). This derivative 
 measures the not important change in the ith output when the jth input stock is 
 increased or used up/reduced. Without (change to make better/related to changing something) costs this derivative is 
 exactly zero as changing the size of the jth input stock is not punished. However, in the presence of (change to make better/related to changing something) costs, this derivative is negative since investment in the jth input stock is punished by a reduction in the ith output. 
 Here (change to make better/related to changing something) costs are being measured in terms of forgone output and hence 
 are internal. The (detailed description of exactly what is required) ( 1) proves to be a convenient method for ineluding the dual maintained guesses of multioutput technologies and (change to make better/related to changing something) costs. Together these parts/pieces will now be (joined together/protected by a fuse) into a consistent 
 possible (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) to get scientific econometric equations. 
 2. A Pattern of behavior multioutput model for U.S. farming 
 
 At each point in time the representative farming-based firm enjoys a stream of 
 rents building up to its stock of almost-fixed inputs. When appropriately discounted, the value of this stream is a measure of the value of the firm. Best 
 (number or thing that changes) inputs, investments, and output supply are solutions to the problem 
 of making the most of the value of a representative farming-based firm. A possible 
 two-stage (biggest increase/best possible extent) problem is used to illustrate this way of thinking/basic truth/rule. The development described here is an extension of energetic (two things existing together) developed by Epstein (1981). 
 In the first stage, the firm is assumed to pick amounts of changeable inputs 
 and outputs. Let W represent the vector of changeable input prices and P the 
 
 127 
 
 vector of output prices. All prices are (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized randomly by the first output 
 price. Naturally, the price of the first output is set to one and is left out/kept out from 
 P. The short-run (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized restricted profit function for the multioutput 
 change function ( 1) is the solution to: 
 subjectto 
 
 n(P, W,K,l)=max P'Y-W'L}{ 
 
 &amp;lt;1&amp;gt;(·)=0 
 
 (2) 
 
 Y,L 
 
 The note ' is used to represent switching. (change to make better/related to changing something) costs hit/effect on 
 the short-run a money-making state of the representative firm. Any (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) or contraction of almost-fixed input stocks exists along with a reduction in short-run 
 (money made/good things received). The dual function n( ·) inherits this property from the function &amp;lt;1&amp;gt;( ·) 
 (Diewert, 1973). Subject to (happening over and over again in a predictable way) conditions that the (able to be done) input and 
 output combinations define a closed, nonempty, and curving out set, a (two things existing together) relationship between n( ·)and &amp;lt;1&amp;gt;( ·) is suggested. This (two things existing together) causes n( ·)to exactly follow (orders) 
 certain (happening over and over again in a predictable way) conditions. These are: n ( · ) is linearly (group of things that are all pretty much the same), monotonically increasing, and curved inK; (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree zero and curving out 
 in all prices; monotonically decreasing in changeable input prices, and monotonically increasing in output prices. Standard (two things existing together) arguments establish these 
 results. 
 The second phase of the decision process involves best choice of quasifixed inputs by making the most of the discounted future stream of rents. Rents building up to almost-fixed inputs are received/got by substracting total rental cost from 
 short-run (number or thing that changes) (money made/good things received). To aid in representing this problem clearly, some 
 added/more note is necessary. Represent the vector of (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized unit rental 
 prices of almost-fixed inputs by q and the constant discount rate by fJ. Finally&#126; 
 is a substitute for the diagonalized matrix of constant (lowering of value) rates. The firm 
 solves: 
 J(P, W,q,K)=max 
 1 
 
 loo exp(-fJt) 
 Jo 
 
 [n(·)-q'K] dt 
 
 (3) 
 
 subject to 
 - the standard equations of movement: 
 dK= (I-&#126;K) dt 
 - and initial conditions 
 K(O) =Ko 
 
 The equations of movement only repeat the standard creation that gross 
 investment is the sum of net investment and replacement investment. The 
 idea (you think is true) of geometric (rotted, inferior, or ruined state) in the almost-fixed input stock is understood in this 
 analysis. Reasons for this idea (you think is true) are recorded/supported by Jorgenson 
 (197 4). The (without limits or an end) (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  idea (you think is true) may seem harmless. This idea (you think is true) is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with geometric (rotted, inferior, or ruined state) of the capital stock maintained earlier. 
 Besides, the decision-maker only follows up on the best plan suggested by 
 
 128 
 
 ( 3) for the first time period. At the end of the first time period, ( 3) is solved 
 again after updating the information set. J ( · ) is the best value of the firm. 
 Although the time subscript has been held down and stopped in the maximand, it hides 
 an important issue in (detailed description of exactly what is required) and guess of energetic production 
 models, namely the (creation and construction/ group of objects) of future price expectations. The values of (P, 
 W, q) must either be known for sure at the beginning of the planning 
 period or expectations must be formed about their values at all future points 
 in time. Otherwise, the maximand ( 3) cannot be tested. A few approaches are available to tackle this problem. Well-known/obvious among these is the 
 clear expectations view (Muth, 1961). It is very hard to include 
 this approach into the type of analysis proposed here. So the simplifying 
 idea (you think is true) that money-based agents have static expectations is maintained. Static 
 expectations mostly says that current relative prices repeat themselves over the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet). 
 As might be expected, the value function J ( · ) inherits some properties from 
 the now emotional  (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized restricted profit function n( ·) (Epstein, 1981). 
 This follows from the (two things existing together) relationship that given n( · ), there is a similar J ( · ) and the other way around, too. From the standpoint of the scientific analyst, 
 this (two things existing together) helps to get convenient closed-form expressions for changeable 
 input, investment, and output supply equations. These behavioral equations 
 describe the relationship between best values of decision (numbers that change/things that change) and opportunity costs, which is the main interest of this analysis. Fully using (two things existing together) 
 results to develop guessing equations share the honor/difference that the equations 
 so received/got can be (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) back into a (clearly visible/clearly understood) value function. Basically, the plan chased after here will closely parallel that adopted in static (two things existing together) studies (see Diewert, 1984, for a complete survey of this approach). 
 First, a flexible form for a value function J ( · ) is specified. The econometric 
 equations are then defined in terms of derivatives of the value function. 
 
 3. A (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized quadratic value function 
 
 A few choices for the value function J (P, W, q, K) are available. These are 
 more fully described in Epstein ( 1981). A (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized quadratic second-order 
 Taylor series (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) was chosen for this study. One reason for making this 
 choice was that the suggested changeable input, investment demand, and output 
 supply equations were linear in (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized prices. Both short and long-run 
 investment demand equations received this property. Besides, this functional 
 form has been adopted in previous studies of group farming-based investment 
 behavior (Lopez, 1985; Vasavada and Rooms, 1986). Keeping this in mind, 
 think about/believe the parametric (detailed description of exactly what is required): 
 
 129 
 
 pl 
 
 lAnA12A13A14 
 A12 Az2 Az3 Az4 
 ( 4) 
 A13 Az3 A33 A34 
 K 
 A14 Az4 A34 A44 
 Note that a0 is a scaler; a 1 , a 2 , a3 and a 4 are appropriately dimensioned vectors. 
 Also, An, A 12 , ... , A 44 are appropriately dimensioned matrices. Equation 
 ( 4) expresses a relationship between best value of a firm, opportunity costs, 
 and almost-fixed input stocks. To get econometric equations, note that the 
 Bellman equation going along with/matching up to problem ( 3) is: 
 J =aa + [alaza3a4 l 
 
 W 
 l q 
 
 + 
 
 [P' W' q' K'] 
 
 j)J =max{ [n(P, W, q, K) -q' K] +JK(l-EK)} 
 
 l[fl 
 
 ( 5) 
 
 I 
 
 An important money-based way of thinking/basic truth/rule is included in the Bellman equation ( 5). 
 According to this equation, at each point in time along the best path, the 
 needed/demanded rate of return suggested by the (not definite) discount rate is the same as 
 the actual unemotional rate of return. That is, the firm picks an best production plan involving choice of inputs and outputs that equate these two 
 high levels. 
 The Bellman equation helps to express best decision (numbers that change/things that change) in terms 
 of first and second derivatives of the value function J ( · ) . Application of the 
 envelope true idea to ( 5) yields the equations: 
 K*=l-EK=J;k[ftJq 
 
 + K] 
 
 (6a) 
 
 L*=-ftJw +JwkK* 
 
 (6b) 
 
 Y* = /)Jp +JpkK* 
 
 (6c) 
 
 Lower case subscripts in (6a)-(6c) are used to select/name derivatives. For example, Jq is the vector of first partial derivatives of the value function with 
 respect to (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized rental prices of almost-fixed inputs. Extending this convention to second derivatives, the note J wk is the sub hessian matrix whose 
 typical ijth element is{ 8JI 8 wi 8Kj}. Together' equations ( 6a)- ( 6c) go along with/match up to the energetic twin of Hotelling's lemma which is widely used in 
 applied static (two things existing together) analysis (Young et al., 1985). Given the value function 
 ( 4), the best investment demand, changeable input, and output supply equations can be expressed in terms of the first and second derivatives of the value 
 function. 
 The (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) model used in econometric guess is received/made from by applying 
 ( 6a)- ( 6c) to the value function ( 4). Equations in the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) model are: 
 
 + A13P+A23 W +A33q+A34K} + K] 
 
 (7a) 
 
 L*=-ft[az +A1zP+A2z W+ Az3q+Az4K] +A24K* 
 
 (7b) 
 
 +A 1 4K* 
 
 (7c) 
 
 K*=A:3l [j)a3{ 
 
 Y*=-ft[a 1 +AnP+A12 W+A 13 q+Al4K] 
 
 130 
 
 A closer look at the system of investment demand equations shows/tells about some interesting information. Long-run almost-fixed input demand equations are received/got by setting net investment to zero and solving the understood equation in 
 (7a). Long-run input demands are watched/followed to be linear in (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized prices. 
 Another feature shared by equation (7a) is that they define a multivariate 
 flexible accellerator (shortened as MFA). The MFA was (at first/before other things happened) advanced 
 to show a richer class of lag distributions than were given by simple 
 (device that speeds something up) models (Low pointi and Rosen, 1969). The MFA always results when 
 the matrix Jqk is a constant matrix. 
 Earlier, an effort was made to stress the relationship between long-run balance values and obstacles that prevented accomplishment of these values. 
 The number of (change to make better/related to changing something) costs secure/make sure of that complete (change to make better/related to changing something) to steady 
 state values does not happen immediately. This information is included in 
 the net investment equation ( 7a). A few other choice models are nested within 
 the maintained (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) model. They can be gotten by forcing simple 
 parametric restrictions. 
 4. A Guess testing procedure 
 
 As noted before, the maintained (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) model was agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with a MFA 
 lag distribution. This is a (checked for truth/proved true) by rewriting ( 6a) as: 
 K*=M[K-K] 
 
 (8) 
 
 where the matrix M equals [J+J-q}. and the vector of steady state input demands K =-fJJq. All (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) guesses relate to the important (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 matrix M. When the matrix M is a diagonal matrix, the univariate flexible 
 (device that speeds something up) (change to make better/related to changing something) (machine/method/way) is received/got. This different model rules 
 out interdependencies in (change to make better/related to changing something) between different inputs. For example, 
 the (change to make better/related to changing something) of capital stock is unaffected by unbalance in labor markets. Previous farming-based investment studies have usually called for/used the univariate flexible (device that speeds something up) ( Griliches, 1960; Penson et al., 1981). For this 
 reason, testing this guess was a useful exercise. 
 Another possibility lies in noting that, without (change to make better/related to changing something) costs, 
 inputs immediately (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to desired levels. This is the same as the (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) that the matrix-Min (8) is a unit matrix. When M is a unit matrix, 
 actual investment equals desired investment and no short-run unbalance 
 can happen in input markets. (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) this restriction helps to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the 
 null guess of no (change to make better/related to changing something) costs. It is worth watching/ noticing/ celebrating/ obeying that the ability to 
 argue with the maintained guess with watched/followed data is one more strength 
 of the (change to make better/related to changing something) cost model proposed in our (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). A test for immediate input (change to make better/related to changing something) is also a test for the guess that all production 
 inputs are changeable. Rejection of this guess does not end the guess testing procedure. 
 
 131 
 
 In fact, gut feeling hints that this guess might likely be rejected. The 
 end/end result that all factors are not (number or thing that changes) does not rule out the possibility that 
 some inputs are changeable. To test for the possibility that a single input, say the 
 ith input, is (number or thing that changes), the following parametric restrictions must be forced: 
 Mii 
 
 = -1 
 
 and 
 
 Mij 
 
 = 0 
 
 Vi =I= j 
 
 (9) 
 
 Following the rejection of the guess that all inputs are changeable, each input 
 can individually be tested by (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) (9). The results received/got from this 
 exercise will hopefully serve to guide future analysts about the correct (detailed description of exactly what is required) of scientific production models. (acts of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) into stiff (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 in input markets have a long and sometimes argument-causing history. The valuable thing 
 steadiness guess (Johnson and Quance, 1982) and tries to test it (Rooms and Vasavada, 1983) have received some attention (not very long ago). A second 
 advantage of our guess testing procedure follows from the scientific information received/got on the degree of valuable thing steadiness in U.S. farming. (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 guesses studied and suggested parametric restrictions are summarized in Table 1. 
 Before passing to the scientific analysis, a quick talk about/say of the test statistic used to tell the difference between different models is appropriate. A few 
 choices are available for this purpose. Well-known/obvious among these are Wald staTABLE 1 
 
 Guesses of interest and suggested parametric restrictions 
 Guess 
 
 Parametric restrictions* 
 
 Statements 
 
 All production 
 inputs (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Mn=M22 =M33 =M44 = -1 and 
 M1z=M13=M1-=Mz1 =Mz3 
 =Mz-=Msl =M3z =M34 
 =M-l=M-z=M-3=0 
 
 M is the negative of the 
 unit matrix 
 
 (able to last through tough conditions) equipment 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 M 11 = -1 andM21 =M3l=M41 =0 
 
 Change 1st column of 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) matrix 
 
 Real estate 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Change 2nd column of 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) matrix 
 
 Farm-Produced 
 (able to last through tough conditions) (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Change 3rd column of 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) matrix 
 
 Family Labor 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Change 4th column of 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) matrix 
 
 Univariate flexible 
 (device that speeds something up) 
 
 M1z=M13=M1-=Mz1=M23=Mz- 
 =M-l=M-z=M-3 
 =M31=M3z=M33=0 
 
 M is a diagonal matrix 
 
 *1 represents (able to last through tough conditions) equipment, 2 represents real estate, 3 stands for farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s, and 
 4 represents family labor. 
 
 132 
 
 tistics, chance ratio statistics, and Langrangian multiplier statistics. Our 
 study used the chance ratio statistic. If O" represents the ratio of values of 
 chance functions for restricted and (having no limits, rules, or barriers) models, then -21nO" is distributed as a chi-squared with degrees of freedom equal to the number of independent restrictions (Theil, 1971). This test is easy to apply and one that is 
 often used in related studies. 
 Scientific results 
 
 The scientific model contained of four almost-fixed inputs, two changeable inputs, and four outputs. Almost-fixed inputs included (able to last through tough conditions) equipment, real 
 estate, family labor, and farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s. Hired labor and (middle-position) materials were (number or thing that changes) inputs. Finally, animals, dairy, grains, and other 
 field crops were the outputs thought about/believed. Data used in guess are described 
 in Ball ( 1985). Before going ahead to guess the model, a time (popular thing/general way things are going) was 
 extra to each equation. This is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with standard practice in scientific production models. The time (popular thing/general way things are going) is used as a substitute for (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) technical change in U.S. farming. (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) technical change was assumed to 
 function as a shifter on the input demand and supply equations. In the input 
 equations a positive coefficient pointed to/showed input-using technical change. A negative coefficient was agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with input-saving technical change. The maintained (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) model was recursive. So the method of cycled (not going in a straight line) 
 (appearing to be) unrelated (moving backwards) was employed. Parametric guesses received/got 
 by this method are known to be asymptotically equal to maximum chance guesses at the point of coming together. This (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) has importance 
 to the guess testing procedure started at a later stage in the scientific 
 analysis. All guess was performed by using the TROLL package. 
 Guessed limits/guidelines of the (change to make better/related to changing something) matrix for maintained and accepted versions of the model are reported in Table 2. (change to make better/related to changing something) coefficients 
 reported there given information on the relative speed of (change to make better/related to changing something) to a 
 separation of actual from desired values. A change in relative prices causes a 
 gap between actual and desired stocks which is not fixed in the immediate 
 time period. (able to last through tough conditions) equipment took a little over 3 years to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to desired 
 values. This result can be explained sometimes by the (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) that 
 farming-based machinery cannot be used in other businesses during periods 
 of decline in prices of farming-based products. In the extreme case, when (change to make better/related to changing something) costs for this input are (without limits or an end), a commonly referred to example is that once 
 farming-based machinery is installed, it is 'bolted to the floor', and cannot be 
 disinvested in response to changing relative prices. A almost the same  end/end result 
 came out for farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s. 
 However, family labor (described the future) longer (change to make better/related to changing something) falls behind. This input took 
 over four years to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to a unbalance. Long falls behind  in labor (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 have been suggested in the farming-based money flow/money-based studies books (Baumgartner, 
 
 133 
 
 TABLE2 
 Guessed limits/guidelines of (change to make better/related to changing something) matrix for maintained and accepted versions of model 
 Limit/guideline
 
 Mn 
 M,2 
 M,3 
 M,4 
 M21 
 Mz2 
 M23 
 M24 
 M3, 
 M32 
 M33 
 M34 
 M4, 
 M4z 
 M43 
 M44 
 
 Maintained model 
 
 Accepted model 
 
 Guess 
 
 Standard error 
 
 Guess 
 
 Standard error 
 
 -0.3019 
 -0.0137 
 -0.3535 
 0.1125 
 -0.9363 
 -0.7350 
 -0.8431 
 -0.1499 
 -0.1367 
 -0.1159 
 -0.3961 
 -0.0557 
 -0.1413 
 -0.0070 
 -0.5131 
 -0.1707 
 
 0.0574 
 0.0459 
 0.0798 
 0.0222 
 0.1903 
 0.1514 
 0.2608 
 0.0737 
 0.1085 
 0.0766 
 0.1418 
 0.0365 
 0.1756 
 0.1363 
 0.2263 
 0.0599 
 
 -0.3064 
 0 
 -0.3372 
 0.1124 
 -1.1022 
 -1.0 
 -1.0606 
 0.1757 
 -0.0664 
 0 
 -0.3079 
 -0.0646 
 -0.0808 
 0 
 -0.4349 
 -0.1536 
 
 0.0435 
 0 
 0.0713 
 0.0189 
 0.1512 
 0 
 0.2067 
 0.0672 
 0.0752 
 0 
 0.1226 
 0.0328 
 0.1233 
 0 
 0.1753 
 0.0615 
 
 *1 represents (able to last through tough conditions) equipment, 2 represents real estate, 3 stands for farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s, and 4 
 represents family labor. 
 
 1965) and have been thought of as an important element of the farm problem. 
 One possible explanation for stiff labor (change to make better/related to changing something) is the specific workers included in choice of farming as an occupation. When a money-making state of 
 farming declines, farmers are unable to easily switch their labor skills to other 
 occupations. This process takes significant retraining and farmers may continue to remain in farming, at least in the short run, in excitement/preparation of improved (money made/good things received). The surprising result received/got from our model was that real 
 estate stocks (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) immediately to desired levels. No (change to make better/related to changing something) falls behind 
 were common for this input confirming the guess of zero (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 costs. 
 Results of the guess testing procedure are reported in Table 3. First, 
 the univariate flexible (device that speeds something up) guess was tested. A calculated statistic 
 of 173.51 went beyond the similar counted value of 32.62 for 16 degrees of 
 freedom. This guess was because of this rejected. Rejection of the univariate flexible (device that speeds something up) has been proven true by previous scientific studies as well (Epstein and Denny, 1983). Adoption of this (change to make better/related to changing something) (machine/method/way) may lead to 
 wrong ends/end results in studying farming-based input markets. Following this, 
 an effort was made to decide/figure out whether all production inputs were (number or thing that changes). 
 Again, the calculated chance ratio statistic was found to go beyond the table 
 
 134 
 
 TABLES 
 Chance ratio statistics for guess tests 
 Guess 
 
 Chance ratio 
 statistics 
 
 Degrees of 
 freedom 
 
 Table value 
 for chi -square 
 
 Univariate flexible (device that speeds something up) 
 All production inputs (numbers that change/things that change) 
 (able to last through tough conditions) equipment 
 Real estate (number or thing that changes) 
 Farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions) (number or thing that changes) 
 Family labor (number or thing that changes) 
 
 49.53 
 173.51 
 66.00 
 4.80 
 26.60 
 61.43 
 
 12 
 16 
 4 
 4 
 4 
 4 
 
 27.78 
 32.62 
 13.70 
 13.70 
 13.70 
 13.70 
 
 value for 12 degrees of freedom. This pointed to the number of almost-steadiness 
 in group U.S. farming. Almost-steadiness may be viewed as a weak form of 
 valuable thing steadiness. Our results confirm the idea of stiffness in input market 
 (change to make better/related to changing something). 
 The next step involved testing for almost-steadiness of individual inputs. The calculated statistic for (able to last through tough conditions) equipment, farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s, and family 
 labor were all higher than the table value of 13.70 for 4 degrees of freedom. 
 Almost-steadiness of these inputs could not be rejected. There appeared to be significant (change to make better/related to changing something) costs connected with changing the levels of these inputs. To 
 contrast, the guess that real estate was a changeable input could not be rejected. The calculated statistic did not lie in the area of rejection. (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 costs did hot influence smooth changes in the stocks of this input. Scientific 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) created by the guess testing procedure confirmed the number of (change to make better/related to changing something) costs as significant (things that add things to other things) in preventing immediate (change to make better/related to changing something) to changing opportunity costs. Energetic output 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) was also suggested by our guesses. Equation ( 7c) clearly hints 
 that so long as at least one input is almost-fixed, output (change to make better/related to changing something) is energetic. 
 The accepted model also gave described/explained information about the nature of (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 technical change in group U.S. farming. Among the almost-fixed inputs 
 (able to last through tough conditions) equipment showed factor using technical change; farm-produced (able to last through tough conditions)s showed the opposite behavior, namely factor saving technical change. 
 Self-employed labor, like family labor, also reduced in amount as a result 
 of technical change. The other changeable input, (middle-position) materials, increased due to the influence of technical change. Three of four outputs had 
 positive coefficients for the time (popular thing/general way things are going). The only exception was the supply of 
 dairy products which had a negative coefficient on the time (popular thing/general way things are going). The unlikely 
 coefficient sign for the dairy part/area may arise because the dairy part/area is highly 
 controlled in the U.S. and the present model poorly takes by force/takes control of (connected/related) 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) features of the dairy industry. Within the present (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), the 
 only explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) in the dairy supply equation are relative prices and 
 
 135 
 
 a time (popular thing/general way things are going). Including in something of other (numbers that change/things that change) may fix this problem. Based on 
 these coefficient signs, technical change tended to reduce the supply of dairy 
 products while increasing grain, other field crops, and animals output. Our 
 energetic (detailed description of exactly what is required) almost completely supports the presence of (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) technical change at the group level, both in input and output markets. 
 Before closing the scientific discussion, a few statements on the econometric 
 performance of the guessed model are called for. The model made happy the 
 monotonicity restriction. All left hand side (numbers that change/things that change) had positive (described the future) 
 values when tested at the point guesses. (even though there is the existence of) the large number of 
 limits/guidelines to be guessed (101 in all), many limits/guidelines were (related to numbers) 
 significant at ordinary levels of importance. Roughly 65% of the limits/guidelines were (meaningful numbers) at the five percent level of importance. On 
 the negative side, the guessed limits/guidelines were not agreeing with/not matching with curviness 
 of the value function, as energetic (two things existing together) would suggest. However, failure of a 
 model to obey rules  to curvature restrictions is not limited to this study as many 
 studies putting into use the dual approach have failed on this front (Shumway, 1983 ). 
 Another encouraging (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) was that most versions of the model reached 
 coming together in fewer than 200 cycles. (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) the complex cross-equation restrictions and poor starting values did not make/give the (job that is important now) an 
 impossible one. 
 Ends/end results 
 
 An attempt was made in this paper to summarize the results of an (happening now) 
 project on identification of the appropriate production structure for group 
 U.S. farming. (in a true way), this is an high-reaching goal to set and can only be 
 completed in a sequence of steps. Hopefully, each step will provide some 
 new information about the structure of production in the U.S. farm-related 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and also serve to guide future research. Keeping this in mind, it is 
 useful to summarize the results received/got so far and point to/show the next items 
 on the research (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal). Our model hints that almost-fixed inputs (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to 
 their desired values in 3-5 years. Unbalance in input markets caused by 
 constantly changing opportunity costs are not fixed immediately but carry 
 over in the next few time periods. This is true of output markets too. A sharp 
 point of difference with previous guesses is the high (change to make better/related to changing something) speeds (described the future) by the multioutput model. Similar previous studies adopting a single (made up of different things) output (described the future) falls behind  of up to 20 years for labor (Vasavada and 
 Rooms, 1986). Shorter falls behind  (described the future) by this model may be a result 
 of changing the model (detailed description of exactly what is required). 
 Knowledge about speeds of (change to make better/related to changing something) help policy makers in the design of 
 (making steady/making firm and strong) policy. Policy instruments in U.S. farming are usually designed to distort market-based opportunity costs. These policies have the effect of creating unbalance in input and output markets. Model guesses 
 
 136 
 
 suggest that it may take a few years before the meant output supply and 
 input demand levels (make steady/make firm and strong) to their new long-run balance values. Guessed limits/guidelines can be used to develop short and long-run price elasticities. 
 While such ancexercise is not hard to (do/complete), it was pushed away to a later 
 and more described/explained (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). 
 Future (acts of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) must (focus mental and physical effort) on improving model (detailed description of exactly what is required). 
 Two important issues need to be talked to/looked at. The first relates to the (detailed description of exactly what is required) ofnonstatic expectations. The static expectations idea (you think is true), while convenient for the scientific analysis, is unnecessarily (serving to severely limit or control). Incorporating 
 expectations into energetic models is by no means an easy job. However, some 
 improvement can be made on the existing model. A second issue relates to the 
 (something forced on people/an inconvenient situation) of curvature restrictions on the value function. Violation of curvature restrictions is a matter of some concern since the guessed model no 
 longer exactly follows the properties said by explanation. Curviness restrictions can be 
 forced by a method proposed in the books ( Lau, 1978). For the present, 
 it is fair to say that these are some ends/end results that can be drawn from the 
 ideas (you think are true) made here and, although early/incomplete, they enable us to make 
 some thumbnail sketches about the nature of input and output changes/recalculations in 
 group U.S. farming. 
 
 References 
 Arrow, K.J., 1982. Best capital (change to make better/related to changing something). In: K.J. Arrow, S. Karlin and H. Scarf (Editors), 
 Studies in Applied Chance and Management Science. Stanford University Press, Palo Singing voice, 
 CA. 
 Ball, V.E., 1977. Output, input, and working well measurement in U.S. farming. Am. J. Agric. 
 Econ., 67: 475-486. 
 Baumgartner, H.W., 1965. Potential ability to move around in farming: some reasons for the existence of the 
 labor-move (from one place to another) problem. J. Farm. Econ., 47: 74-82. 
 Berndt, E., Fuss, M. and Changeman, L., 1979. A energetic model of costs of (change to make better/related to changing something) and connected factor demands. Work. Pap. 7925, Institute for Policy Analysis, University of Toronto, 
 Ont. 
 Rooms, R.G. and Vasavada, U., 1983. Testing valuable thing steadiness for U.S. farming. Am. J. Agric. 
 Econ., 65:761-769. 
 Diewert, W.E., 1973. Functional forms for (money made/good thing received) and change function. J. Econ. Explanation, 
 6: 404-418. 
 Diewert, W.E., 1984. (two things existing together) approaches to microeconomic explanation. In: K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intriligator (Editors), Handbook of Mathematical Money flow, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
 Epstein, L.G., 1981. (two things existing together) explanation and functional forms for energetic factor demands. Rev. Econ. 
 Stud., 48: 81-95. 
 Epstein, L.G. and Denny, M.G.S., 1983. The multivariate flexible (device that speeds something up): its scientific effects/results/suggestions and an application to U.S. manufacturing. Econometrica, 51: 647-674. 
 Griliches, Z., 1960. The demand for a (able to last through tough conditions) input: Farm tractors in the United States; 19211957. In: A.C. Harberger (Editor), The Demand for (able to last through tough conditions) Products (that are bought and sold). University of Chicago 
 Press, Chicago, IL. 
 
 137 
 Johnson, G.L. and Quance, L., 1982. The Overproduction Trap in U.S. Farming. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
 Jorgenson, D.W., 1974. The money-based explanation of replacement and (lowering of value). In: W. Sellakaerts 
 (Editor), Econometrics and Money-based Explanation: (written opinions) in Honor of Jan Tinbergen. MacMillan, 
 London, pp. 189-222. 
 Lau, L.J., 1978. Testing and (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) monotonicity, curviness and almost-curviness restrictions. 
 In: M. Fuss and D. McFadden (Editors), Production Money flow: A Dual Approach to Explanation 
 and Application, I. North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 409-453. 
 Lopez, R.E., 1985. Supply response and investment in the Canadian food processing industry. 
 Am. J. Agric. Econ., 67: 40-48. 
 Mortenson, D.T., 1973. Generalized coast of (change to make better/related to changing something) and energetic factor demand explanation. 
 Econometrica, 41: 657-665. 
 Muth, J.F., 1961. Clear expectations and the explanation of price movements. Econometrica, 29: 
 315-335. 
 Low pointi, M.I. and Rosen, S., 1969. Connected factor demands. Am. Econ. Rev., 59: 457-471. 
 Penrose, E.T., 1959. The Explanation of the Growth of the Firm. Wiley, New York. 
 Penson, J., Romain, R. and Hughes, D., 1981. Net investment in farm tractors: an econometric 
 analysis. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 63: 629-635. 
 Shumway, C.R., 1983. Supply demand, and technology in a multiproduct industry: Texas field 
 crops. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 65: 748-760. 
 Theil, H., 1971. Rules/basic truths of Econometrics. Wiley, New York. 
 Vasavada, U. and Rooms, R.G., 1986. Investment in U.S. farming. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 68: 
 950-960. 
 Young, D .L., Mittelhammer, R. C., Rostamizadeh, A. and Holland, D. W., 1985. (two things existing together) explanation and 
 applied production money flow/money-based studies research: a (teacher and teaching-related) written work. Res. Bull. 962, Washington State 
 University. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
