AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 The (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) and causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in developing countries 
 Lisa C. Smitha·*, Amani E. El Obeidb, Helen H. Jensenb 
 a International 
 
 Food Policy Research Institute, 2033 K Street, N. W Washington, D.C. 20006, USA 
 blowa State University, Ames, !A, USA 
 
 Received 21 May 1999; received in changed form 30 August 1999; accepted 15 November 1999 
 
 Abstract 
 
 At the 1996 World Food Summit, 186 countries made a loyalty to/promise to reduce the number of almost always undernourished 
 people by half by 2015. In order to plan effective policies for reaching this goal, a thorough understanding of the location 
 and causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is needed. This paper provides a broad summary of the current character of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in 
 developing countries, focusing on two questions: (1) Why are they food insecure? and (2) Why are the food insecure? To 
 answer the last thing just mentioned question data from 58 developing countries with high numbers of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) are employed to 
 examine the relative importance of two of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry)'s most basic causes: national food availability and the inability of 
 people to access food due to poorness. Using child (bad food quality) as a substitute (along with descriptive controls for non-food 
 (things that decide other things) of (bad food quality)), the paper finds little relationship between national food get/helpabilities and food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). The 
 group of countries that show the highest extreme harshness of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) are those with high poorness and food (dietary energy) 
 (more than what's needed), agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the view that poorness is the most (existing all over a large area) cause of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in the 1990s. The paper 
 ends/decides by (thinking about/when one thinks about) the effects/results/suggestions of the analysis for appropriate (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) and policy targeting to improve food 
 security for the greatest numbers of people at the fastest pace, now and into the 21st century.© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All 
 rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry); Poorness; Developing countries 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Worldwide  1 food supply is now (good) enough to meet 
 the food needs of the world's population. It is expected 
 to continue to be (good) enough well into the next century 
 (Islam, 1995). (even though there is the existence of) such (oversupply/large quantity) of food, over 
 
 *Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-202-862-8166; fax: +l-202467-4439. 
 E-mail address: l.c.srnith@cgiar.org (L.C. Smith). 
 1 An earlier paper on this issue that used data through 199211993 
 is available in Johnson et a!., 1999. 
 
 840 million people (20%) in poor countries 
 today are guessed to suffer from long-lasting undernourishment (FAO, 1996a); many more suffer from shortages of protein and very important micronutrients, such 
 as iodine, Vitamin A and iron. More than that, even those 
 who consume (good) enough food to meet their dietary 
 needs can suffer from (bad food quality) due to poor health 
 and (not good enough) or inappropriate caring behaviors. 
 The most (able to be hurt) of the world's people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) are the 
 first to suffer from such food and nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry): 
 167 million developing-country children under age 
 five, or about one in three, are (not given enough food). It is 
 
 0169-5150/00/$- see front matter© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S 0 1 6 9-5 15 0 ( 9 9) 0 0 0 5 I- 1 
 
 200 
 
 L. C. Smith et al./Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 guessed that over 50% of child deaths in developing 
 countries are related to (bad food quality) (Pelletier et al., 
 1995). As so clearly showed/represented by Haddad (1995), p. 
 93, (bad food quality) has (affecting lots of things in many ways for a long time) results for the 
 ability of those children who survive to add/give to 
 their countries' development as adults: 
 For nearly half of the children in the ... least 
 developed countries, being born is a shock from 
 which they will never recover. In these countries, 
 nearly all of which are in South Asia or subSaharan Africa, out of every 1000 children born 
 alive, 112 will die before their first birthday. 
 Another 48 will die before their fifth birthday. 
 Of the remaining 840, 300 will be significantly 
 underweignt. As (between 6 and 18 years of age)d children, they will 
 be less able to learn in school. As adults, they will 
 earn less income and pile up less wealth. 
 Only the remaining 540 children will come out 
 (compared to other things) unharmed. 
 In some countries and for some historical periods 
 the not enough food consumption and (bad food quality) 
 that are partially responsible for such innocent suffering have been partly due to not enough supplies of 
 food at a national level. (how good (or good enough) something is) of worldwide  and 
 national food supplies was the main concern of the 
 first world worldwide  summit on food security, the World 
 Food Conference of 1974, which (happened at the same time with rising 
 grain prices worldwide (FAO, 1996c). 
 While food availability is still a problem for some 
 countries, the main cause of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in developing countries today is believed to be the inability of 
 people to gain access to food due to poorness (Foster, 
 1992; Von Braun et al., 1992; Alexandratos, 1995; 
 Serageldin, 1995; Maxwell, 1996a). The problems of 
 food access and poorness were, appropriately, a focal 
 point at the second world summit on food security, the 
 World Food Summit of 1996, at which 186 countries 
 adopted a Plan of Action with the following commitment2: 
 We will put into use policies aimed at destroying 
 poorness and (state where two things are not the same) and improving physical 
 and money-based access by all, at all times, to 
 (good) enough, (related to healthy eating) (good) enough and safe food 
 and its effective use (FAO, 1996b, p. 13). 
 
 2 A full list of the World Food Summit promises can be 
 found in the Add on. 
 
 At the Summit, these countries set a goal of reducing the number of almost always undernourished people 
 by half by the year 2015 (FAO, l996b). 
 In order to plan effective policies directed at 
 improving food security, a thorough understanding of 
 the location and causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is needed. 
 This paper provides a broad summary of the current 
 character of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in developing countries. 
 Focusing specifically on long-lasting, rather than short-lived, food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry), the paper faces/deals with two questions: Where are the food insecure? and Why are they 
 food insecure? We first lay out a idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for understanding the causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) 
 and introduce the scientific measures employed in the 
 paper. We then give an summary of the (land-area-based/location) 
 distribution of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in the 1990s, broadly 
 think about/believe its basic causes in the developing-country 
 areas, and discuss where it is likely to be located in 
 the early 20 years of the 21st century. Next we employ 
 data from 58 developing countries with high numbers of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) to examine the relative 
 importance of national food availability and poorness 
 in deciding/figuring out food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in the 1990s. Finally, 
 we think about/believe the effects/results/suggestions of the analysis for appropriate (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) and policy targeting to improve 
 food and nutrition security for the greatest numbers of 
 people at the fastest pace, now and into the 21st-first 
 century. 
 
 2. The causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) 
 A person is food secure when he or she has access at 
 all times to enough food for an active, healthy life. 
 In the same way/in that way, people are food secure when their consumption of food is (good) enough, secure (not (able to be hurt) 
 to consumption shortfalls), and (able to last/helping the planet) (Maxwell, 
 1996). The list of causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is long and 
 many-sided: they range from (not having a steady, trustworthy government), war 
 and civil battle(s)/tension, macroeconomic (too much of one thing and not enough of another) and trade 
 dislocations to (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) worsening, poorness, 
 population growth, (women and men not treated equally), not enough education, and poor health. All, however, can be related in 
 some fashion to two basic causes: not enough national 
 food availability and not enough access to food by 
 families and people. A broad idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for food security is given in Fig. 1, in which it 
 is seen to be part of an overall process linking worldwide 
 and national food availability, families' and indi- 
 
 201 
 
 LC. Smith et al.! Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Worldwide  Food 
 Availability 
 
 g 
 
 --&#126;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;--,__&#126; 
 National 
 Food 
 Production 
 
 National Net 
 Imports of 
 Food 
 
 &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;-+--Household 
 
 "Full" 
 \ 
 
 / 
 Household 
 and Individual 
 Food Access 
 
 Incomes 
 &#126; 
 
 ;1 
 
 :::1 
 
 c 
 
 &amp;gt; 
 
 0 
 
 &#126; 
 
 c 
 z 
 c 
 ..J 
 
 &amp;lt; 
 0 
 
 :r 
 
 w 
 
 C/) 
 
 :J 
 
 0 
 
 :r 
 
 ..J 
 
 &amp;lt; 
 
 :J 
 
 c 
 
 &amp;gt; 
 0 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Fig. 1. Idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for food security: from worldwide  food availability to peoples' nutrition security SOURCE: Changed from UNICEF 
 (1998), Frankenberger eta!. (1997a, b). 
 
 food' access to food, and people' nutrition 
 security. 3 
 Worldwide  and national food availability stand at the 
 most macro level of the food security 'equation'. 
 Worldwide  food availability is figured out by/decided by total world 
 food production. In any given year, national food 
 availability is figured out by/decided by a country's own food 
 production, its stocks of food, and its net imports of 
 food (imports minus exports), including food aid. 
 Still closer to food security is household and individual access to food which, in addition to national 
 3 Examples of more detailed idea-based (solid basic structures on which bigger things can be built) can be 
 found in UNICEF (1998), Oshaug (1994) and FAO (1996d). 
 
 food availability, is figured out by/decided by a household's 'full' 
 income. Along with cash income, full income includes 
 the value of products (that are bought and sold)  produced (such as food) and 
 services gave/given (such as child care) in families 
 that do not enter the market, as well as in-kind 
 moves (from one place to another) of products (that are bought and sold)  and services. Access to food may 
 be gained through (1) production or gathering of food, 
 (2) (instance of buying something for money) of food available to buy with cash income, 
 and/or (3) receipts of in-kind moves (from one place to another) of food 
 (whether from other private people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.), national or foreign governments, or international institutions). 
 Within families, individual food access is influenced by intrahousehold food distribution decisions. 
 As shown in Fig. 1, a household's expenses of full 
 
 202 
 
 L.C. Smith et al.! Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 income for (accomplishing or gaining) food security fight against 
 expenses on other basic needs (e.g. health care, 
 housing, and basic education) as well as non-needs. A household or individual unable to meet all 
 basic needs can be thought about/believed to be in total 
 poorness (Frankenberger, 1996). 
 Finally, at the most micro level of the food security 
 equation is nutrition security, without which food 
 security is not translated into an active, healthy life. 
 Nutrition security is defined as follows: 'An individual 
 is (related to healthy eating) secure when he or she has secure 
 access to a (related to healthy eating) (good) enough diet and the food 
 ate/destroyed is (related to living things) used such that (good) enough 
 performance is maintained in growth, resisting or 
 recovering from disease, pregnancy, (breast-milk making), and 
 physical work' (Frankenberger et al., 1997a, b, 1). 
 In addition to food security, nutrition security has two 
 other (things that decide other things). The first is 'care', or 'the provision 
 in the household and the community of time, attention, 
 and support to meet the physical, mental and social 
 needs of the growing child and other household 
 members' (ICN, 1992, 1). Examples of important 
 child care behaviors are the timing and frequency 
 of breast-feeding, the degree of stimulation and interaction with parents, investments in disease prevention 
 and domestic cleanliness, the use of health services and 
 regular growth watching. The second non-food 
 (thing that decides something) of nutrition security is health. Poor health, 
 or illness, affects nutrition security by depressing 
 (desire to eat/desire for something), stoping the (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid) of the (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) in 
 food and using/eating calories and other (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) while 
 fighting off and recovering from illness, leaving less 
 energy and (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) available for growth and weight 
 maintenance (Ramalingaswarni et al., 1996). 
 
 3. Indicators of food and nutrition security 
 In the rest of the paper, to examine where the 
 food insecure are located and the basic causes of their 
 food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry), we depend on three indicators (reported 
 for 93 developing countries in Add on Table A.1). 
 The first indicator, daily per person dietary energy 
 balance (DEB), is a measure of national food availability. It gives the good amount of a country's dietary 
 energy supply (DES) for meeting the dietary energy 
 needed thing (DER) of its population if such dietary 
 energy were distributed among people according to 
 their needed things. Countries with daily per person 
 
 DESs that are greater than their daily per person DER 
 are classified 'dietary energy extra'; otherwise they 
 are classified 'dietary energy shortage'. National per 
 capita DESs are taken from the United Nations Food 
 and Farming-based Organization (FAO) food balance 
 sheets and population statistics. Food production 
 and trade (including food aid)4 data and information 
 on seed rates, wastage, stock changes, and types of 
 food use for each country are used to arrive at the totals 
 of each valuable thing available for human consumption 
 each year. Guesses of total energy availability for 
 human consumption are then received/made from by collecting 
 the energy values (in (small units of heat), or 'kcals'). The DER 
 for each country takes into account the country's 
 (related to information about people) (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) (sex and age distribution) 
 and (sums of money given/freedoms to move within limits) for physical activity. The DERs 
 employed in this paper go along with/match up to body mass 
 indexes (BMI) watched/followed among healthy, active people. 5 
 The second indicator we employ is a measure of 
 income-based total poorness, a substitute for people's 
 ability to access food. 6 A country's total poorness 
 rate is defined as the proportion of people whose 
 income is less than one dollar per day. Such people 
 4 Note that since food aid is included in per person DES figures, 
 the figures are not an indicator of national food dependability - or 
 the ability of countries to meet their food needs on their own - for 
 all the countries. Without food aid, countries that are 
 classified as dietary energy extra may fall into the dietary energy 
 shortage category (Ramakrishnan, 1997). In 1994-1995, the developing-country area with the highest percentage of its food supply 
 met through food aid was Latin America (6%), followed by subSaharan Africa (5.6%) (USDA, 1995). 
 5 The per person DERs going along with/matching up to BMis watched/followed among 
 healthy, active people are termed 'average' (rather than 'minimum') per person DERs (FAO, 1996a). For the developing-country 
 areas these are guessed to be (in kcals): sub-Saharan Africa 
 2100, near east and north Africa 2150, east and Southeast Asia 
 2220, South Asia 2110, and Latin America and the Caribbean 2200 
 (FAO, 1996a, Table 16). 
 6 Nationally representative data on direct measures of food 
 access, such as dietary intakes and food expenses, are not 
 available for a large number of countries. To give a rough guess 
 of the numbers of food insecure in each developing country, the 
 FAO uses per person DES and guesses of the distribution of food 
 intake within countries to calculate the numbers of 'chronically 
 undernourished'. While the FAO measure gives a broad idea of the 
 number and numbers of food insecure in poor countries, 
 because it is (related to how something was done) too nice to national food 
 get/helpabilities, it cannot be employed for making correct crosscountry comparisons and in doing analyses of the causes of 
 food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) (Smith, 1998). 
 
 L.C. Smith eta!. I Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 203 
 
 Table 1 
 Child (bad food quality), total poorness, and dietary energy availability by developing-country area" 
 Area 
 
 Child (bad food quality) 
 (underweight) ( 1995) 
 
 Total poorness 
 (1993) 
 
 Dietary energy supply/balance 
 (1996) 
 
 Number 
 
 Number 
 
 Dietary energy 
 supply (per 
 capita kcals/day) 
 
 Dietary energy 
 balance (per 
 capita kcals/day) 
 
 (%) 
 
 Number of 
 children 
 (millions) 
 
 (%) 
 
 Number of 
 people 
 (millions) 
 
 South-Asia 
 Sub-Saharan Africa 
 East and South-East Asia 
 Near East and North Africa 
 Latin America and Caribbean 
 
 49 
 31 
 23 
 15 
 10 
 
 86 
 31 
 38 
 6 
 5 
 
 43 
 39 
 26 
 4 
 24 
 
 515 
 219 
 446 
 11 
 110 
 
 2380 
 2156 
 2792 
 2988 
 2813 
 
 +270 
 -55 
 +572 
 +840 
 +613 
 
 All developing countries 
 
 31 
 
 167 
 
 29 
 
 1301 
 
 2615 
 
 +450 
 
 a Sources: Data columns 1 and 2: WHO (1997), Table 3. Data columns 3 and 4: Table 5, Ravallion and Chen (1997). Data column 5: 
 Add on Table A.l, column 5. Data column 6: Add on Table A.l, column 6. 
 
 are unlikely to be able to meet their food needs 
 sustainably. Where possible, the measure is based 
 on (1985) buying power equality (PPP) prices to 
 secure/make sure of international comparability. It includes the 
 credited value of non-market products (that are bought and sold) (including production of food for own consumption, but leaving out/keeping out 
 the value of people's time) (World Bank, 1998). 
 The third indicator, child (bad food quality), is a measure 
 of nutrition security. Specifically, we employ the 
 number of underweight children under 5 years 
 measured anthropometrically by weight-for-age, a 
 summary measure (taking by force)/(taking control of) both short height (stunting) and thinness (wasting) (Martorell and Mason, 
 1996). Child (bad food quality) is figured out by/decided by health and 
 care as well as food security; all three (things that decide other things) 
 may act independently and interact cooperatingally in 
 influencing child (bad food quality) (Haddad et al., 1998). 
 Anyway, it is carefully thought about/believed a good (substitute-related) measure 
 for food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) (Maxwell and Frankenberger, 
 1992; Rogers, 1997). In the analysis below, in order 
 to separate the influence of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) on child 
 (bad food quality) from the influence of health, we employ 
 an indicator of the quality of countries' health (surrounding conditions). This is an index composed of the percentage 
 of each country's population with access to health 
 services, safe water and (keeping things clean and disease-free). 
 
 4. The (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in developing 
 countries 
 Employing child (bad food quality), total pov&#126;rty, 
 and dietary energy availability data, it is possible to 
 
 construct a broad (land-area-based/location) distribution of food 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) and to identify its basic causes in the 
 developing-country areas. South Asia and subSaharan Africa are the areas with the worst food 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) problems (see Table 1 and Figs. 2 and 3). 
 South Asia has by far the highest rate of child 
 (bad food quality), at 50% of all children under five. It also 
 has the highest numbers of (not given enough food) children (see 
 dashed line in Fig. 2). At 86 million, this is almost onehalf of the whole developing-country total, which 
 points to/shows a huge food and nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) 
 problem. Although the area has a dietary energy 
 extra of 270 kcals per person per day, nearly one out 
 of every two South Asian people is guessed to be 
 living in total poorness. This hints that South 
 Asia's food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is connected mainly with a food 
 
 100 
 50 
 
 80 
 
 g, 40 
 
 5l 
 
 60 
 
 30 
 
 40 
 
 &#126; 20 
 0. 
 
 10 
 
 20 
 
 0 
 
 0 
 
 "'&#126; 
 c 
 
 I 
 
 lii 
 
 .0 
 
 E 
 ::&amp;gt; 
 
 c 
 
 South Asia 
 
 SubEast and Near East 
 Latin 
 Saharan Southeast and North America 
 Africa 
 Asia 
 Africa 
 and 
 Caribbean 
 t&#126;········nt Child (bad food quality) 
 -Total po&#126;.erty 
 .. ·D· .. Millions of children (not given enough food) 
 
 Fig. 2. Child (bad food quality) and total poorness in developingcountry areas. Numbers of (not given enough food) children are measured 
 on the right-hand up-and-down axis. Source: Table 1. 
 
 204 
 
 L.C. Smith et al./Agricu/tural Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 ll'i)South Asia 
 
 5.4% 3.0% 
 
 - East and Southeast 
 Asia 
 
 49.1% 
 
 o Sub-Saharan Africa 
 - Near East and 
 North Africa 
 - Latin America and 
 Caribbean 
 
 Fig. 3. (related to a large area) proportions of total developoing-country child 
 (bad food quality), in percent. Source: Table I. 
 
 access, rather than food availability, problem. In addition to food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry), South Asian countries' high 
 child (bad food quality) numbers are also caused by their 
 poor health (surrounding conditions) (only 46% of people/of the group 
 has access to health services, safe water, and (keeping things clean and disease-free)) and (not good enough) care for women and children, 
 factors that are linked in turn to the very low social and 
 health status of South Asian women (Ramalingaswami et al., 1996; Osmani, 1997). Within the South 
 Asian area, the worst problems are in Bangladesh, 
 which has the highest child (bad food quality) rate in the 
 world (56%), India (53%) and Nepal (47%). India is 
 the country with the highest number of (not given enough food) 
 children in the world, at 62 million, or 37% of the 
 developing-country total. 
 Sub-Saharan Africa's child (bad food quality) rate of 
 31% is much lower than South Asia's. Due to the 
 area's current low population density, the number of 
 (not given enough food) children in sub-Saharan Africa is also 
 fairly low, at 31 million. Its poorness number, however, is almost as high as South Asia's, suggesting 
 extreme food access problems. Also, it has a 
 major food availability problem, with a dietary energy 
 balance close to zero. Of the 26 developing countries 
 that are dietary energy shortage, 17 are in sub-Saharan 
 Africa. Adding/giving to child (bad food quality) is the 
 area's poor health (surrounding conditions) (with only 42% of 
 the population having access to health services, safe 
 water, and (keeping things clean and disease-free)). The countries in the area with 
 the highest child (bad food quality) rates are Ethiopia (48%) 
 and Niger (43%). Somalia has the worst food availability problem of all developing countries, with a 
 dietary energy shortage of 568 kcals per person per day. 
 Although the other developing-country areas 
 have less bad food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) and much better 
 
 health (surrounding conditions) than do South Asia and subSaharan Africa, 7 some countries within these areas 
 have major food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) problems. While the East 
 and Southeast Asia area has a fairly high dietary 
 energy extra of 572 kcals per person per day, it 
 maintains (compared to other things) high povetty (26%) and child 
 (bad food quality) rates (23%). It is the home of a large 
 number of (not given enough food) children, 38 million, which is 
 nearly one-quarter of all developing-country (not given enough food) children. Countries with especially high child 
 (bad food quality) rates are Vietnam (45%), Myanmar 
 (43%) and Laos (40%). 
 The Near East and North Africa area has the 
 highest dietary energy extra of the developing-country areas, at 840 kcals. It also has a low poorness 
 number, at 4%, suggesting that food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is 
 not a major problem. Anyway, the area's child 
 (bad food quality) rate is 15%, suggesting that nutrition 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) remains a problem due to poor health or 
 care. Within the area, Afghanistan has an very 
 high dietary energy shortage of 475 kcals and a 40% 
 child (bad food quality) rate. 
 The Latin America and Caribbean area has the 
 lowest child (bad food quality) rate of all the developingcountry areas. Although it has a high dietary energy 
 extra (at 613 kcals), its poorness rate (24%) is almost 
 equal to that of East and Southeast Asia. This 
 hints that the main problem hidden (under) food and 
 nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in Latin American and Caribbean 
 countries is probably one of food access. Compared to 
 other countries in the area, Haiti and Guatemala, for 
 which over one-quarter of all children under five are 
 guessed to be (not given enough food), have the worst food 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) problems. 
 Some developing countries have (compared to other things) low 
 overall numbers of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) but anyway 
 contain large numbers of food insecure people, due 
 either to large (groups of people/animals/things) or in-country (related to a large area) differences that cancel each other out (Von Braun et al., 
 1992). For example, Brazil and Mexico, with dietary 
 energy (more than what's needed) and child (bad food quality) rates of 6 
 and 14%, (match up each pair of items in order), anyway contain pockets 
 
 7 A close guess of the percent of people having access to health 
 services, safe water, and (keeping things clean and disease-free) in east Asia is 76. For the near 
 east and north Africa area the percentage is 78. For the Latin 
 American and Caribbean area the percentage is 80. 
 
 L.C. Smith eta/.! Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 of extreme total poorness and food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). 
 China has a dietary energy extra and a child 
 (bad food quality) rate of 17%, which is low compared to 
 other developing countries. Yet it is the home of the 
 second largest number of developing-country (not given enough food) children, at 18 million, or 11% of the total. 
 Across developing countries, the number of food 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is generally higher in areas away from cities than in 
 city-based  areas (Von Braun et al., 1992). An International 
 Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) study has 
 found that the number of children's (preschoolers') 
 (bad food quality) is regularly lower in city-based  samples 
 compared to (away from cities) samples (see Add on Table A.2). 
 In Peru, for example, only 6.4% of children living in 
 city-based  areas are (not given enough food), compared to 17.7% of 
 children living in areas away from cities (Regret! et al., 1998). 
 However, city-based  food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) and (bad food quality) will 
 become more and more important problems in the future 
 as rates of (city growth) increase and city-based  (keeping things clean and disease-free), 
 diet quality, and food safety problems grow (FAO, 
 1996d). 
 (definitely/as one would expect) future food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is dependent on 
 what actions are taken now to avoid it. Anyway, 
 current (related to a large area) (popular things/general ways things are going) can give us some idea of where 
 food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) may be located in the early 20 years of 
 the 21st century. By most projections, both food and 
 nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) are on the decline in developing 
 countries as a whole. Child (bad food quality) in Southeast 
 Asia is falling quickly, at around one percentage point 
 per year. It is (lowering in number/getting worse) more slowly in South Asia (by 
 one-half a percentage point per year), where it is 
 expected to remain high relative to other areas well 
 into the 21st century. Without speeded up (serving to stop something bad before it happens) 
 action, the area's poorness, poor health conditions, 
 and poor quality of care could continue for some time. 
 (even though there is the existence of) a (lowering in number/getting worse) child (bad food quality) rate, the Latin 
 American area is also likely, without fast 
 action, to experience a toughness of total poorness, 
 and so problems of food access, into the 21st century 
 (ACC/SCN, 1992; IFPRI, 1995). 
 The only area in which food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) is 
 expected to increase over the next 20 years is subSaharan Africa. Trends show that child (bad food quality) 
 has either increased or remained static for most countries. Total poorness is expected to rise; (statements about the future) 
 show the area will face continued food availability 
 problems and probably will be unable to import the 
 difference between its food needs and production 
 
 205 
 
 without increased investment (ACC/SCN, 1992; 
 IFPRI, 1995). 
 
 5. National food availability, poorness, and food 
 security 
 We have seen that not enough food availability at a 
 national level and (not good enough) access to food due to 
 poorness are the two most basic causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). Although both are important factors, for policy 
 purposes it is important to know which is (compared to other things) 
 more important in deciding/figuring out food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in each 
 developing country. In this section we give some 
 (numbers-based) (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on this issue for the developing 
 world as a whole using data from the early 1990s. 
 As noted in Fig. 1, enough food available in a 
 country to meet the food needs of all of its population 
 is a necessary - but not (good) enough - condition for 
 food security. This point is made clear by the fact that 
 in many countries food supply is enough to meet the 
 needs of all people but food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) anyway 
 remains high. Using child (bad food quality) as a substitute for 
 food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry), Fig. 4 shows how the extreme harshness of 
 food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) changes across six groups of devel50 .&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;--_.. 100 
 
 40 
 
 80 
 
 30 
 
 60 
 
 20 
 
 40 
 
 10 
 
 20 
 
 0 
 
 0 
 High 
 shortage 
 
 Medium 
 shortage 
 
 Low 
 shortage 
 
 Low 
 Medium High 
 extra extra extra 
 
 National food availability 
 
 lll!ill!l!i Percentage of children (not given enough food) 
 -+-Number of children (not given enough food) 
 
 Fig. 4. Child (bad food quality) by dietary energy availability country 
 groupings. Note: The flat/left-and-right axis gives six groups of countries 
 (made different) by their dietary energy balances. Countries are 
 defined as dietary energy shortage if their daily per person dietary 
 energy supply is not enough to meet their per person ;dietary energy 
 needed thing; otherwise they are dietary energy extra. The dietary 
 energy balance cut-offs for each group are given in note 8. The 
 percentage of child (bad food quality) is measured on the left-hand 
 up-and-down axis. The percentages are calculated as the total number of 
 (not given enough food) children is measured on the right-hand up-and-down axis. 
 Source: calculated from data in Add on Table A. I. 
 
 L.C. Smith eta/.!Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 206 
 
 oping countries (made different) by their food availability positions. The groups range from one containing 
 high dietary energy-shortage countries through one 
 made up of high dietary energy-extra countries. 8 
 We find that the chance that a child will suffer 
 from (bad food quality), rather than decreasing steadily with 
 increasing food availability, is likely to be higher in 
 countries with low dietary energy (more than what's needed) than in 
 those with high dietary energy shortages. Only for the 
 medium and high extra groups do child (bad food quality) 
 rates show a (lowering in number/getting worse) (popular thing/general way things are going) with increased food 
 availability. Overall, the dietary energy-extra countries have a lower (number of times something happens) of child (bad food quality) 
 (30%) than the dietary energy-shortage countries 
 (37%). However, the difference is small. Fig. 4 suggests a weak relationship between national food get/helpabilities and people's food security in developing 
 countries. 9 
 Fig. 4 also shows the numbers of (not given enough food) 
 children for the same six groupings. It is seen/obvious 
 that in any given year a larger number of (not given enough food) 
 children may live in dietary energy-extra countries 
 than in dietary energy-shortage countries. In fact, in 
 1995 about 131 million of the 167 million 
 children under five who were guessed to be (not given enough food) (78%, or about three in four) lived in 
 countries with dietary energy (more than what's needed). This suggests 
 that in the 1990s, for the large majority of food 
 insecure people, the hidden (under) problem probably 
 8 The six groups are defined by upper and lower bounds on the 
 countries' per person dietary energy balances as follows: 
 
 Category 
 
 Daily per person dietary energy 
 balance bounds (kcals) 
 Lower 
 
 High shortage 
 Medium shortage 
 Low shortage 
 Low extra 
 Medium extra 
 High extra 
 
 -299 
 -99 
 451 
 901 
 
 Number of 
 countries 
 
 Upper 
 -300 
 -100 
 0 
 450 
 900 
 
 5 
 10 
 11 
 38 
 18 
 11 
 
 9 Note that the quality of countries' health (surrounding conditions) 
 generally improves over the six groups. The percentages of the 
 groups' total (groups of people/animals/things) with access to health services, safe water, 
 and (keeping things clean and disease-free) (presented in the order given in Fig. 4) are 33, 33, 56, 
 50, 76, and 83. This points to/shows that the child (bad food quality) number 
 differences across the groups are more likely to be driven by 
 differences/different versions in food security than by differences/different versions in health. 
 
 is not one of not enough food availability in their 
 countries. 
 To examine the relative extent to which poorness and 
 national food availability are sources of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry), we focus on a subset of 58 developing countries 
 with high degrees of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). This group 
 includes all countries with dietary energy shortages 
 and/or numbers of child (bad food quality) of at least 
 15%. To tell/show the difference between them by their food availability 
 positions, the countries are first grouped into dietary 
 energy shortage and extra groups. To (make different) 
 them by their poorness positions, within each of these 
 groups are embedded a 'high poorness' group and a 
 'low poorness' group. The judging requirements for falling into the 
 high poorness group are that the country has either a 
 poorness rate of 35% or higher and/or an guessed 
 1995 per person gross national product (GNP) of less 
 than $1000. 10 
 Table 2 lists the countries in each group, giving a 
 snapshot of their food security situations. The columns 
 of the table represent the countries' food availability 
 positions. The rows represent their (total) poorness 
 positions. Each country's child (bad food quality) rate is 
 given in parentheses. Also, at the bottom of each 
 (one-fourth of an area) is the total number of (not given enough food) children 
 in the group. The highest number fall into the food 
 extra/high poorness (one-fourth of an area) (75 million), mainly 
 due to the presence of India. Overall, as was the case 
 for the whole sample of 99 developing countries (see 
 Fig. 4), most of the (not given enough food) children 
 living in these highly food-insecure countries (81%) 
 live in food-extra countries. Also, a majority 
 (83%) fall into the high poorness category. 
 To see how the extreme harshness of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) differs 
 across the groups, Table 3 gives guesses of the 
 numbers of child (bad food quality) for each. The number is the greatest for the dietary energy-extra/ 
 high poorness group, at 49%. Think about/believe the differences 
 in the child (bad food quality) rates across the dietary 
 energy-shortage and extra groups. The (number of times something happens) of 
 child (bad food quality) is (a) little lower in the dietary 
 energy-extra group than in the shortage group for 
 
 10 Where possible, all povetty rates and GNPs are based on PPPconverted international dollars (see Add on Table 1). The 
 countries for whom 1995 guessed per person GNPs alone classify 
 them as high poorness are those listed in Table 2 but for which 
 poorness rates are not given in Add on Table A.l. 
 
 207 
 
 L.C. Smith et al. I Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 Table 2 
 Classification of highly food-insecure countries into national food 
 availability and poorness groups" 
 
 Table 3 
 Number of child (bad food quality) by national food availability and 
 poorness positions of highly food-insecure countries, in percent" 
 National food availability 
 
 National food availability 
 
 High poorness 
 
 Low pove1ty 
 
 Dietary energy 
 shortage 
 
 Dietary energy 
 extra 
 
 Bangladesh (56) 
 Ethiopia (48) 
 Afghanistan (40) 
 Laos (40) 
 Madagascar (40) 
 Somalia (39) 
 Chad (39) 
 Cambodia (38) 
 Congo, Them. Rep. (34) 
 Mali (34) 
 Malawi (30) 
 Burundi (29) 
 Sierra Leone (29) 
 Haiti (28) 
 Guatemala (27) 
 Mozambique (26) 
 Zambia (24) 
 Kenya (23) 
 Zimbabwe (13) 
 Mongolia (12) 
 (25 million children) 
 
 India (53) 
 Vietnam (45) 
 Myanmar (43) 
 Niger (43) 
 Sudan (34) 
 Burkina Faso (33) 
 Rwanda (29) 
 Uganda (26) 
 Gambia (26) 
 Senegal (22) 
 Liberia (20) 
 Honduras (18) 
 Lesotho (16) 
 Cameroon (15) 
 
 Angola (35) 
 Tanzania (31) 
 Yemen (29) 
 Guinea (24) 
 Central Afr. Rep. (23) 
 Bolivia (8) 
 
 Nigeria (39) 
 Pakistan (38) 
 Sri Skinnya (38) 
 Indonesia (34) 
 Philippines (30) 
 Congo (28) 
 Botswana (27) 
 Namibia (26) 
 Benin (25) 
 Mauritania (23) 
 Ghana (23) 
 Malaysia (20) 
 Cote d'Ivoire (20) 
 Togo (19) 
 Guyana (18) 
 China (17) 
 Gabon (15) 
 (46 million children) 
 
 (4 million children) 
 
 (75 million children) 
 
 Notes and source: after each country name, the percentage of 
 children (not given enough food) (Add on Table A.l, column 1) is given in 
 parentheses. A country is dietary energy shortage if its per person 
 dietary energy supply is not enough to meet its average per person 
 dietary energy needed thing; otherwise it is dietary energy extra. 
 Countries with either poorness numbers of greater than 35% or 
 per person GNPs less than $1000 (both measured in PPP-(changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 
 dollars) are classified into the high poorness group; otherwise they 
 are in the low poorness group. 
 a 
 
 High poorness 
 Low poorness 
 
 Dietary energy shortage 
 
 Dietary energy extra 
 
 39 
 28 
 
 49 
 25 
 
 a Notes and source: The countries in each group are given in 
 Table 2. Child (bad food quality) data are from Add on Table A.l, 
 columns 1 and 2. (bad food quality) rates are calculated as the total 
 number of underweight children in the countries falling into each 
 (one-fourth of an area) divided by the total number of children. See Table 2 notes 
 for classification judging requirements. 
 
 the low poorness group; for the high poorness group, 
 however, the (number of times something happens) is higher in the dietary energysurplus group than in the shortage group by ten percentage points. 11 
 Next think about/believe the differences in the numbers of 
 child (bad food quality) across the high and low poorness 
 groups. The number is greater in the high poorness 
 group than in the low poorness group across both 
 dietary energy-extra and -shortage groups, consistent 
 with the commonly-thought view that poorness is the most 
 (existing all over a large area) cause of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). The difference is 
 obvious within the dietary energysurplus group, with the number in the high poorness 
 group being almost double that of the low poorness 
 group. 12 This difference may partially reflect large 
 differences in the groups' health (surrounding conditions). 13 Overall, the numbers suggest that for most countries with 
 high food and nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) and for most people 
 who are food and nutrition insecure, the hidden (under) 
 11 The health (surrounding conditions) index of the extra group is higher 
 than the shortage group (77 against/compared to/or 57). The groups' child 
 (bad food quality) number difference may also be due to this difference. Note that when India is left out/kept out from the high 
 poorness/surplus group the group's number of child (bad food quality) 
 falls to 35%, a number which is still not much lower than that of 
 the high poorness/deficit group and 10 percentage-points higher than 
 the low poorness/surplus group. 
 12 A two-tailed test for the difference in the unweighted means of 
 the child (bad food quality) numbers of the dietary energy-shortage 
 group (31%) and the dietary energy-extra group (28%) shows/tells about no 
 significant (related to studying numbers) difference (t=0.84). The difference between 
 the unweighted means of the high poorness group (32%) and the low 
 poorness group (26%) is (meaningful numbers) at the 5% level 
 (1=2.4). 
 13 The health (surrounding conditions) index for the high poorness/surplus 
 group is 77; that for the low poorness/surplus group is 43. 
 
 208 
 
 L.C. Smith et 
 
 at. I Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 cause is likely to be poorness rather than national food 
 availability. 
 
 6. Policy to improve food security 
 The causes of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) are complex and 
 connected. Many, many helping actions could be useful 
 in reducing or eliminating it. The key policy goal, 
 however, is not simply to improve food security, but to 
 improve it in a (able to last/helping the planet) fashion for the most people 
 at the fastest pace. To reach this goal, given (money-related) 
 and institutional abilities, policies should be targeted at the hidden (under) causes that (showy way of standing/mental attitude) the most 
 limiting or 'binding' restriction to improve food security in each clearly stated/particular big picture. 
 The above analysis hints that, in the 1990s, 
 poorness is the most binding restriction to improving 
 people's food security in developing countries. In 
 most settings, policies that improve people's access 
 to food by reducing poorness are likely to have the 
 greatest gain in food security improvements. A powerful means of reducing poorness is through fair 
 money-based growth. In order for growth to benefit poor 
 people as well as those better off, special efforts are 
 often needed to enable the poor to participate in the 
 growth process, such as efforts to improve their access 
 to (money-related) and productive useful things/valuable supplies, information and 
 training, and physical and market (set of machines). A 
 second and (completing/matching) means of reducing poorness 
 is investment in the workers of the poor, mainly 
 their health and educational accomplishment. Developing 
 people's skills and abilities (to hold or do something) prepares them to take 
 advantage of new opportunities placed before them 
 by money-based growth (World Bank, 1991). A final 
 means of reducing poorness is investing in the social 
 capital of the poor. Respect is the networks, 
 normal behaviors, and trust among members of communities that 
 enable them to coordinate and cooperate for their 
 members' back and forth/equal between people benefit (Moser, 1996). It is this way a 
 further means of enabling poor people to take advantage of money-based opportunities and gain access to 
 services that improve their workers. 
 In addition to poorness, many countries still face 
 problems of national food availability (especially 
 sub-Saharan African countries). Most countries also 
 face nutrition security problems linked to problems of 
 health and care (especially South Asia and sub- 
 
 Saharan Africa). To make good the gains of food 
 security in terms of actual human physical well-being, 
 attention to these problems must continue also. 
 How then do governments and international organizations committed to reducing food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) go 
 about choosing appropriate helping actions? Choice of 
 priority helping actions needs/demands, above all, identification of the people who are food and/or nutrition 
 insecure and of the first (or most important) causes of their (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). 
 In this way, helping actions that are appropriate for the 
 given big picture  can be chosen to reduce the restrictions 
 created by/presented by these causes (FAO, 1996d; Frankenberger, 
 1997). Because there are many factors that are necessary but not (good) enough for bringing about food and 
 nutrition security, all possible causes - whether 
 related to problems of food availability, food access, 
 or the non-food (things that decide other things) of nutrition security 
 (care and health) - must be thought about/believed (at the same time) for an best choice and organizing of 
 helping actions. Beyond identification alone, priority 
 setting needs/demands knowledge of the relative importance 
 of each cause in deciding/figuring out food and nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). Focus can then be placed first on those 
 causes that (showy way of standing/mental attitude) the most binding restriction. 
 In general, when more than one cause is being 
 talked to/looked at at a time, policy goals should be linked 
 so that many causes can be tackled with single 
 helping actions and cooperation can be gotten from 
 many helping actions (Frankenberger, 1997). In 
 countries where food production is the main income 
 source of the poor, policies that increase farming-based 
 working well can, when appropriately created, 
 improve food access at the same time as they improve 
 food availability because they can raise incomes and, 
 in the long run, lower real food prices. (in almost the same way), 
 working well-improving plant breeding that enriches 
 staple foods with rare/not enough  micronutrients reduces 
 not only food availability problems but micronutrient 
 (bad food quality) as well (Bouis, 1996). An example of a 
 case where many helping actions can have a cooperating effect is combining income generation (especially of women) with nutrition education (Von Braun 
 et al., 1993). Combining workers development 
 and food help in low-potential farming-based areas 
 where high food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) exists with investments in 
 increased food production in (next to) high-potential 
 areas is another example. In this case, jobs that are 
 created in the high-possible areas through increased 
 
 L.C. Smith eta!. I Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 working well can be filled by people from the lowpotential areas, both food availability and food access 
 problems are talked to/looked at (Frankenberger, 1997). 
 With an eye both to solving immediate problems 
 and reaching long-term goals, choice of an best 
 mix of helping actions should think about/believe helping actions that 
 have an hit/effect in the long run as well as those having 
 an hit/effect only in the short run (Von Braun et al., 
 1992). The benefits of investments in farming-based 
 research, population (making steady/making firm and strong), basic education, 
 and (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide money-based growth may only build up 
 after a few years. Yet they can have powerful good effects on a large number of people's food and 
 nutrition security. To avoid or respond to problem situations, some helping actions are needed to tackle immediate problems. Examples of helping actions that have 
 their hit/effect mainly in the short run are additional/helping 
 feeding, food stamp and food restricting programs. 
 Sometimes it is possible to add/give to both shortand long-term goals (at the same time). For example, 
 programs to combine additional/helping feeding with 
 nutrition education, as well as food-for-work with 
 investment in (away from cities) transport and health (set of machines), 
 can improve food and nutrition security both immediately and in the future. 
 In many cases there will likely be trade-offs in 
 reaching policy goals directed at different problems, 
 and an best balance between competing goals must 
 be (accomplished or gained). For example, a focus on food availability 
 leads in the direction of investment in new technologies to increase food (or export crops) production in 
 high-possible areas. A focus on poorness reduction, on 
 the other hand, leads in the direction of investment in 
 programs to raise incomes of poor people who often' 
 live in useful thing/valuable supply-poor, low-possible areas where 
 getting large food (more than what's needed) may not be possible 
 (Maxwell, 1996b). Beyond cost (things to carefully think about), the 
 best investment balance should (in the end) depend 
 on the relative importance of food availability and 
 food access in deciding/figuring out food and nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in the particular big picture. 
 Finally, in creating (producing a lot with very little waste) food security policies targeted at the hidden (under) (proof that one thing definitely causes another) problems, care 
 must be taken to account for possible negative side 
 effects so that new problems are not created. Actions 
 that focus on improving food availability and/or 
 access may have negative results for nutrition 
 security by affecting its non-food (things that decide other things). For 
 
 209 
 
 example, helping actions that lead to increases in household members' time in income-creating activities 
 may lead to a decrease in the time they spend in child 
 care or health improvement, slowing down improvements in children's nutrition that go with increases 
 in food access (Smith, 1995). Macroeconomic and 
 trade policies that are designed to (help increase/show in a good way) foodsecurity-improving money-based growth may have harmful hits/effects on some people's food security. For example, reductions in food payments raise food costs for 
 net food people, reductions in public expenses 
 on health services can lead to a (worsening / rusting, crumbling, etc.) in health 
 (surrounding conditions), and currency (reductions of value) can reduce 
 the incomes of those depending on imported productive 
 inputs. Increased food production that happens 
 through (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) onto not important lands (or through 
 shorter unplanted periods) causes soil worsening, compromising future food production and income. As a 
 final example, inflows of food aid, without (steps taken to prevent trouble or injury), can lead to dependence and production bad things, interfering with long-term food production and 
 poorness-reduction efforts. Such possible bad results should be taken into account in policy 
 creation and either turned-away or made up for/paid for 
 through (completing/matching) helping actions. 
 
 7. Ends/end results 
 To improve food security for the greatest numbers 
 of people at the fastest pace, policies must be targeted, 
 first, on the areas, countries, and people who are 
 most food insecure. Second, they must be targeted on 
 reducing the hidden (under) problems causing food 
 (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). To make sure that food security results in 
 actual improvements in human physical well-being, 
 nutrition security must be improved also. So, it is 
 not only food itself that is important in efforts to 
 improve people's food security, but also health and 
 care (especially of children), both of which are necessary for nutrition security. 
 (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located), South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa 
 are the developing country areas with the most 
 extreme food and nutrition (state of not being safe/source of mental worry). These areas, 
 as well as countries in other areas with dietary 
 energy shortages and high levels of poorness and (bad food quality), should be the focus of international efforts to 
 improve food and nutrition security. Whereas poorness 
 
 L. C. Smith et al.l Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 210 
 
 is the leading cause of food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) for most 
 developing countries, including those that are dietary 
 energy extra, many countries also have problems 
 related to national food availability (especially subSaharan African countries) and to health and care 
 (especially South Asian and sub-Saharan African 
 countries) that must be settled also. 
 In general, policy combinations that improve food 
 and nutrition security for the greatest number of 
 people at the fastest pace have the following qualities. 
 First, they focus on the most binding restriction to their 
 improvement. Second, they are based on linked policy 
 goals so that single helping actions can be used to 
 solve many problems and cooperating hits/effects can 
 be gotten from many helping actions. Third, they 
 contain, as needed, both long-run and short-run (tools or objects used to do work or measure something). Fourth, they (accomplish or gain with effort) an best balance 
 between competing policy goals. Finally, they avoid 
 or make up for any possible negative side effects of 
 helping actions. 
 Improving people's physical well-being through 
 improving their food and nutrition security will have 
 
 two helpful effects that improve the long-run (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of helping actions. The first is to increase the 
 ability (to hold or do something) of the poor to pull themselves out of poorness, 
 this way improving their access to food in a (able to last/helping the planet) 
 manner. The second is to provide the workers 
 basis for speeded up money-based growth and national 
 development (Behrman, 1992; Martorell, 1996), in 
 turn enabling countries as a whole to get (good) enough 
 food for their (groups of people/animals/things) over time, whether through 
 domestic production or imports. 
 
 Add on A. Promises made at the 1996 
 world food summit 
 1. We will secure/make sure of an enabling political, social, and 
 money-based (surrounding conditions) designed to create the best 
 conditions for the destruction of poorness and for 
 (able to last through tough conditions) peace, based on full and equal participation of women and men, which is most helpful 
 to (accomplishing or gaining) (able to last/helping the planet) food security for all; 
 
 Table A.l 
 Food and nutrition security data for developing countries" 
 Country 
 
 Sub-Saharan Africa 
 Angola 
 Benin 
 Botswana 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cameroon 
 Central Afr. Rep. 
 Chad 
 Congo 
 Congo, Them. Rep. 
 Cote d' Ivoire 
 Ethiopia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Ghana 
 Guinea 
 Kenya 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 
 Number of child 
 (bad food quality) 
 (underweight) 
 (1990s) 
 (%)b 
 
 Number of children 
 (not given enough food) 
 (underweight) 
 (1990s) 
 (thousands)c 
 
 Health (surrounding conditions) 
 (access to health 
 services, safe water, 
 and (keeping things clean and disease-free)) 
 (%)d 
 
 35.3c 
 24.5b 
 26.8c 
 32.7 
 29.1c 
 15.1 
 23.2 
 38.8 
 27.5" 
 34.4 
 20.0 
 47.7 
 15.1" 
 26.2 
 22.9c 
 24.0c 
 22.5 
 16.0 
 20.lc 
 
 768 
 238 
 63 
 653 
 330 
 340 
 125 
 480 
 130 
 3049 
 437 
 4864 
 25 
 48 
 691 
 296 
 989 
 47 
 74 
 
 28 
 47 
 60 
 49 
 58 
 24 
 15 
 26 
 20 
 36 
 60 
 30 
 79 
 83 
 54 
 32 
 37 
 49 
 32 
 
 Number of 
 total 
 poorness 
 (1988-96) 
 (%)" 
 
 33.0 
 
 36.2 
 
 17.7 
 
 64.0 
 31.4 
 26.3 
 50.2 
 
 Dietary energy 
 supply (1996) 
 (per capita 
 kcals/day)f 
 
 Dietary energy 
 balance (1996) 
 (per capita 
 kcals/day )g 
 
 1983 
 2415 
 2272 
 2137 
 1708 
 2175 
 1938 
 1972 
 2107 
 1815 
 2421 
 1845 
 2517 
 2332 
 2560 
 2099 
 1971 
 2209 
 2161 
 
 -117 
 315 
 172 
 37 
 -392 
 75 
 -162 
 -128 
 7 
 -285 
 321 
 -255 
 417 
 232 
 460 
 -1 
 -129 
 109 
 61 
 
 211 
 
 L. C. Smith et aUAgricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 199-215 
 
 Table A.1 (Continued) 
 
 40.0 
 29.9 
 33.6b 
 23.0 
 14.9 
 26.1 
 26.2 
 42.6 
 39.1 
 29.4 
 22.3 
 28.7 
 38.8c 
 33.9 
 8.8c 
 30.6 
 19.0 
 25.5 
 23.5 
 13.0b 
 
 1039 
 555 
 628 
 93 
 16 
 690 
 65 
 796 
 6587 
 277 
 332<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
