World Development, Vol. 24, No. 10, pp. 1579-1595,1996 
 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
 Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
 0305-750X/96 
 $15 .OO+ 0.00 
 
 Pergamon 
 
 SO305750X(96)00059-9 
 
 Male-Female 
 Working well: 
 
 Differences in Farming-based 
 
 Methodological 
 
 Issues and Scientific 
 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 
 International 
 
 AGNES R. QUISUMBING" 
 Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA. 
 
 Summary. - Most guesses of male-female differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) from production function studies show that male and female farmers are equally (producing a lot with very little waste) farm managers, controlling for levels of inputs and workers. There is some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), however, of allocative inefficiency within 
 families. Not important products of labor depend on the relative scarcities of labor and the (male/female status) division 
 of labor in clearly stated/particular farming systems. Many of these studies, however, are (related to how something was done) 
 flawed. 
 Greater attention needs to be given to appropriate guess methods, endogenous input choice, the use 
 of headship as a stratifying 
 (number or thing that changes), and the effects/results/suggestions 
 of intrahousehold 
 useful thing/valuable supply portion. 
 Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd 
 
 1. INTRODUCTION 
 It is often argued that women's lower levels of 
 human and physical capital result in lower working well or inability to respond to money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something).' 
 Much of the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) referred to to support this argument 
 comes from farming. Yet, the measurement of differences in farming-based working well between men and 
 women is full of idea-based and methodological 
 (problems, delays, etc.). These arise from the difficulty of defining 
 appropriate measures of working well 
 in different 
 farming systems, (something left out) of individual (features/ qualities/ traits) in tries to measure working well differences by 
 sex, and the lack of clearness (related to/looking at/thinking about) the measurement 
 of sex and (male/female status) differences ? 
 An test of male-female working well differences should in a perfect world be based on guesses of total factor working well, in which an index of output is divided 
 by an index of inputs, grouped over all types of outputs and inputs, (match up each pair of items in order). Lack of (male/female status)-(made different) data on inputs and outputs, however, has prevented the use of this approach. Existing studies 
 therefore use partial working well measures, such as 
 produce and labor working well. These partial measures 
 of working well are complicated by differences in 
 farming systems and social and cultural institutions. It 
 is (able to be done) to guess technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) differences 
 between male and female farmers in farming systems 
 where men and women manage separate plots, as in 
 many African (communities of people) (Boserup, 1970). It is more 
 hard to separate managerial (wasting very little while working or producing something) differences in 
 
 farming-based settings where plots are (helped to grow) both/together 
 by male and female family members and hired laborers. In the last thing just mentioned, found in the "male" farming systems 
 of Asia and Latin America, the farm manager is usually assumed to be the male head of the household, 
 (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) the actual (thing that's given/work that's done) of women to 
 decision-making and farm labor.7 
 (even though there is the existence of) the volume of tries to document 
 male-female working well differences, few 
 control for individual (features/ qualities/ traits) such as education and physical valuable things. If women in a planned way had 
 
 1519 
 
 *This paper draws from research begun while I was with the 
 Education and Social Policy Department, The World Bank. 
 Later work at the International Food Policy Research 
 Institute has been supported by the United States (service business/government unit/power/functioning) for 
 International 
 Development, 
 Office 
 of Women 
 in 
 Development, Grant No. FAO-0100-G-00-5020-00, 
 on 
 Strengthening 
 Development 
 Policy 
 through 
 (male/female status) 
 Analysis: An (Having different things working together as one unit) Multicountry Research Program. I 
 am thankful to Harold Politician, Barbara Hem, Hanan 
 Jacoby, Per Pinstrup-Andersen, 
 Paul Schultz, Roger Slade, 
 Daphne Spurling, and Chris Udry for comments and suggestions on previous drafts. I admit/recognize/respond to intelligent comments 
 from (school) course people (who were part of a study, etc.) 
 at IFPRI. I also thank Bob 
 Evenson, Hailu Mekonnen, and Katrine Saito for providing 
 me with unpublished material from their work in progress. 
 Two unnamed referees added/gave greatly to a better creation of, and difference between, sex and (male/female status) 
 differences. Jay Willis gave/given help with graphics. 
 The usual (statements that weaken or put conditions on a bigger statement) apply. Final rewriting/redoing accepted: April 
 20.1996. 
 
 1580 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 lower levels of education and physical valuable things than 
 men: which is typical in most farming-based settings, 
 an approach that did not control for individual stocks 
 of physical and workers would tend to overestimate working well differences due to sex.5 That 
 is, women farmers would be expected to have lower 
 working well simply because they are female, not 
 because they have fewer useful things/valuable supplies. Such an error 
 would be unfortunate because the correct (identification of a disease or problem, or its cause) 
 of sources of working well differences, if they exist, is 
 important in order to identify appropriate policy helping actions for increasing women's working well and 
 welfare. 
 The not enough (detailed description of exactly what is required) of individual farmer 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 adds/gives further to the confusion 
 between "sex" and "(male/female status)" as a source of working well differences. Sex differences are due to born-in (related to the body function of living things) differences between men and women. (male/female status) 
 differences, on the other hand, arise from the socially 
 built relationship between men and women 
 (Oakley, 1972). These differences affect the distribution of useful things/valuable supplies and responsibilities 
 between men 
 and women, and are shaped by idea-based, religious, 
 (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.), money-based, and cultural (things that decide other things) (Moser, 
 1989, p. 1800). Being socially decided/figured out, this distribution can this way be changed through conscious social 
 action including public policy. 
 While there are other measures of working well 
 such as earnings functions and (related to computers and science) adoption 
 functions, this paper (focuses mental and physical effort) on scientific guesses of production functions.6 Production functions 
 have been widely used to guess sex differences in 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). These studies usually guess 
 a combined moving backward with a dummy (number or thing that changes) for the sex 
 of the farm manager (or household head). Coefficients 
 from production functions have also been used to 
 guess sex differences in labor working well. Many 
 of these studies, however, ignore the (happening at the same time) 
 bias introduced by ordinary least squares (OLS) 
 guess of production functions, especially the 
 endogeneity of input choice with respect to farmer 
 (features/ qualities/ traits). 
 This paper reviews the evidence on sex 
 differences in farming-based working well based on production function guesses. It provides a critical 
 review of the methodological issues hidden (under) the 
 measurement and scientific guess of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) and labor working well. In so doing, it aims 
 to test the current state of the books and identify the most promising areas for future research. 
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the meaning and measurement of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) differences using production functions, and Section 3 presents a critical survey 
 of scientific studies on technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and labor 
 working well differences by sex. Section 4 discusses 
 outstanding idea-based and methodological 
 issues, 
 and suggests directions for future research. 
 
 2. CONCEPTS AND METHODOLOGY 
 (a) Productionfunctions 
 A production function is defined in terms of the 
 maximum output that can be produced from a specified set of inputs, given the existing technology available to firms (Battese, 1992, p. 185). Suppose that the 
 production edge of something/unexplored area is shown in Figure 1. 
 The flat/left-and-right axis represents the vector of inputs 
 X connected with producing the output Y. More than that, 
 suppose that the watched/followed input-output values come 
 from a sample of male and female farmers, and that 
 these are below the production edge of something/unexplored area. That is, farmers do not reach the maximum output possible for the 
 inputs involved, given the technology. Farmers may 
 lie below the production edge of something/unexplored area if different technologies are now in use. Female farmers, for example, 
 may be using traditional technologies either due to 
 lack of knowledge, lack of access to modern inputs 
 connected with new technologies, or higher costs to 
 putting into use the new technologies. A measure of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for male farmers is given by y'/y* at A, 
 and for female farmers by y2/y* at B, where y* is the 
 edge of something/unexplored area output connected with the level of inputs x. 
 Given the level of input n, male farmers are more technically (producing a lot with very little waste) than female farmers (they can produce more y with given inputs x). 
 The emotional  approach to production analysis guesses directly the limits/guidelines of the production function of a farm manager i in householdj: 
 
 where Y, is amount produced, V, is a vector of inputs 
 used by farm manager i (including land, labor, capital, 
 and extension guidance); Xi is a vector of individual 
 attributes, including the sex of the farmer; and Z, are 
 household- and community-level 
 (numbers that change/things that change). Relationship of input use with individual and household (features/ qualities/ traits) can be (taken/took control of) by interaction terms Vi/ix, 
 and VLZ,. In scientific applications, this involves guessing a single production function from the combined sample of male and female farmers, assuming 
 that they are producing the same output and use the 
 same technology, and allowing for sex differences in 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) by using a dummy (number or thing that changes) for the 
 sex of the farmer.7 Note, however, that the confusion 
 between "sex" and "(male/female status)" could lead to misspecification of the production function if a "(male/female status) dummy" 
 were to take by force/take control of only the sex of the farmer, leaving out 
 information on physical and workers. Aside 
 from the problem of left-out (numbers that change/things that change), the "(male/female status) 
 dummy" would take by force/take control of both the (related to the body function of living things) and 
 socially decided/figured out (features/ qualities/ traits) of the individual in 
 the (not being there; not being present) of information on physical and human 
 capital.* 
 Most of the early scientific work on male-female 
 
 MALE-FEMALE 
 
 DIFFERENCES 
 
 IN AGRICULTURAL 
 
 1581 
 
 PRODUCTIVITY 
 
 Production edge of something/unexplored area 
 
 Output, Y 
 
 Watched/followed input-output 
 ;( A = (x,y') 
 Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) at 
 
 1 B = (KY? 
 
 0 
 
 Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 B=y2/y 
 
 X 
 
 at 
 
 Inputs, X 
 
 x: inputoutput 
 
 values of male farmers 
 
 0: input-output 
 
 values of female farmers 
 
 Figure 1. Technical eficiency of male andfemale farmers. 
 differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Douglas production function: 
 Y=a,La' 
 
 P2 
 
 has used the Cobb- 
 
 (21 
 
 where Y is output, L is labor input (hired or family), 
 and T is a vector of land, capital, and other ordinary inputs. Usually, the equation is guessed by 
 ordinary least squares (OLS) by taking logarithms on 
 both sides; a typical form is as follows: 
 lnY=a,+a,lnL+a,lnT+&#126;lnE+yEXT+ 
 6%X + E 
 
 (3) 
 
 where Y, L, and Tare as defined above; E is educational accomplishment or an indicator (number or thing that changes) for level of 
 education (of the farm manager, or household head, or 
 the members of the household); EXT is an index of 
 extension services; SEX is a dummy (number or thing that changes) for the 
 sex of the household head or farm manager, and E is 
 the error term. The coefficient 
 that points to/shows 
 male-female differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 6, 
 an intercept shifter. Relationship between the sex of the 
 farmer and other inputs can be (taken/took control of) by interaction 
 terms. Guesses of output per unit of land are usually 
 received/got through yield (moving backwards), where the depen- 
 
 dent (number or thing that changes) is yield per hectare and the input (numbers that change/things that change) are expressed in terms of inputs per hectare. 
 Although the Cobb-Douglas functional form is convenient to guess since it is linear in limits/guidelines, it is 
 an unnecessarily (serving to severely limit or control) form to (force (on people)/cause an inconvenient situation) on the hidden (under) 
 production relationship. It assumes strong separability 
 between inputs and an ability to stretch of substitution equal to 
 1.O. Less (serving to severely limit or control) approaches using second-order 
 Taylor's (acts of things getting bigger, wider, etc.) to come close to the functional form 
 (for example, the translog, (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized quadratic and 
 Leontief), while widely used in other uses, have 
 rarely been used to carefully study sex differences in working well, with the few exceptions discussed below. Even 
 flexible forms, however, involve a guess about the 
 hidden (under) functional form. Nonparametric approaches 
 may have greater potential by not forcing (on people) a  specific 
 functional form, so long as the properties of a production function are preserved? The effects/results/suggestions of 
 neglecting endogeneity of input choice, however, may 
 be more serious than functional form (things to carefully think about). 
 
 (b) (happening at the same time) (things to carefully think about) and endogenous 
 input choice 
 Single-equation 
 
 guess of production functions 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 1582 
 
 is filled with problems because the amounts of output and 
 (number or thing that changes) inputs are (at the same time) figured out by/decided by the 
 conditions of profit (biggest increase/best possible extent). More than that, most 
 studies guessing sex differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) use both farmer (features/ qualities/ traits) (age, education) and input levels as move backwardors. Since move backwardors 
 are endogenous, they will be related to the error 
 term, and least squares guesses of limits/guidelines will be 
 (not agreeing/not happening in the same way) (Greene, 1993, p. 579). This failure of 
 least squares with endogenous right-hand side (numbers that change/things that change), or (happening together)-equations 
 bias, is a feature of 
 many of these studies. 
 Solutions to this problem have included the use of 
 instrumental (numbers that change/things that change), where a vector of (numbers that change/things that change), Z, 
 which is related to X but not with the error term, 
 is used as the move backwardor, or the use of clear (happening together) equation methods. Endogeneity of move backwardors, 
 however, can also be avoided by guessing (money made/good thing received) or 
 cost functions instead of the production function. 
 The dual approach to production analysis guesses 
 (money made/good thing received) functions as a function of input and output prices, 
 and gets the input demand and output supply functions from the restricted profit function."' This 
 approach has its advantages when there are multiple 
 outputs and inputs, as in a multicrop farming system. 
 Modeling input choice clearly also allows for the 
 possibility that farmer (features/ qualities/ traits) influence the 
 choice of ordinary inputs. More than that, this approach 
 also enables the (person who works to find information) to distinguish working well 
 differences due to differences in access (which assumes 
 the existence of (blocking things)) or in input choices. The dual 
 approach has only been (not very long ago) applied to the analysis 
 of male-female differences in working well. 
 
 (c) Technical vs. allocative eficiency 
 Production function approaches focus on technical 
 rather than allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something); tests of the last thing just mentioned are 
 less common in this books. useful thing/valuable supply portions 
 within the household are carefully thought about/believed Pareto (producing a lot with very little waste) if 
 no (giving out things in a different way) of useful things/valuable supplies to different household 
 members or to different uses could increase total output. An scientific test of this idea (you think is true) was performed by Udry (1994) using plot-level data from 
 Burkina Faso. As discussed in section 3(b), the not mirror-images distribution of rights, useful things/valuable supplies, and responsibilities by (male/female status) may have more serious effects/results/suggestions 
 for allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) than sex differences do for 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 
 3. EMPIRICAL 
 
 EVIDENCE 
 
 (a) Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) differences 
 Results from different studies guessing technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) differences between male and female farm- 
 
 ers are summarized in Table 1. To highlight the 
 methodological parts of these studies, the discussion will be organized according to guess method 
 rather than by country. 
 (i) Combined moving backward guesses 
 If the same technology is available to both male and 
 female farmers, and if they are producing the same 
 crop, it is appropriate to guess one production function, and to allow for sex differences by using a sex 
 dummy and (or) interacting the sex dummy with other 
 inputs. This approach has been most commonly used 
 to guess differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between 
 male and female farm managers or household heads." 
 An example is Moock's (1976) study of 152 maize 
 farmers in Kenya's VihigaDistrict in the 1970s. Moock 
 guessed Cobb-Douglas yield functions for all farms, 
 with a female manager dummy, and for male and 
 female-managed 
 farms separately (to be discussed 
 later). The study found that women, who make up a 
 third of the sampleare at least as productive as men: the 
 female farmer dummy, though positive, was not significant by itself in the combined moving backward and was dropped 
 from the final (detailed description of exactly what is required). Interactions between the 
 female farmer dummy and other inputs were used to 
 test for sex differences in input use. Results 
 show that women benefit less from more densely 
 planted farms, but tend to make better use of labor on 
 maize farms than men. The negative (though weakly 
 significant) interaction between farming-based extension 
 and the female dummy points to/shows that exposure to farming-based extension increases technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 
 male farmers relative to female farmers. Female farners with at least first (or most important) education have higher yields. 
 An test of the effects of the training and 
 visit (T&amp;V) extension system in Kenya also uses 
 combined (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) from male and female farmers 
 from a national survey conducted 
 in 1989-90 
 (Bindlish and Evenson, 1993). The T&amp;V system, 
 (not very long ago) put into use with World Bank support, has 
 employed a big number of women as field 
 farming-based extension workers, in contrast to home 
 money flow/money-based studies extension where women have usually/(in the past) 
 (focused on doing one thing very well). The study also finds that female heads are 
 equally as (producing a lot with very little waste) as male heads (the female dummy 
 is not significant), and that extension, measured by the 
 ratio of field extension workers to farm families, 
 has a positive effect on output and total factor working well. Interestingly enough, an earlier version of the 
 paper found that female heads were more productive 
 when female extension workers were assigned to the 
 sublocation. When assignment of female extension 
 workers however, was (described the future) based on locational 
 (features/ qualities/ traits), 
 including the percentage of female 
 farmers in the area, the interaction between female 
 extension 
 workers and female farmers became 
 unimportanti 
 This hints that placement of extension workers may be endogenous, and that female 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 Log of total value of 
 crop production at 
 plot level 
 
 Log of total value of 
 crop production at 
 farmer level 
 
 1.22 
 
 0.18 
 
 0.126 
 
 -0.017 
 
 Female head dummy 
 
 Male farmer dummy 
 
 Male farmer dummy 
 
 All plots 
 No.ofplots=601 
 Male plots = 4 19 
 Female plots = 182 
 
 All farmers 
 No. of farmers = 453 
 Male farmers =306 
 Female farmers = 147 
 
 Saito, 
 Mekonnen , 
 and Spurling 
 (1994) 
 
 a.022 
 
 -0.23 
 
 Log (In) of crop 
 production 
 in 1990 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 All farmers 
 N=675 
 Male heads = 434 
 Female heads = 241 
 
 1.98 
 
 0.167$ 
 
 Log of maize 
 output per area of land 
 
 Bindlish and 
 Evenson 
 (1993) 
 
 2.15 
 
 0.108t 
 
 -1.5 
 
 -1.85 
 
 -0.280* 
 
 XI.028 
 
 1.29 
 
 0.090 
 
 Female dummy x log of 
 area planted in maize 
 Female dummy x log of 
 plant population per area of land 
 Female dummy x log of 
 labor input per area of land 
 Female dummy x first (or most important) 
 school dummy 
 Female dummy x log of 
 extension contact index 
 
 t-ratio 
 
 Endogenous 
 input 
 choice 
 
 All farmers 
 N= 152 
 Males = 101 
 Females = 5 1 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 Dependent 
 changeable 
 definition 
 
 in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something): (male/female status) effectsfrom 
 
 Moock (1976) 
 
 Sex of farmer 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 studies with guesses of male-female differences 
 
 Sample 
 
 I. Productionfunction 
 
 Study 
 
 Table 
 
 Table I continued overleaf 
 
 Coefficients of land, capital, 
 male family labor, female 
 family labor, extension 
 dummy, and maize/beans 
 mixture positive and significant 
 Formal education and age of 
 farmer unimportant. 
 
 Coefficients of land, capital, 
 male and female labor, female 
 hired labor, dummies for 
 (material that makes plants grow better) and tractor use, maize/ 
 beans dummy, (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) dummy 
 significant and positive. Formal 
 education unimportant. 
 Extension weakly significant. 
 
 Coefficients of age of head, 
 and first (or most important) education of 
 head are negative but 
 unimportant. 
 
 Female dummy, though 
 positive, was not significant 
 by itself and was left out/kept out. 
 
 Comments 
 
 combined (moving backwards) 
 
 Korea 
 Jamison and 
 Lau (1982) 
 
 Mekonnen, 
 and Spurling 
 (1994) 
 
 saito, 
 
 Nigeria 
 
 Burkina Faso 
 Bindlish, 
 Evenson, 
 and 
 Gbetibouo 
 (1993) 
 
 Study 
 
 Mechanical farms = 
 1.3638 
 (90.2% male heads) 
 
 All plots 
 Total no. of plots = 1,174 
 Male plots = 885 
 Female plots = 289 
 
 All farmers 
 No. of farmers = 226 
 Males = 210 
 Females = 15 
 
 All farmers 
 N=2,406 
 Male heads = 2,233 
 Female heads = 103 
 Unclear = 70 
 
 Sample 
 
 Male head dummy 
 
 Male farmer dummy 
 
 Male farmer dummy 
 
 Female head dummy 
 Proportion of female 
 extension workers in 
 division 
 
 Sex of farmer 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 0.95$ 
 
 0.5597 
 
 a.130 
 
 -0.146 
 34.65t 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 2.33 
 
 5.59 
 
 0.47 
 
 -1.63 
 2.71 
 
 r-ratio 
 
 Table 1. Conrinued 
 
 Log of value of 
 farming-based crop 
 output (won) 
 
 Log of total value 
 of crop production 
 plot level 
 
 Log of total value 
 of production at 
 household level 
 
 Log (In) of crop 
 production at the 
 farm level 
 
 Dependent 
 changeable 
 definition 
 
 at 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 Endogenous 
 input 
 choice 
 
 ' 
 
 Education measured by the 
 household average, leaving out/keeping out 
 the household head, is 
 significant and positive. 
 Education of household average 
 has stronger effect than 
 education of household head. 
 Land, labor, animal and 
 mechanical power, and (material that makes plants grow better) 
 have significant and positive 
 coefficients. 
 
 Coefficients for land, capital, 
 male and female family labor, 
 male and female hired labor, 
 insecticide use were positive 
 and significant. Dummy for 
 l-8 years of education and age 
 of head were negative and 
 significant. 
 
 Coefficients of land, female 
 family and hired labor, 
 insecticide use dummy, and age 
 of household were positive 
 and significant. 
 
 Logarithm of total area cropped 
 and the number of parcels 
 have positive and significant 
 coefficients. 
 
 Comments 
 
 rt 
 $_$ 
 
 tSigniftcant 
 &amp;Significant 
 *Significant 
 BCoefficients 
 &#126;Coefficients 
 
 Thailand 
 Jamison 
 and Lau 
 (1982) 
 
 Korea 
 Jamison 
 and Lau 
 (1982) 
 
 with highest R**. 
 with highest R**. 
 
 Male head dummy 
 
 Nonchemical farms = 
 1848 
 (99.5% male heads) 
 
 at 1%. 
 at 5%. 
 at 10%. 
 are reported from (moving backwards) 
 are reported from (moving backwards) 
 
 Male head dummy 
 
 Male head dummy 
 
 Chemical farms = 918 
 (97.8% male heads) 
 
 Nonmechanical farms 
 = 541g 
 (87.6% male heads) 
 
 0.269 
 
 0.076 
 
 0.059 
 
 1.05 
 
 0.28 
 
 0.87 
 
 Log of output (kg.) 
 
 Log of output (kg.) 
 
 Log of value of 
 farming-based crop 
 output (won) 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 No 
 
 In highest R*2 moving backward (not 
 reported here), maximum education 
 of head has a positive and 
 (meaningful numbers) rate of return 
 of 2.4%. A dummy for four years of 
 education is significant and positive; 
 extension significant and positive; 
 labor, land, and coefftcients positive 
 and significant. 
 
 In highest R** moving backward (not 
 reported here), maximum education 
 of household head has a positive and 
 (meaningful numbers) rate of return 
 of 3%. Dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for 
 educational levels positive but not 
 significant, extension negative but 
 unimportant, labor and land 
 coefficients positive and significant. 
 
 Education measured by the 
 household average, leaving out/keeping out the 
 household head, is significant and 
 positive. Education of household 
 head unimportant and not included. 
 Land, capital, labor, animal 
 power, and (material that makes plants grow better) are positive 
 and significant. 
 
 1586 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 extension workers may in fact be assigned to areas 
 where they can be more productive, (in other words) where female 
 farmers are most important. 
 Burkina Faso offers an interesting contrast to the 
 above results (Bindlish, Evenson and Gbetibouo, 
 1993). Moving backward results show that female heads of 
 families are less productive than men in most crops 
 and have total values of output that are about 15% 
 lower, although this coefficient is only weakly significant. The proportion of female field extension workers, however, has a significant and positive effect on 
 output. 
 The negative female farmer dummy may be due to 
 cultural, religious, and (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) differences between 
 Burkina Faso and Kenya, rather than to differences in 
 the extension system, which has now moved/changed over to 
 the T&amp;V system. Fewer farm families are headed 
 by women in Burkina Faso. More than that, a woman 
 comes under the authority of another male family 
 member when her husband is away. The significant 
 proportion of plots managed by women - especially 
 those planted to food crops, (grass grown for food), and millet may partly explain, however, why the proportion of 
 female extension workers has a positive and significant effect on output. As farmers and plot managers, 
 women benefit from interaction with female extension 
 workers. 
 The two Asian countries included in the Jamison 
 and Lau (1982) study of farmer education and farm 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) offer some counterpoint to the studies on 
 African farming systems. Although the study was mostly meant to measure returns to schooling in an 
 farming-based setting, it also provides some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on 
 sex differences (or lack of that/of it) in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the rice-based "male" farming systems of 
 Thailand and Korea. In contrast to the high percentage of female-headed families or female-managed 
 farms in Africa, only 10.5% of the Korean farms are 
 managed by women, and an even lower 1 .l% of 
 farms in the Thai sample are managed by women.r3 
 Since the study does not focus on differential working well of male and female farmers, only a dummy for 
 the male household head is the indicator of sex differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Results show that the 
 sex of the household head does not significantly 
 affect output in both countries, except in Korean 
 mechanical farms, where men have a 9.5% advantage. (No such advantage exists in nonmechanical 
 farms.) While this finding is quite strong across different (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required), Jamison and Lau (1982) do not 
 offer any explanation except for a guess that 
 there may be possible skill or strength needed things 
 in the use of mechanical power. This explanation may 
 be (designed only for/happening only within)  the type of mechanical traction used, 
 since, in other countries in East Asia (for example, 
 Japan), women have been able to make use of smallscale machines, especially in transplanting and collecting. 
 
 (ii) Separate (moving backwards) by sex offarmer 
 A few studies have also guessed production 
 functions separately to allow for different input coefficients for male and female farmers. For example, 
 Moock's (1976) results from separate (moving backwards) for 
 male- and female-managed 
 farms point to/show that first (or most important) education has a positive and significant effect on 
 yields for women, but a negative and significant effect 
 for men. Extension contact tends however, to benefit 
 men but not women.r4 
 This approach completely/in a hinting way assumes that male and 
 female farmers do not share the same technology. If 
 these equations were guessed for monocrop farmers 
 however, as in Moock's sample of maize farmers, the 
 hidden (under) technologies would have been identical. A 
 better test of differences in input use by sex 
 would have been to interact the sex dummy with all 
 input (numbers that change/things that change), as was performed in the combined 
 moving backward. Or, the idea (you think is true) of different 
 technologies could have been tested clearly by (doing/completing) a Chow test on the separate (moving backwards). 
 (iii) Separate (moving backwards) by plot 
 One more approach to guessing sex differences 
 in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) involves (doing/completing) (moving backwards) on plot-level (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements), either for the combined 
 sample of male- and female-managed 
 plots, or for 
 male and female plots separately (Saito, Mekonnen 
 and Spurling, 1994). In this study, based on a survey 
 done in three districts in Kenya, Cobb-Douglas 
 production functions with the gross value of maize, 
 beans, and cowpeas per hectare as the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) were guessed using plot-level (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements), further disaggregated by the sex of the plot manager. 
 Although a farm-level moving backward more appropriately 
 captures male-female differences in managerial (wasting very little while working or producing something), plot-level (moving backwards) 
 were used to take 
 advantage of more degrees of freedom. 
 The moving backward for all plots shows that, while positive, the male plot manager dummy is unimportant. In 
 separate (moving backwards), capital (value of farm tools and 
 equipment) is a positive and significant (thing that decides something) of 
 the gross value of output per hectare for male plots but 
 is unimportant for female plots. A (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) dummy, 
 which proxies full exercise of land rights, is not significant for either male or female plots. This may 
 reflect lack of difference/different version in (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) across plots. While 
 the effect of extension is positive and highly significant for male plots, it is unimportant for female plots. 
 This may point to/show better use of extension services by 
 men. 
 The authors (do/complete) almost the same  analyses for Oyo 
 State, Nigeria, using both farm-level and plot-level 
 (moving backwards). The male farmer dummy is unimportant 
 at the farm level; coefficients for land, capital, hired 
 and family labor (both disaggregated by sex), and 
 insecticide use (an endogenous (number or thing that changes)) are positive 
 and significant. At the plot level, the male farmer 
 
 MALE-FEMALE 
 
 DIFFERENCES IN AGRICULTURAL 
 
 dummy was positive and significant. But the dummy 
 for one to eight years of education and the age of the 
 household head was negative and significant, a surprising result which seems to point to/show negative returns 
 to schooling and experience (if age is a substitute for 
 experience).r5 
 These results should be viewed with caution due to 
 methodological problems. First, this study (switches back and forth/does one, then the other) 
 between plot-level and farm-level analyses, generally 
 using the same Cobb-Douglas form. If plot output is 
 Cobb-Douglas, however, then farm output will not be 
 Cobb-Douglas in labor and other inputsI Second, the 
 combining of all plot-level (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 without an 
 appropriate fixed or random effects guess procedure is likely to result in inefficient guesses. Farmlevel unobservables 
 would be common to plots 
 farmed by a single farmer, and error terms across plots 
 could be related. If there is unseen mixed-up nature across plots controlled by an individual, which is 
 related to inputs, then combining plot (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 without taking into account fixed effects would be 
 (not agreeing/not happening in the same way). Finally, the computation of gross value 
 of output based on the value of survival/income crops is 
 flawed. Tree crops were not included because their 
 long developing period makes the idea (you think is true) of a 
 common production technology silly. Gross 
 value of output based on food crops alone, however, is 
 a poor indicator of managerial (wasting very little while working or producing something), especially if 
 men are more likely to help grow tree crops. 
 Or, since women are usually/(in the past) involved 
 in the (producing crops/helping something grow) of food crops, they could have developed, over time, a (serving to compare two or more things) advantage in food crop 
 (producing crops/helping something grow)." 
 (iv) Tests 
 Coefficients guessed from the above studies have 
 been used to test out the gains from increasing 
 women's levels of physical and workers.'8 
 Guesses of possible working well gains tested out 
 from the Moock coefficients 
 range from yield 
 increases of 7% (if female maize farmers were given 
 sample mean (features/ qualities/ traits) and input levels) to 9% 
 (if they were given men's input levels and other (features/ qualities/ traits)). Giving all women at least a year of first (or most important) education would raise yields by 24%, reflecting 
 the gains to providing first (or most important) education in a setting 
 where women have very low educational levels. 
 Tests with the Saito, Mekonnen, and Spurling 
 (1994) coefficients 
 suggest a 22% increase in 
 women's yields on maize, beans, and cowpea plots if 
 women farmers were given the workers and 
 input levels of male farmers. 
 These (testing out) results, however, should be understood/explained with caution, since they do not show/tell about how levels of inputs may be raised. To a great extent, differences in input use may be driven by differences in 
 education, since better-educated 
 farmers are more 
 likely to use modem inputs. These differences may 
 
 PRODUCTIVITY 
 
 1587 
 
 also stem from differential access to credit, especially 
 in the use of modem inputs such as improved seeds 
 and (material that makes plants grow better). More than that, these tests may also 
 incorrectly show the gains if a change in input use 
 did happen, since the Cobb-Douglas production technology assumes constant elasticities, and believes (beforehand) 
 that changing the level of one input does not change 
 the elasticities with respect to other inputs. 
 An different approach could have been to perform a Oaxaca rotting of the yield differential 
 between male and female farmers (Oaxaca, 1973). 
 Although this approach has been used to rot 
 the wage gap, it can also be applied here: 
 
 Q,-Q,=b,(X,-X,)+(b,-b,)X, 
 
 (4) 
 
 where Q, and Q, represent mean yields of males and 
 females (match up each pair of items in order), and b, and b, are guessed output coefficients of male and female farmers, and X, 
 and X, are mean levels of gifts and inputs of 
 male and female farmers. That is, the overall average 
 male-female yield gap can be rotten into the 
 portion due to differences in input gifts, (X,,,Xf) tested using male coefficients; the other portion is because of differences in the returns, or output elasticities (b,, - bf), that males and females get for 
 the same gift or input application. 
 
 (b) Allocative ejficiency 
 A more recent study using described/explained (related to scientific farming) 
 panel data from Burkina Faso hints that not mirror-images roles and responsibilities within the household may 
 have serious effects/results/suggestions on allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 (Udry, 1994). Under the null guess of Pareto (wasting very little while working or producing something), (may or may not happen, depending on something) on plot size and land quality, 
 yields on plots planted with the same crop in the same 
 year should be equal, even if they are controlled by 
 different members of a household. Rather than estimate production functions, Udry moved backward plot yields 
 on plot (features/ qualities/ traits) and individual (features/ qualities/ traits), 
 including the (male/female status) of the plot manager.19 Plots controlled by women have much lower yields than 
 almost the same  plots within the household planted with the 
 same crop in the same year, but controlled by men in 
 the same household. The yield differentials are due to 
 lower input strength on female-managed plots: much 
 less male labor per hectare is loyal to/is dedicated to plots controlled by women than to almost the same  plots controlled by 
 men. Child labor and unpaid exchange labor are also 
 applied more intensively to plots controlled by men. 
 Finally, almost all (material that makes plants grow better) is mainly located in plots 
 controlled by men, even though the not important product 
 of (material that makes plants grow better) reduces. These differences in input 
 strength between male- and female-managed 
 plots 
 continue even after land quality, measurement error, or 
 risk management behavior are taken into account. 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 1588 
 
 While Udry's (moving backwards) may suffer from left-out 
 (numbers that change/things that change), due to the lack of information on individual 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of farmers (aside from age, sex, and 
 headship), these results raise questions about the idea (you think is true) 
 of Pareto (producing a lot with very little waste) useful thing/valuable supply portions within the 
 household. Guesses show that a (giving out things in a different way) of now used factors of production across plots could 
 increase the value of household output by lo-20% 
 (Politician et al., 1995). 
 In understanding/explaining his results, Udry identifies two 
 sources of useful thing/valuable supply misallocation within families: 
 (i) people' greater (reward or reason for doing something) to (accomplish or gain with effort) higher 
 output on their own plots than on others; and (ii) 
 mistake in the intrahousehold labor portion 
 process. These results and their (understanding/ explanation) are agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the argument, (before that/before now) made in the 
 anthropoligocal 
 and (pro-woman) money flow/money-based studies books, 
 that (male/female status) differences lead to allocative inefficiencies within the household. Palmer (1992), for example, argues that when culture holds back women to 
 work within the household production unit, the 
 monopsonistic position of the male household head 
 prevents women's labor from moving to better uses in 
 the outside labor market. In the African setting (which 
 is more related to Udry's analysis), while there are 
 separate "markets" for male and female useful things/valuable supplies 
 within the household's separate money-based accounting 
 units, (male/female status)-based market mistakes exist. 
 Differences in allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) may remain 
 even after controlling for individual and (related to scientific farming) 
 (features/ qualities/ traits). Elson (1995). referring to Ongaro's (1988) 
 study in Kenya, points out that entitlement differences 
 by (male/female status) may result in differences between male- and 
 female-headed families. In this study, the introduction of new weeding technology increased yields of 
 female heads families by 56% and those of male 
 heads only by 15%. Ongaro argues that female heads 
 may have a greater (reward or reason for doing something) to put into use better weeding 
 practices (usually/(in the past) a women's task) because they 
 controlled the money/the profit of their increased effort. 
 More than that, factors of force and threats of violence 
 by men may lead to higher (wasting very little while working or producing something) on farms managed by men because they may be able to extract labor 
 with greater ease from women and children than 
 women farmers can?O 
 
 (c) Labor working well 
 
 diflerences 
 
 Coefficients guessed from production functions 
 have been used to measure sex differences in labor working well?r Output elasticities with respect to male and 
 female labor are used to figure out/calculate  not important products, 
 usually tested at the sample mean. The truth/trueness of 
 this approach depends on the ideas (you think are true) included in 
 the hidden (under) production function, especially those 
 (related to/looking at/thinking about) the separability of the factors of production, 
 as well as those (related to/looking at/thinking about) endogeneity of inputs. 
 
 Some studies have used rather (serving to severely limit or control) production technologies, for example, a Cobb-Douglas production function with male and female labor further 
 disaggregated 
 into family and hired labor (Saito, 
 Mekonnen, and Spurling, 1994). The ends/end results 
 (related to/looking at/thinking about) the relative working well of male and female 
 labor are possibly not real or true, however, because the CobbDouglas technology orders/forces additive separability on 
 the production function. 
 Other studies have used flexible functional forms 
 and tested clearly for separability of the production 
 function?* Such flexible functional forms allow tax rates of substitution between inputs to change/differ 
 depending on the levels of other inputs, and shed light 
 on the substitutability of male and female labor. They 
 provide ideas of the (male/female status) division of labor by 
 crop and by job  in farming systems. I discuss studies 
 using flexible forms more a lot in this review. 
 (i) Separability and the (male/female status) division of labor 
 Kumar and Hot&amp;kiss (1988) estimate translog 
 production functions for different crops and test for 
 separability between male and female labor in Nepal. 
 Separability hints that the tax rates of substitution between pairs of factors in the separated group 
 (for example, male and female labor) are independent 
 of the levels of factors outside that group (in their 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required), land). The separability test points to/shows 
 that, except for the dry season crops, men's and 
 women's labor are weakly separatable; that is, they have 
 different tax rates of substitution with land. This 
 hints that, at least for some crops, there is little reason for collecting men's and women's labor. 
 Laufer (1985) uses ICRISAT data from six villages in India over a three-year period to guess generalized quadratic production functions for three 
 major crops with farm-level fixed effects to control for 
 unseen farm-clearly stated/particular factors. Weak separability 
 of labor inputs with respect to all other nonlabor 
 inputs was tested by forcing limits on the coefficients . 
 Chance ratio tests point to/show that male and female 
 labor are not (weakly) separatable in the production of 
 (grass grown for food) and rice. Male and female labor are good 
 (completes/goes along with) in (grass grown for food) and rice, but male labor is 
 more substitutable for animal power and land. Male 
 labor is (completing/matching) with machines (mainly crop-watering/rinsing with water pumps), while female labor is substitutable. In 
 contrast, male and female labor are found to be good 
 substitutes in (peas, beans, lentils, etc.), and equally (completing/matching) 
 with animal power. In all crops, male and female labor 
 are combined in (compared to other things) fixed proportions with 
 land. Male and female labor could be (completing/matching) 
 in (grass grown for food) and rice, but substitutable in (peas, beans, lentils, etc.) 
 because of the different nature of tasks needed/demanded to 
 grow the different crops, and the usual (male/female status) 
 division of labor by job. 
 Jacoby's (1991) study of the families in the 
 
 MALE-FEMALE DIFFERENCES IN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 
 
 Peruvian Sierra uses both Cobb-Douglas and (one after the other) restricted translog production functions to guess not important products and test for the substitutability 
 of male and female labor. First, he guessed two 
 Cobb-Douglas 
 production functions for crops and 
 animals, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 He finds that while adult 
 female labor does not have a significantly positive 
 effect on crop output, it is highly significant in the 
 animals equation, with a coefficient almost twice 
 that of adult males. Adult males have about the same 
 coefficient in both equations. If poor (person) families 
 well set apart time across tasks, the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) suggests a sexual division of labor, with women spending 
 (compared to other things) more of their time than men in animals 
 production, 
 and men (focusing on doing one thing very well) 
 in (work done by traveling to a place to watch, listen, learn, etc.). 
 Second, Jacoby used a (one after the other) restricted translog 
 production function to test for the nonseparability of 
 male and female labor. A sexual division of labor 
 hints that labor working well of men and women will 
 be differentially affected by the presence of other 
 inputs; that is, the tax rate of change 
 between labor of men and women will change/differ  with the 
 levels of other inputs. Since the tax rate of change from a Cobb-Douglas production function 
 depends only on the ratio of male and female labor 
 inputs, 
 the Cobb-Douglas 
 production 
 function 
 (forces (on people)/causes an inconvenient situation) separability. 
 Rather than do so, Jacoby 
 (one after the other) tests for a nonseparable technology. He 
 first tests for strong separability against the joint other choice of weak separability or nonseparability, then 
 tests weak separability against nonseparability alone, 
 through a series of translog (moving backwards). 
 The end/end result from the sequence of tests is that 
 only the nonseparabilities 
 of male and female labor 
 with respect to land and farm animals are (related to numbers) 
 significant. This is because of the sexual division 
 of labor in farming: since men are involved in tasks 
 such as plowing and transport, farm animal input 
 would tend to be more substitutable with the hours 
 men spend on the farm than with women's hours. The 
 use of more animals for plowing, for example, would 
 replace adult male time spent with the foot plow, but 
 would not cause women to substitute out of weeding. 
 The strong negative interaction between female labor 
 and farm size may also be a result of the sexual 
 division of labor: families with little land tend to 
 add to/addition their income with nonagricultural activities. In near landless families, men tend to spend 
 more time in off-farm work, leaving most farming-based 
 tasks in the hands of women. The ability to stretch of substitution between male and female labor at the geometric 
 means of the data equals 1.84, which is higher than 
 that allowed by the Cobb-Douglas 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 (namely, one), but does not point to/show very high 
 substitutability. 
 (ii) Not importantproducts of labor 
 The above studies also figured out/calculated 
 
 the not important 
 
 1589 
 
 product of labor, which is the addition to output due to 
 an added unit of labor, (made different) by sex. In the 
 Nepal study referred to above (Kumar and Hotchkiss, 
 1988), the not important products of men's and women's 
 labor are found to be independently significant for all 
 crops except early paddy. For the dry season crops, an 
 added/more unit of women's labor added/gave more to 
 output than male labor, probably due to competing 
 activities of fuel and water collection, which hit/harm 
 on women's time for farming-based production. 
 While not important products of men and women's 
 labor may differ, farmers would be giving-out labor 
 clearly if the ratios of not important products are equal 
 to relative wages. In fact, Laufer (1985) finds that in 
 India, while the not important product of male labor is 
 greater than that of female labor in all crops, the ratios 
 of not important products lie within the range of ratios of 
 watched/followed wages paid in the six villages, suggesting 
 that farmers clearly equate relative wages to the 
 ratios of not important products. 
 In Jacoby's (1991) study of the Peruvian Sierra, 
 the ratio of female-to-male not important products of 0.64, 
 which is (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) close to the relative wage, points to/shows that men add/give more to total farm output at 
 the margin than women. This may be due to women's 
 habit/desire to be casual rather than regular farm workers 
 in the Peruvian Sierra, and to spend more time, on 
 average, in household and nonfarm business activities 
 than in farm work. Jacoby argues that women may sort 
 themselves into these activities because they are 
 "deep down" more productive in them than men, and that 
 these working well differences are important by the 
 purchase/getting/learning of part/area-specific workers by both 
 men and women. But since the same farming-based tasks 
 (for example, land preparation) are performed by 
 women in other farming systems, it may not be valid 
 to use the findings from the static measurement of a 
 production technology to generalize about a division 
 of labor whose roots may be cultural. An different 
 explanation proposes that there could be a higher cost 
 related to body size in some farming-based operations 
 that would then be reflected in higher working well of 
 men relative to women. 
 (iii) Women's working well and polygyny 
 Another study by Jacoby carefully studies women's farming-based working well as a factor influencing men's 
 demand for wives in C&amp;e d'Ivoire, where polygyny is 
 common (Jacoby. 1995). He guesses a (may or may not happen, depending on something) 
 profit function as a function of input prices, capital 
 inputs, and male and female family labor inputs. 
 Although the profit function is Cobb-Douglas, it is 
 changed to allow the labor working well limits/guidelines to 
 depend on permanent farm (features/ qualities/ traits), including 
 crop composition. Ordinary least squares guesses 
 show that female labor seems to add/give a larger 
 share to farm (money made/good thing received) than male labor, though this difference decreases with first-differenced 
 OLS esti- 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 1590 
 
 mates. After accounting for mixed-up nature of labor 
 inputs and using (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) of that/of it, however, men 
 add/give more to farm (money made/good thing received) than do women. When 
 crop composition is taken into account, the (thing that's given/work that's done) of female work hard to (money made/good thing received) is negatively related with 
 cocoa, coffee, cotton, rice and maize. Crops usually/(in the past) grown by women, such as tubers, interact positively (or only weakly negatively) with female labor. 
 While the results seem to support (focusing on doing one thing very well) by 
 crop according to (serving to compare two or more things) advantage, in the 
 longer run, crop (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) (and the (male/female status) division 
 of labor by crop) is also endogenous. In Africa, for 
 example, recent (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) hints that women are 
 now more involved in cash crop (producing crops/helping something grow) (Saito, 
 Makonnen and Spurling ,1994). 
 (iv) (serving to compare two or more things) advantage and the sexual division 
 of labor 
 Many of the studies on labor working well differences appeal to the idea of (serving to compare two or more things) advantage. 
 "(serving to compare two or more things) advantage" is used to explain (focusing on doing one thing very well) of people in the activities which they can 
 perform (producing more with less waste)ly than other people with 
 whom they have an exchange relationship. While this 
 is a commonly used explanation, it does not acceptably explain the sources of the (wasting very little while working or producing something) differences which lead to the (male/female status) division of labor and its 
 later 
 cultural transmission. 
 One possible 
 source, as talked about/said earlier, is the higher cost on body 
 size in farming-based operations. Body size differences 
 may be a function of (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) intakes, however, 
 which are also (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) against females in some cultural 
 contexts (famously South Asia). Women's (focusing on doing one thing very well) in domestic activities is also attributed to their 
 lower working well in farming or some other type of 
 non-home production. It is more likely that the (male/female status) 
 division of labor reflects both (related to the body function of living things) (body sizerelated) and social factors. In most cultures, women 
 have a greater responsibilities for childcare and household provisioning; such caring behavior is reinforced 
 through normal behavior or beliefss. This may hold back women's 
 ability to participate in farming-based tasks which conflict with household responsibilities. 
 
 4. SUMMARY 
 
 AND METHODOLOGICAL 
 ISSUES 
 
 significant). In this setting, women may be more held back by cultural factors from having more active 
 roles, and levels of education and technical development are lower. More recent work on Burkina Faso 
 points to/shows that lower input strengths on women's 
 plots, which result in lower produces, are due to not mirror-images roles and responsibilities within the household. 
 This hints that (male/female status) differences may lead to 
 allocative (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) within the household, even if 
 sex differences do not, mostly, affect technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Further scientific work on this area, 
 with better information on individual farmer (features/ qualities/ traits), should be done/tried. 
 The neglect of endogenous input choice is a serious defect of this books. Since relationships 
 between farmer (features/ qualities/ traits) and input use are not 
 thought about/believed, most studies have guessed (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) coefficients and do not address how actual levels of inputs 
 use are to be increased. To the extent that better educated farmers are more likely to adopt modem inputs, 
 these studies underestimate 
 the results 
 of 
 underinvestment in women's education in (away from cities) (communities of people). Endogeneity of inputs extends even to those 
 inputs which are usually assumed fixed in the short 
 run. Land size, which is usually assumed to be (coming from the outside of something), is related to land quality. More than that, in 
 (communities of people) where land is set apart and given out to women based on 
 marriage, land size is unlikely to be (coming from the outside of something). 
 Recent studies guessing differences in labor working well using flexible functional forms provide 
 interesting ideas of the sexual division of labor in 
 different farming systems. One cannot generalize 
 whether an added unit of male or female labor is 
 more productive, however, because the sexual division of labor differs/changes widely across crops, tasks, and 
 farming systems. Labor (not enough of something) may result in higher 
 not important products of labor: in Nepal, the higher marg<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
