 Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 (away from cities) employment in industrialised countries$ 
 John Brydena,*, Ray Bollmanb 
 a 
 
 The Arkleton Centre, St. Mary's, Kings College, University of Aberdeen, Old Aberdeen, AB24 2UF Scotland, UK 
 b 
 Statistics Canada, Ottawa, Ont., Canada, K1A OT6 
 Received 26 January 1999; received in changed form 12 October 1999; accepted 13 November 1999 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper tests the recent changes in (away from cities) employment in the OECD countries, highlighting the growing role of 
 employment in services and, sometimes, manufacturing activity. In many, but not all, areas away from cities the (not part of the church)  decline in 
 farming-based employment has been more than evened out by growing employment in these other parts/areas. However, the 
 (many different kinds of people or things) of employment growth within and between areas away from cities is stressed, as are the effects/results/suggestions of this (many different kinds of people or things) for policy. 
 A range of explanations for the relative money-based success of some areas away from cities is explored. These include the hits/effects of 
 globalisation; rebuilding of the labour market; new `consumption' demands on the areas away from cities; and human ability to move around. The 
 paper ends/decides that traditional explanations do not explain the (many different kinds of people or things) of results in areas away from cities. New approaches are needed. 
 Recent analyses under the (flag/sign/headline) of `the new money-based (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.)' has advanced our understanding of the pre-conditions for 
 (away from cities) development to happen, but understanding the (many different kinds of people or things) pattern of (away from cities) employment results within the same kind of 
 (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) remains a challenge which needs to be talked to/looked at by inter-(related to control or punishment) approaches and methods. #_# 2000 Elsevier 
 Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: (away from cities) employment; (away from cities) development; OECD countries 
 
 1. Introduction 
 This paper was given great ideas from a collection of papers 
 which, as editors and contributors, we put together in a 
 book, (away from cities) Employment: An International (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), (not very long ago) published by CAB International (Bollman and Bryden, 1997). The papers were presented at 
 a (meeting to discuss things/meeting together) held in the (away from cities) town of Coaticook, 
 $_$ 
 
 Based on a paper presented at the (away from cities) Employment 
 Symposium at the IAAE XXIII Conference, Sacramento, 10±16 
 August 1997. 
 * 
 Corresponding author. Tel.: 44-1224-273-901; fax: 441224-273-902. 
 
 Quebec, in October 1995, and seven of the 30 chapters 
 report (serving to compare two or more things) research begun/tried within the 
 OECD (away from cities) development programme. For the ®rst 
 time, although only for the OECD countries, a (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) 
 complete body of similar data analysing 
 the (popular things/general ways things are going) and patterns in (away from cities) employment is 
 available. This marks a (large/relatively large) step forward 
 from the usual focus on farming-based employment, 
 and the generally sad predictions about the 
 hit/effect of (lowering in number/getting worse) farming-based employment on (away from cities) 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 Although we obviously admit/recognize/respond to the work of 
 our fellow workers at the Coaticook (meeting to discuss things/meeting together) and the 
 bene®t of the stimulating discussions there, we have 
 
 0169-5150/00/$ ± see front matter #_# 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 9 9 ) 0 0 0 5 3 - 5 
 
 186 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 tried to go beyond the extent of/the range of the book and ask what 
 explanations might support watched/followed changes in 
 (away from cities) employment. 
 1.1. The changing big picture  for (away from cities) development 
 The attention given to (away from cities) development in OECD 
 countries has steadily increased over the past ten years, a 
 period of (large/relatively large) change at both worldwide  and 
 (related to Europe) levels. Liberalisation and globalisation are 
 driving worldwide  trade and capital movements and the 
 worldwide  division of labour and signi®cant market changes/recalculations follow from this. Partly linked with these (popular things/general ways things are going), 
 major changes in sets of rules affecting (away from cities) 
 areas are happening. These market and policy changes 
 mean major challenges, as well as some new opportunities, for (away from cities) (groups of people/animals/things). The ability (to hold or do something) of (away from cities) 
 people to respond to possible opportunities and 
 threats by creating new sources of income and 
 employment to replace (lowering in number/getting worse) employment in farming, other first (or most important) businesses, some services (e.g. 
 banking, (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.), wholesaling) and manufacturing is a critical issue both for (away from cities) people and 
 for policy makers and (away from cities) development (services businesses/government units). 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the recent past in OECD countries 
 is that some areas away from cities are 'better placed' than others 
 to change to fit these processes of `opening up' and the 
 resulting exposure to external forces, although 
 the (proof that one thing definitely causes another) factors are not obvious. Among the 
 explanations of (away from cities) success we can ®nd those focusing on factor gifts, factor prices, creative abilities (to hold or do something), good luck, `social' capital, nice things, 
 closeness to rich city-based  (groups of people/animals/things) with increasing (way of living) demands on areas away from cities, etc. 
 Areas away from cities differ very (much) in their money-based 
 structure and activity, their natural and human 
 useful things/valuable supplies, the (off to the side)ity of their location (and 
 hence market (possible greatness or power) and transport costs), their 
 (related to information about people) and social facts or conditions (that surround someone), in other 
 words, their general 'initial conditions'. Therefore, 
 they are affected in different ways, and to different 
 extents, by the external forces with which they interact. Policies and support structures for areas away from cities must 
 more and more recognise this (many different kinds of people or things) of conditions and 
 results. It follows that knowledge and understanding of the processes involved, and local responses to 
 them, becomes a important element in the improvement 
 of policy and local action. 
 
 More and more, areas away from cities are expected to develop 
 their own analyses of their strengths, weaknesses, 
 opportunities and threats, and change their own plans and action plans to deal with them. This is a 
 general habit/desire, caused by the lack of described/explained 
 knowledge and solutions at the `centre' as well as 
 by ®scal restrictions. A critical question for local 
 actors is the dual one: how can they best (make small) 
 bad effects of globalisation and how can they best 
 take advantage of new opportunities? A related question is what room for manoeuvre do they have in an time 
 where the big levers often seem to be beyond their 
 control? 
 2. Trends in (away from cities) employment 
 2.1. Introduction 
 In order to identify and analyse (popular things/general ways things are going) in (away from cities) 
 development, the OECD established a land-based 
 big plan/layout/dishonest plan in which 2000 areas, covering the whole 
 (land area owned or controlled by someone) of the OECD countries, are identi®ed. These 
 areas are grouped into three types according to their 
 share of population living in (away from cities) communities: 
  Mostly (away from cities) areas: over 50% 
  Significantly (away from cities)or `intermediate'regions: 15±50% 
  Mostly urbanised areas: below 15% 
 By grouping areas in this way, each type of area 
 contains some (away from cities) and some city-based  communities, 
 although to different degrees (Meyer, 1997). It is this 
 OECD classi®cation which is used throughout this 
 paper. 
 2.2. General (moves in a particular way/becomes popular) 
 The (lowering in number/getting worse) relative importance of farming in 
 areas away from cities is continuing mostly due to adoption of 
 new technology and the growth of other parts/areas. The 
 OECD work on land-based indicators of (away from cities) employment showed that in only three OECD countries did 
 farm-related account for over 25% of the labour force in 
 mostly (away from cities) areas in 1990. Very differently, 
 industry accounted for more than 25% of employment 
 in such areas in seventeen countries, while services 
 accounted for more than 25% of employment in all of 
 them, and over 50% in 18 (OECD, 1996, p. 46). 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 187 
 
 Table 1 
 Employment change in energetic and falling behind labour markets, Canadaa 
 Number of areas 
 
 Employment 1991 (%) 
 
 Employment change 1981±1991 
 
 266 
 209 
 68 
 141 
 38 
 21 
 17 
 19 
 12 
 7 
 
 100 
 30 
 11 
 19 
 23 
 14 
 8 
 47 
 21 
 26 
 
 116.5 
 114.1 
 129.3 
 107.0 
 126.0 
 138.6 
 109.2 
 113.9 
 129.6 
 104.0 
 
 Total 1981  100 
 National 
 Mostly (away from cities) areas 
 Pattern of behavior 
 Falling behind 
 Significantly (away from cities) areas 
 Pattern of behavior 
 Falling behind 
 Mostly city-based  areas 
 Pattern of behavior 
 Falling behind 
 a 
 
 Difference to national 
 0.0 
 À2.4 
 12.8 
 À9.5 
 9.5 
 22.1 
 À7.3 
 À2.6 
 13.1 
 À12.5 
 
 Source: von Meyer (1997) Table 2.2. 
 
 The same OECD studies also showed that between 
 1980 and 1990 the rates of growth of employment in 
 mostly (away from cities) areas went beyond those in mostly urbanised areas in three of the 15 countries for which data was available (Huillet, 1997, p. 
 342). More recent work which disaggregates these 
 (away from cities) areas shows clearly that even among the most 
 `rural' types of (away from cities) area, some have experienced 
 growing employment while others have experienced 
 declining employment (and sometimes population). 
 For example, Cunningham and Bollman (1997) show 
 that `there is a wide difference/different version in employment growth 
 among the different areas of Canada, independent of 
 their degree of (away from cities)ity', with rates of employment 
 growth in mostly (away from cities) areas ranging from 
 À20 to 70% (p. 57). Schindegger and Krajasits (1997) 
 show a almost the same  pattern of growth in Austria, where 
 rates of employment growth range from À19 to 14% 
 in the (away from cities) areas (p. 174). Table 1 summarises the 
 data for Canada, which is not unexpected. 
 Although this (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is both surprising and 
 encouraging, two warnings are needed/demanded. First, it 
 remains true in most countries that employment has 
 grown faster in mostly city-based  areas than in 
 mostly (away from cities) areas, and that, in general, it is 
 the signi®cantly (away from cities) areas which have experienced 
 the most fast employment growth. In the (away from cities) 
 areas only the city-based  communities are growing Ð 
 (away from cities) communities are losing both population and 
 employment. According to Irmen (1997) 
 ``rural communities within mostly (away from cities) 
 areas are the losers in (related to space or existing in space) development F F F 
 
 These (away from cities) communities lose population and 
 employment, whereas the (away from cities) communities in 
 other types of areas (mostly city-based  and 
 intermediate) gain in national importance'' (p. 28). 
 In urbanised areas, `rural' communities are growing 
 because they are located in an urbanising (surrounding conditions) 
 and benefit from it. Second, there has also been a 
 continuing employment shortage in many areas away from the cities of 
 the richer countries Ð reflected in a net commuting 
 balance with city-based  areas. Areas away from the cities often continue to 
 be net suppliers of labour to city-based  areas (Schindegger 
 and Krajasits, 1997, p. 168). 
 Other labour market changes worth brie¯y commenting on include: a fall in once-a-year hours worked per 
 person; an increase in self-employment and part-time 
 work especially among women; a rise in long-term 
 and youth unemployment; and the feminisation of the 
 labour force Ð women are playing an ever larger role 
 in the labour force. Although general (popular things/general ways things are going), they are 
 also obvious in areas away from cities. 
 The main points to note at this stage are: 
 1. We cannot generalise about the development or 
 growth experience of (away from cities) areas. We cannot 
 assume that they will unavoidably experience 
 declining employment and population Ð the 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is that some will succeed and others will 
 even grow faster than the fastest growing city-based 
 area. (places that are off to the side) are not doomed to be constantly falling behind areas in money-based terms, nor are 
 centres (already decided beforehand to happen) to be constantly in the lead. 
 2. Differential results within broad areas are not 
 
 188 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 generally (named after/discovered by/caused by) policy differences Ð in 
 many cases the same policy government produces very 
 different results in different places Ð real 
 processes of money-based, technical and social 
 change are involved which are often independent 
 of policy or even in spite of policy (for example, in 
 the EU the growth of farm household pluriactivity 
 in the 1980s was not encouraged by policy). That 
 is not to say that policy changes and putting into use are insigni®cant factors, especially when they 
 are clearly combined with market and community forces and are ¯exible enough to deal with 
 varied (away from cities) conditions. 
 3. Some areas away from cities (show or prove) (large/relatively large) ability to change to fit quickly changing external conditions, (even though there is the existence of) well-known handicaps. 
 4. At least in terms of direct employment, (away from cities) 
 people now work in the manufacturing and the 
 (businesses)s in almost all of the EU. However, 
 some areas may `depend' on farming (the 
 major export base) even though few are directly 
 employed in it. 
 In Europe, rebuilding is happening in farming, 
 agri-food and food retailing and distribution parts/areas. 
 There is also a general move/change to a service-based (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in which the information and knowledge based 
 businesses play an increasing role. Linked with this is a 
 de-materialisation of production (i.e. any good one 
 buys has a higher `services' part than in earlier 
 20 years), a de-linking of money-based growth from consumption of raw materials, a dissociation of ®nancial 
 world/area/ball from the `real (process of people making, selling, and buying things)', and an internationalisation of savings-investment ¯ows and of relations in 
 commercial and knowledge worlds/areas/balls. Although many 
 of these are not new features of (away from cities) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) (for 
 example, areas away from cities have always been open to savings/investment ¯ows to cities), new elements concern 
 the globalisation of these ¯ows, the reduced power of 
 areas and nation states to in¯uence them and the 
 strengthening internationalisation of relations in commercial and knowledge worlds/areas/balls which both threatens 
 many local commercial and knowledge based activities and provides them with new (non-local) opportunities. 
 De-appeared production (in the sense that personal demand is moving/changing from products (that are bought and sold)  consumption to 
 services consumption) in the form of tourism and 
 
 recreational businesses have been especially important in the richer countries and much of this is based on 
 new `consumption' uses of the countryside. However, 
 this is not to argue that production activities do not 
 remain important both in terms of their money-based 
 signi®cance and in terms of perceptions of (away from cities) 
 people. 
 2.3. There is a steady and long term decline in 
 farming-based employment 
 The long term and generalised decline in farming-based employment is well recorded/supported. In the 1980s 
 once-a-year rates of decline were between 3 and 4% in 
 Japan, Finland, and Austria. In the EU, farming-based 
 employment has (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) by around 2±3% per year 
 over the past ten years (Post and Terluin, 1997, p. 310). 
 In 1990, farming-based employment was less than 
 10% of total employment in all EU countries except 
 Greece (23%), Portugal (20%), Ireland (15%) and 
 Spain (11%) (op. cit., p. 308). What's more, in all 
 countries the extent of farming-based employment is 
 (made to appear much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is) because the ®gures include pluriactive 
 farmers and farm families for whom farming may 
 provide but a small part of/amount of household income. 
 In the EU-12, a sample of 7000 farm families 
 pointed to/showed that just under half of all farm families 
 earned more than half of their household income 
 from farming in 1987 (Bryden et al., 1994). 
 Anyway, it is clear from differential working well 
 data that there is still (large/relatively large) room for further 
 labour savings in farming even without major 
 changes to the CAP. More than that, in the 10 Central 
 and Eastern (related to Europe) Countries (CEECs) which 
 have applied to join the EU, a quarter of the labour 
 force is still working at farming (9.5 million people) creating only 8% of GDP: if the CEECs 
 approach the average working well of the present 
 EU-15, then about 3 million people would leave 
 farming over a period of years. It is not beyond 
 the bounds of possibility, based on past experience, 
 that in East, West and Central Europe as a whole more 
 than 6 million people could leave farming in the 
 next ten years. 
 The purpose of stating this is to raise the question, if 
 not in farming, where are the jobs in areas away from cities going 
 to come from; and how might policy best help in the 
 process of change? 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 Table 2 
 Employment in tourism compared to agriculture as percentage of 
 total employment, 1990a 
 Country 
 
 Germany 
 Austria 
 Canada 
 US 
 Finland 
 France 
 UK 
 Switzerland 
 
 Employment 
 in tourism (%) 
 
 Employment in 
 farming (%) 
 
 P.R.b 
 
 S.Rc 
 
 Alld 
 
 P.R. 
 
 S.R. 
 
 All 
 
 5.2 
 17.7 
 9.3 
 10.5 
 11.0 
 6.5 
 9.8 
 18.7 
 
 4.4 
 21.0 
 9.3 
 11.3 
 4.2 
 7.4 
 4.9 
 11.7 
 
 4.0 
 21.8 
 9.7 
 11.2 
 8.3 
 7.9 
 8.3 
 14.9 
 
 1.5 
 13.3 
 10.9 
 5.9 
 16.0 
 10.8 
 10.3 
 9.5 
 
 1.5 
 4.1 
 3.3 
 2.4 
 5.3 
 5.5 
 4.2 
 6.3 
 
 1.0 
 6.2 
 4.6 
 3.3 
 8.5 
 5.7 
 2.4 
 4.1 
 
 a 
 
 Source: OECD, 1996. 
 Mostly (away from cities) areas. 
 c 
 Significantly (away from cities) areas. 
 d 
 All areas. 
 b 
 
 2.4. Employment in (away from cities) tourism has been 
 increasing 
 In a few OECD countries, employment in tourism 
 goes beyond that in farming in all types of area. This 
 is the case in the mostly (away from cities) areas of 
 Austria, US, Germany and Switzerland (see Table 
 2). More than that, tourism employment has been growing 
 in all types of (away from cities) area (with the exception of 
 Finland) throughout the 1980s; once-a-year growth rates of 
 3% or higher were recorded in Germany, Spain and 
 Switzerland (Bontron and Lasnier, 1997, p. 436). 
 2.5. Mixed experience with other services 
 In all OECD countries employment in services has 
 been growing. This (popular thing/general way things are going) is re¯ected in the mostly (away from cities) areas where most employment growth 
 during the 1980s was due to net increases in the 
 (businesses) (Meyer, 1997). In all (away from cities) areas the 
 growth of most services similar things that at national 
 levels. The main exception is business services 
 (including knowledge and information based services); this tends to be the high value-added, highwage element of the (businesses), and is heavily 
 under-represented in areas away from cities (Cunningham and 
 Bollman, 1997). Some people expect such services 
 to rule all employment after 2000; for example, 
 projections in Finland in 1995 suggested that by the 
 year 2000, 93% of all work would be `information 
 
 189 
 
 work' (Bryden, 1997 p. 448). However, questions 
 remain about the linkages between this type of work 
 with other parts/areas, and about its exact de®nition. 
 Public services, including education, health and 
 public management, are important employers in 
 many areas away from cities. These parts/areas grew quickly during 
 the 1980s, but that growth appears to have been 
 stopped or even reversed in many areas in the 
 1990s. Employment (moves in a particular way/becomes popular) in other person services, especially retailing and personal services, tend 
 to be linked to population levels and changes. 
 A critical question is whether areas away from cities can participate in the growth in employment in services. In 
 principal this should be helped by the quickly 
 increasing access to, and signi®cant cost reductions 
 in, digital (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.), linked in turn to the 
 `Information Highway'. However, (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the 
 adoption of these technologies by (away from cities) actors, and 
 especially of the content and hits/affects of their use, is 
 rather rare/not enough. Bryden (1997) identi®es some 
 cases where investment in Information and Communications Technology (ICT) has created employment 
 opportunities in areas away from cities. The focus is placed 
 upon opportunities rather than job creation (by itself/in and of itself)  as it 
 is the hit/effect of ICT on the (wanting to beat others in contests) of (away from cities) 
 businesses/projects in general and the hits/effects on employment 
 of ICT adoption and use which is important for the 
 future of areas away from cities. A main point seems to be that 
 signi®cant employment losses as well as gains can be 
 linked to ICT and, at least sometimes, gains may 
 go beyond losses. Public policies at both national and 
 local levels can make a difference to the direction of 
 these net effects. For example, the helping action of the 
 Highlands and Islands Development Board (HIDB) 
 and later the Highlands and Islands Business/project (which 
 succeeded HIDB) in investments in digitalising the 
 telecom network, and targeting new types of business/project which could use the network, appears to have 
 had good effects (see Sproull et al., 1996). This 
 supports (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of pro®table relocation of (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.)-intensive businesses/projects in (away from cities) America 
 (Salant and Marx, 1995). 
 3. Explanations of (away from cities) employment changes 
 The changes in (away from cities) employment in OECD countries are of more than passing interest. They are the 
 
 190 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 opposite of what was expected, if not in terms of 
 farming-based employment, then certainly in terms of 
 growth in manufacturing and services employment in 
 many areas. More than that, there has been a surprising 
 (quality of changing over time or at different places) in results. They are not agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with 
 the (statements about the future) of core-edge/edges models or, in fact, 
 new-classical models, of development patterns. The 
 `New Money-based (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.)' models have created 
 pictures/situations where (away from cities) development will happen 
 (Krugman, 1993, 1999; Kilkenny, 1993, 1998, 
 1999) but the problematique remains Ð how to 
 explain differential money-based performance among 
 (away from cities) places with almost the same  features of (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.), 
 settlement and (off to the side)ity with respect to metropoles. Although Kilkenny's recent work in particular 
 opens up important new questions, new information, 
 and explanation, is needed to explain the loss of competitive 
 advantage in some areas away from cities, and its collection in 
 others. 
 Some of the key explanatory chapters in the book 
 deal with issues such as education levels, (small groups of possible customers), networks and (way of living) choices as a means of 
 exploring the differential performance of (away from cities) 
 areas. In many cases, the ®ndings are almost the same  and 
 point to the need to view (away from cities) employment changes 
 both within a set of worldwide  and national changes, 
 commonly termed `restructuring', which have speci®c 
 (away from cities) hits/effects and with reference to micro-(related to a large area) 
 (features/ qualities/ traits). For example, in their work McGranahan and Kassel (1997) decide that, (even though there is the existence of) the long 
 standing focus put upon group of workers education as a 
 key to money-based (moving ahead or up), high (related to a large area) education levels offer a limited advantage. Money-based development may be just as dependent upon local 
 facts or conditions (that surround someone) such as closeness to industrial districts 
 or expanding city-based  centres, good/willing climate and 
 nice things as local education levels. Through examining (way of living) choices and (away from cities) job creation, Persson 
 et al. (1997) identify three factors which lead to 
 increasing (using different things): internationalization and 
 organization of money-based activity; (many different kinds of people or things) of (ways of living) and ability to move around patterns among people; and policy 
 (creation and construction/ group of objects) and practices (p. 146). 
 Basically there are three main groups of explanations of (away from cities) employment change. The ®rst group 
 relates to the hits/effects of globalisation and rebuilding, and the second to new `consumption' functions of 
 the countryside in the richer countries. These two 
 
 groups both relate to external demand forces. The 
 third group of factors is the local `swift-footedness' 
 (either public or private business-starting) in some 
 communities that is not well understood or measured. 
 Clemenson and Lane (1997) identify (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) (small groups of possible customers) as a means of using (for selfish reasons) 
 potential bene®ts of each of these groups. Special place/good job 
 markets can both respond to the external demand 
 forces, encouraging a re-examination of the opportunities offered by any one place and use local 
 business-starting to create a successful marketing 
 plan. 
 3.1. Hits/effects of globalisation 
 Although the internationalisation of money-based 
 activity has been happening for centuries, globalisation1 is a recent thing/event which has intensi®ed 
 during the 1980s and '90s. Whereas internationalisation refers mainly to trade in products (that are bought and sold)  and services the 
 production of which was organised within national 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), globalisation involves `functional (combination of different things together that work as one unit) between (in other countries) broke up money-based 
 activities' (Dicken, 1992). Although much attention 
 has been paid to the globalisation of manufacturing 
 activities, it is obvious that globalisation has also 
 happened in important business services such as 
 banking, insurance, advertising and communications. 
 Globalisation is marked in part by the reduction 
 of the cost of space due to the reduction in the cost 
 of transportation and communication. Before the 
 beginning of globalisation, high transportation and communication costs protected some (away from cities) workers from 
 competition, and (in almost the same way) were protected from competing in city-based markets by the same high costs. 
 New technology has caused signi®cant reductions in 
 the costs of transportation and communication. 
 Although (related to computers and science) change is not new, it is the 
 focus on transportation and communications that 
 makes globalisation hit/effect signi®cantly on (away from cities) 
 areas. 
 While internationalisation was greatly boosted in 
 the late 19th century by the development of transport 
 technology (steam ships, railways, refrigeration), globalisation has been helped by the reduction in 
 1 
 
 This section draws in part on Chapter 1 in Bor et al. (1997). 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 average taxes/import taxes and other trade (blocking things) after the Second 
 World War2, by the development of ICT, and linked 
 with the growth in trans-national corporations (TNCs). 
 These changes mean that capital can, in way of thinking/basic truth/rule at 
 least, be got together wherever the costs of production 
 are the lowest and where social and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 restrictions are least. The parts of a product (or service) can more and more be manufactured in 
 different international locations and got together at one 
 spot, either through the growth in TNCs or by (paying someone else to do something) and `just-in-time' ways of doing things of the new 
 production system and forms of `¯exible (focusing on doing one thing very well)' (Piore and Sabel, 1984). Although such money-based links are established and maintained in many 
 and different ways, the very important features of worldwide 
 money-based rebuilding are carefully thought about/believed to be its 
 `post-Fordist' nature, ¯exibilisation, and the international scale of the production and manufacturing 
 processes (Gertler, 1988; Bernat, 1993; Cappellin, 
 1994). 
 A second and a little bit related feature of 
 money-based life today is the speed of change and 
 connected disturbance and doubt, although western Europe has gone for more than 50 years without a 
 major war. Sources of disturbance and doubt 
 include the separation of the `real (process of people making, selling, and buying things)' from 
 the `symbol (process of people making, selling, and buying things)' of international ®nancial 
 ¯ows and transactions3; the big changes in the 
 USSR and Eastern Europe which have changed the 
 nature of (related to Europe) space; (not having a steady, trustworthy government) in 
 the Middle East and Africa; changes in the worldwide 
 (surrounding conditions) linked to air-related pollution and the 
 `greenhouse effect'; and continuing trade arguments 
 (Dicken, 1992). 
 
 2 
 In 1940, the average tax/import tax (taxes charged and collected on imports) on products (that are bought and sold) 
 was about 40%; after the GATT Uruguay round of trade talks 
 (1986±92) it was about 5%. There has at the same time been a 
 growth in non-tax/import tax (blocking things) to trade such as quotas, import 
 licences, and different legal/law-based devices. 
 3 
 According to Drucker (1986) both visible (goods) and invisible 
 (services) trade are much larger than ever before Ð US$_$ 2.5 to 
 US$_$ 3 trillion a year `But the London Eurodollar market F F F. Turns 
 over US$_$ 300 billion each working day, or US$_$ 75 trillion a year, a 
 volume at least 25 times that of world trade. In addition there are 
 the foreign exchange transactions in the world's main money 
 centres, in which one currency is traded against another. These run 
 at around US$_$ 150 billion a day F F F 12 times the world-wide trade 
 in products (that are bought and sold)  and services'. 
 
 191 
 
 3.2. Why does globalisation matter for areas away from cities 
 and people? 
 Why does this matter for areas away from cities? First and 
 best because it has effects/results/suggestions for employment 
 and business/project. Because capital is more and more mobile 
 (in other countries), while labour remains (compared to other things) not moving and tied to place, at least two habits/desires can be 
 watched/followed. First of all, there is downward pressure on 
 real wage rates, especially in low-skill pieces/parts of the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) which tend to be over-represented in (away from cities) 
 areas. Secondly, there is a relative shortage of investment capital in high cost producing countries and 
 areas which are unable to maintain their competitive 
 edge (in other countries). So, some areas away from cities are more and more being seen as sources of labour; labour that is low 
 cost, reliable and unorganised (Glasmeier, 1993), while 
 some industrial labour markets such as those mainly located in early industrialised areas are being by-passed 
 by the current processes of production (Urry, 1984). 
 The processes of globalisation and rebuilding 
 have impacted on almost all areas of money-based life, 
 public and private, and are usually recognised in the 
 downsizing, re-structuring and (reasons) of businesses, institutions and organisations over the last few years 
 Ð and changing labour market conditions have followed from this. 
 3.3. Rebuilding of the labour market 
 The rebuilding of the labour market has had 
 common effects in most industrial nations, although 
 the hit/effect on areas away from cities has been (made different) by 
 greater dependence on ®shing, forestry, mining or 
 farming and the degree to which capital had already 
 penetrated the local (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Common elements 
 include the rise of unemployment and the changing 
 nature of work (Pahl, 1984). An increasing number of 
 jobs are contract-based, (for only a short time), and casual, such 
 that an increasing proportion of the group of workers has two 
 or more income-earning activities that are part-time 
 and provide limited social bene®ts. As heavy industry 
 declines and information-based activities expand, the 
 nature of work is changing, with a clear/separate rise in 
 employment opportunities in the (businesses), even 
 in areas away from cities, and a decline in manual labour. (even though there is the existence of) 
 this, manufacturing is still important in terms of local 
 employment. Much deskilling has happened and 
 
 192 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 where reskilling has happened it has been selective and 
 particular to favoured locations (Newby, 1987). In this 
 huge move/change in labour market structures the participation of women has generally increased which, 
 together with the growth of (belief in women's power), has added/has given 
 to an important move/change in (male/female status) relations and household 
 maintenance (Barthez, 1982; Whatmore, 1990). For 
 most parts of labour market change, there is an 
 equal effect in areas away from cities. 
 3.4. The changing role of the state 
 Globalisation is also changing the role of the nation 
 State. National borders are less (connected/related) in a world of 
 international ®nance and worldwide  liberalisation of trade, 
 the laws of which are serious and stubborn together at the 
 international level rather than by single countries. 
 Governments are more and more called upon to secure/make sure of 
 participation in world affairs by upgrading communications and transportation (set of machines)s, agreeing 
 to international (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) gives/agrees and programs, 
 and (causing agreement with) legal and technical dif®culties between trading partners. The pressure to remain `competitive' in the (world-wide process of people making, selling, and buying things) has led to pressure to 
 reduce taxes and other heavy loads on the (related to big business) part/area, 
 and new demands for increased workers investment. Governments appear to be shifting some of their 
 responsibilities while shedding others, in an effort to 
 balance the budget in a time of ®scal problem (OECD, 
 1993). The (old/allowing to get old/getting older) of people/of the group and high levels of 
 unemployment have added to pressures on public 
 budgets in many OECD countries. Common responses 
 involve the rebuilding of defence, social welfare, 
 health and education, as well as efforts to move away 
 from granting permanent payments to (lowering in number/getting worse) parts/areas (farming, heavy industry) towards an `investment approach' through which people, parts/areas and 
 areas can be helped to improve their competitive 
 position. The role of governments is more and more to 
 help development rather than to direct it, to 
 cooperate with other nations for trade purposes, 
 and to start partnerships with local groups, including local government and private business, to stimulate money-based development that is locally driven and 
 cost-shared. The scope for (controlled by one central place), uniform policies and (away from cities) development measures is limited. (away from cities) 
 community development can no longer (if it ever 
 could) be produced as a standardised item of mass 
 
 production. Policy must be ¯exible to complement and 
 stimulate local abilities (to hold or do something) and business-starting. 
 3.5. The widespread hits/effects of globalisation and 
 rebuilding 
 Changes due to globalisation and money-based rebuilding, either (proof that one thing definitely causes another) or (able to reply or react/quick to respond), are obvious in all 
 parts/areas of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and in most walks of life. Most 
 corporations, institutions, state bodies, and non-governmental organisations are being rebuilt in some 
 way. Both the speed of change and its unpredictability and complex difficulty lead to disturbance and doubt. We do not know whether to think about  worldwide 
 rebuilding in all its obviousations as a (not fitting together) 
 or a (atomic) leap in the progress of (a system where people own money and valuable things) (Drucker, 
 1986; Campanella, 1990). Some modern deep thinkers compare it to romanticism, a stage in shared 
 lifewhich (combines different things together so they work as one unit) both traditional values and progress 
 (Hall and Jarvie, 1992). To Giddens (1991) globalisation 
 is a form of advanced modernism, while others, such as 
 Gellner, suggest that it may be after-modern (Gellner, 
 1988; Harvey, 1989). Whatever one's view of the nature 
 and signi®cance of worldwide  rebuilding, it contains a 
 set of external factors which seem likely to go on 
 in¯uencing developments in areas away from cities and opportunities for (away from cities) people for some time to come. 
 3.6. Summary of globalisation hits/effects 
 The most important general hits/effects of globalisation can therefore be summarised brie¯y as: 
  the hit/effect on employment and work; 
  the shrinking of distance through lower costs, and 
 increasing (wasting very little while working or producing something), of move (from one place to another) and communications, evened out by increased awakeness 
 of cultural groups and communities4; 
 4 
 Robertson (1992) refers to this aspect of globalisation as both 
 the (press or force into a smaller space)ion of the world and the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of awakeness of the world as a whole,' but points out that globalisation is not 
 simply a world of coming together (communities of people). Speeded up globalisation is 
 evened-out by increased awakeness of cultural groups and 
 communities, which is one of the main disagreements of 
 rebuilding. The idea of `global culture' advanced by Featherstone (1990) involves increased worldwide  awakeness, but 
 increased knowledge of the (quality that makes something stand alone or look different) of culture groups, 
 reflecting the idea of the `global village' forecast by McLuhan 
 and advanced by Sachs (1993) as `cosmopolitan localism'. 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
  the changing role of the nation state; 
  the new role for communities and places; 
  the stress on (wanting to beat others in contests) and `flexibilisation' 
 as main features of creative and policy 
 responses. 
 3.7. (away from cities) hits/affects of globalisation 
 Particular hits/effects of globalisation on people in 
 (away from cities) and (off to the side) areas include: 
  worldwide  movements of capital and finance, leading to 
 a shortage of external investment capital; 
  the decline in farming-based employment and in the 
 relative money-based importance of food production, 
 with (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) changes in the farming 
 industry; 
  more and more worldwide  penetration of local markets 
 and increased opportunity for local producers to 
 penetrate worldwide (special place/good job) markets, exposure to 
 increased competition, and the related rebuilding 
 of (a system where people own money and valuable things); 
  growing inter-dependence between areas and activities which are physically distant from each other; 
  increasing efforts to internationalise the terms 
 under which trade happens, and remove money-based and other (blocking things) to trade, including most 
 famously farming-based production payments, for 
 example through the GATT and now the WTO; 
  the (making things all follow the same rules or be copies of the same models) of many (mass market) products, harmonisation of rules and standards 
 (ISO 9000 etc.), lowering of trade (blocking things); 
  the introduction and spread of new technologies, 
 especially ICT and science; 
  worldwide  cultural flows (e.g. through (TV, the Internet, etc.)), 
 obvious in mass person products; 
  (changes in people) including increased personal 
 ability to move around; 
  a new international division of labour in which 
 many unskilled jobs and connected production are 
 moving to the Newly Industrialised Countries. 
 It is not so much the nature of globalisation forces 
 driving change or their general results which 
 distinguishes (away from cities) from city-based  areas, but rather the 
 speci®c forms which these forces take in areas we 
 perceive as `rural'. We focus on them because (away from cities) 
 areas have become (more and more) less self-suf®cient 
 
 193 
 
 and self-contained, and ever more open to the wider 
 forces (money-based, social, political) shaping (related to Europe) 
 and worldwide  development. 
 3.8. Public products (that are bought and sold)  and new demands on the countryside 
 A second major explanatory factor for (away from cities) 
 employment changes is the coming into view of new perceptions of the countryside in rich countries with a high 
 population density (e.g. northern (related to Europe) countries), 
 and the coming into view of new uses and functions which 
 are linked to these new perceptions. 
 The (process of people making, selling, and buying things) contains both private (market) 
 and public (non-market) products (that are bought and sold)  and services. For 
 example, food products and drugs are private products (that are bought and sold)  of the farming-based part/area while pleasant 
 (wide views of nature scenes/wide areas of beautiful land), clean water (also now a private good) and 
 air, (lots of different living things all existing together) and culture are all public products (that are bought and sold). 
 Public products (that are bought and sold)  are those which cannot be directly traded 
 as it is dif®cult or impossible to leave out/keep out non-payers 
 from their bene®ts. However, a further feature concerns the important of public perception of `rurality' 
 and the social construction of the countryside in 
 general Ð Newby's `village in the mind'. 
 In many cases public products (that are bought and sold)  are critical useful things/valuable supplies in 
 creating indirect trading activities, for example, they 
 support the development of tourism and recreation, 
 and the perceived (quality of something that makes people like it or want it) of (away from cities) living. They are 
 also important  for human welfare in both (away from cities) and city-based 
 areas. The fact that public products (that are bought and sold)  such as a unspoiled 
 (surrounding conditions) or beautiful (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) cannot be traded 
 directly creates the dif®culty of valuing tradable against/compared to/or non-tradable products (that are bought and sold)  which, in the end, places heavy 
 demands on political processes. If a good cannot be 
 traded, should it be protected or preserved only as a 
 natural nice thing? Since non-tradable products (that are bought and sold)  cannot be 
 de-localised, how important are they in (indirectly) 
 beginning and building on local competitive advantages? Who 
 should pay for their maintenance and improvement, 
 and how should it be ®nanced? 
 Because of the strong link between public products (that are bought and sold) 
 and new city-based  consumption demands on (away from cities) space in 
 richer areas/countries with high population densities, they are a important  in¯uence on both the nature and 
 extent of new (away from cities) money-based activities. For example, 
 city-based  people more and more see areas away from cities as important for rest and recreation, for fresh air and clean 
 water, as offering (ways of living) with advantages over those 
 
 194 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 in city-based  areas, as having cheaper and more big 
 housing, with positive features of culture and history 
 which are worth preserving, and so on. So, public 
 products (that are bought and sold)  have an more and more important in¯uence on 
 the relative (wanting to beat others in contests) of different areas away from cities 
 and offer scope for local action in a range of diversi®ed money-based, social, cultural and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 activities. 
 3.9. Human ability to move around 
 Movements of people are a key aspect of (away from cities) 
 change and development. In-traveling, out-traveling, 
 retirement, the keeping/holding onto/remembering or loss of young people, the 
 return of people, commuting, recreation and tourism 
 are all dimensions of this movement. So too are issues 
 of personal and public transport, the location of services (more and more (had everything controlled by one central place)), the location of 
 employment and housing need, provision and cost. 
 Both out-traveling and in-traveling have results for local people, local (communities of people), local (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), local politics and local cultures. In-traveling 
 can offer both threats and opportunities. 
 The movement of people (and in fact businesses/projects) 
 into areas away from cities is not only figured out by/decided by the availability of work and other money-based opportunities, but 
 also by the new values placed on (away from cities) space Ð clean 
 (surrounding conditions), community life, space for fun, pleasant (wide views of nature scenes/wide areas of beautiful land), healthy 'lifestyles', (away from cities) culture, etc., 
 as well as, sometimes, availability of extra 
 buildings and lower cost housing. 
 Previous studies have pointed to/showed two types of traveling from city-based  to areas away from cities: job related traveling 
 and (where there are lots of homes) traveling. Much of the books on 
 city-based  to (away from cities) traveling has assumed that these two 
 types of traveling are closely related and that (related to working on the job) change hints a change in residence. Blanc and 
 Tahar (1997) suggest that there are different factors 
 in¯uencing job related and (where there are lots of homes) traveling and 
 the two types of traveling should be looked at separately. Drawing on a 1985 INSEE survey, they test 
 the relationship between (related to working on the job) and (where there are lots of homes) 
 traveling and point to/show that the two types of traveling 
 are not connected. The analysis suggests a one-way 
 relationship between (related to working on the job) and (where there are lots of homes) 
 ability to move around: (in other words) although (related to working on the job) ability to move around in¯uences (where there are lots of homes) ability to move around, the reverse is unlikely to 
 be true. 
 
 Lower population densities in areas away from cities mean that 
 it is dif®cult for people moving to a new location to 
 ®nd work and people starting a new job to ®nd 
 housing. However, the (away from cities) housing market is in 
 general easier to access than the (away from cities) labour market. 
 Three reasons are given for this: 
  building one's own house is easier than creating a 
 paid job for oneself; 
  empty houses are common in the countryside 
 after the long period of (away from cities) escape; 
  a person's skills are more specific than housing 
 preferences, and finding a match when there is a 
 shortage is easier on the real estate market than on 
 the job market. 
 This argument is proven as true by Persson et al. 
 (1997) who focus on the decreasing in¯uence of (away from cities) 
 employment availability on people' decisions to 
 move to areas away from cities. They suggest that (way of living) choices 
 are more and more important in maintaining (away from cities) (groups of people/animals/things), both in encouraging people to move to (away from cities) 
 areas and in creating jobs in the area in which they live. 
 A survey of in-traveling workers in (away from cities) Sweden illustrated 
 that employment was not the main reason for their 
 move, and reasons such as moving back to their roots, 
 searching for a sense of community and a non-city-based (way of living) were identi®ed. A survey in southern 
 Canada pointed to/showed a large proportion of families having 
 diversi®ed their sources of income to maintain particular (way of living) choices such as taking holidays, to bene®t children or to sustain family consumption patterns. 
 Persson et al. use the idea  of the `Arena (community of people/all good people in the world)' 
 to illustrate the (many different kinds of people or things) nature of (away from cities) labour markets, 
 the increasing importance of (ways of living) in areas away from cities, 
 and the supply of businesspersons able to work at home, 
 provide business, education and health services. They 
 also develop the idea  of `reach' Ð broadly de®ned 
 as `the ability to agreement the surrounding world 
 in one's world/area/ball of in¯uence' (p. 155). For example, 
 physical reach in the form of links with larger population centres is important in (away from cities) development, but also 
 important are the dimensions of social reach, time 
 reach, knowledge reach and money-based reach in understanding the differences between (away from cities) families, 
 and the effects of new technologies. Basically, this 
 idea  highlights the importance of different kinds of 
 `networks' in going beyond the edges of local 
 space and local markets. 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 Modern (ways of living) are in¯uenced by worldwide 
 (popular things/general ways things are going) and the pluralistic (features/ qualities/ traits) of `footloose' 
 labour markets. Persson et al. make the point that more 
 bold and confident (ways of living) are developed through a better educated group of workers and the coming into view of knowledge and information based small production units 
 with ¯exible working conditions. It is more and more 
 possible to make choices about where to live and work 
 based on (things to carefully think about) other than just employment 
 opportunities. They (describe the future) that the search for quality 
 of life will have a signi®cant hit/effect on settlement 
 patterns. 
 Persson et al. go on to suggest that the place given to 
 employment creation in (away from cities) planning is of less 
 importance today, and that planning at local level is 
 the most appropriate way to help (away from cities) communities 
 to develop their own advantages. `Public policy should 
 pay as much attention to micro-(related to a large area) character as is 
 paid to expensive job-creation programmes' (op. cit. 
 p.161). 
 Errington (1997) also watches/states that opportunities 
 for (away from cities) employment are no longer the very important 
 order in keeping (groups of people/animals/things) in areas away from cities. The 
 concern of policy in areas away from cities to oppose/to go againstact (having fewer and fewer, or no, people) has to a certain extent been replaced by a 
 growing out¯ux of (groups of people/animals/things) from city-based  to (away from cities) 
 areas. However, Errington argues that there is still a 
 case for government helping action in (away from cities) employment 
 because of the (thing that's given/work that's done) that local employment 
 opportunities make to (accomplishing or gaining) balanced (i.e. (able to last/helping the planet)) (away from cities) communities. He shows this point 
 through his study of the village of Lambourn in 
 Berkshire, England, focusing attention on the extent 
 of car use in and around the village. Errington's survey 
 pointed to/showed that levels of car ownership were almost the same  for 
 those who worked in the village and those who 
 commuted, but the weekly distance travelled by people (who travel back and forth to work) was two and a half times greater than those 
 who worked in the village. He hints that more local 
 employment opportunities would reduce (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions)al and social costs of commuting, by that/in that way adding/giving to a more (able to last/helping the planet) (away from cities) (community of people/all good people in the world). This is, of 
 course, an (middle-position) (away from cities) area, close to the southeast England city-based area. 
 Other elements explaining employment changes 
 include: 
  new-classical arguments relating to factor prices; 
 
 195 
 
  hits/effects of new technology (distance-shrinking 
 effects); 
  workers (not just education, but also lower 
 labour force turnover, loyalty etc.); 
  `social capital' (Putnam, 1993), including institutional effectiveness and natural tendency of local actors 
 to co-operate; 
  flexible networks, linked to previous co-operative 
 structures in farming (Piore and Sabel, 1984; 
 Zacchia, 1986; Beccatini, 1990). 
 The scope for local actors to encourage activities 
 based on these factors is mostly beyond the extent of/the range of 
 this paper. However, it is clearly in¯uenced by a set of 
 less `tangible' useful things/valuable supplies or abilities (to hold or do something) which may be 
 more, or less, present in local (communities of people). They include 
 effective `governance' and natural tendencies of local actors 
 in private, public and (something you choose to do, but is not required) worlds/areas/balls to co-operate, 
 as well as material conditions, in¯uence over other 
 `public goods', useful thing/valuable supply markets such as those for land 
 and minerals, labour and knowledge, as well as a range 
 of networks and the relationship between these and 
 communications (set of machines). This suggests a new 
 ®eld for cross-(related to control or punishment) research which can penetrate the reasons for wide differences between the 
 medium and long term performance of (away from cities) places 
 in almost the same  policy and (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) locations. These 
 issues are further explored in Dawe and Bryden (1999) 
 and Bryden and Dawe (1998). 
 4. End/end result 
 There are many different forces at work leading to a 
 rebuilding of (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things), (community of people/all good people in the world) and labour 
 markets. What is surprising in a sense is the (state of always working or appearing the same way) of many (away from cities) employment changes Ð the 
 unstoppable decline in farming-based employment, the 
 increase in services employment, especially that 
 linked to tourism and recreation Ð and their clearness with changes in city-based  labour markets (feminisation, move/change to part-time and casual work etc.). However, 
 it is clear that (away from cities) labour markets are still (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) by 
 low-skill, low paid work, that they face huge/extreme 
 possible changes as the growth in knowledge and 
 information work begins to rule the labour market, and that new technology and its (showing the ability to create interesting new things) use in 
 (away from cities) contexts, as well as (related to workers in general) development 
 
 196 
 
 J. Bryden, R. Bollman / Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 185±197 
 
 and attention to less `tangible' useful things/valuable supplies including 
 `social capital' in its different disguises will be very 
 important in future changes. 
 Existing explanations, either of the new-classical or coreperiphery school, are of little help in terms of understanding differential money-based performance between 
 areas away from cities, even those in (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) (places that are off to the side). 
 They do not account for the differential performance 
 within such (places that are off to the side), nor do they think about/believe important parts of social or (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) capital or the 
 new `consumption' demand on (away from cities) space. We suggest that a new ®eld of cross-(related to control or punishment) research is 
 opened up, dealing with the multi-(with many flat, polished surfaces) factors 
 which appear important for such explanations. In 
 developing new methods for examining the big thing/the important event of differential performance between areas away from cities, 
 more attention needs to be paid to the leftover/extra term (R) 
 in the production function. An unpacking of `R' 
 necessarily involves paying attention to less `tangible' 
 and because of this less easily measurable factors such as 
 institutional performance and culture, and so hints 
 the need for inter-(related to control or punishment) approaches and methods. 
 Responses 
 The authors are thankful for comments at the IAAE 
 Symposium and especially to Albert Valdez and Alan 
 de Janvry. Jackie Cornish is also thankfully admitted/recognized/responded to for her editing help in preparing this paper 
 for (book, magazine, etc.). Two unnamed referees also if helpful comments. 
 References 
 Barthez, A., 1982. Famille, Pain (from hard work) et Farming. Money-baseda, 
 Paris. 
 Beccatini, G., 1990. In: Pyke, F., Beccatini, G., Sengenberger, W. 
 (Eds.), The Marshallian Industrial District as a Socio-Money-based 
 Idea. Industrial Districts and Inter-firm Co-operation in Italy, 
 ILO, Geneva. 
 Bernat, A.G., 1993. Manufacturing rebuilding in nonmetropolitan U.S. In: Fuller, A.M., Rounds, R.C. (Eds.), Stimulating 
 (away from cities) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) for the 2000's: the Challenge for (away from cities) 
 Manufacturing and Tradeable Services. (series of events) of the 4th 
 Once-a-year ARRG Conference, Goderich, Ontario. ARRG Working 
 Paper Series No. 4, (away from cities) Development Institute, Brandon 
 University, MB, pp. 35±41. 
 
 Blanc, M., Tahar, G., 1<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
