Copyright (c) 1993 by Christopher B. Barrett. All rights reserved. 
 Readers may make word for word copies of this document for non-commercial 
 purposes by any means, gave/given that this copyright (see/hear/become aware of) appears on all 
 such copies. 
 University of Wisconsin-Madison Department of Farming-based Money flow Staff Paper Series. 
 
 December 1993 
 
 No. 369 
 
 ON PRICE RISK AND THE INVERSE 
 FARM SIZE-PRODUCTIVITY RELATIONSHIP 
 By 
 Christopher B. Barrett 
 University of Wisconsin-Madison 
 
 Abstract: The often-watched/followed inverse relationship between farm size and working well is generally explained by 
 labor market mistakes. Although other explanations exist (e.g., size-sensitive cropping patterns and changeable 
 soil quality), the books ignores doubt as an explanation. Using a simple two-period model of an 
 farming-based household that both produces and uses/eats under price doubt at the time labor portion 
 decisions are made, this paper (shows or proves) (in a way when you carefully examine something) that an inverse relationship may exist, even except for any 
 of the more common explanations. A simple data exercise suggests the believability of time-related price risk as an 
 explanation for this thing/event. 
 JEL Classification: D13, O13, Q12 
 
 ___________________________ 
 This research was supported by an International Predissertation Learning opportunity from the Social Science Research 
 Group of people and the American Group of people of Learned Societies with money given by the Ford Foundation. Michael 
 Carter, Jean-Paul Chavas and people (who were part of a study, etc.) in the International Development Workshop at Wisconsin gave/given 
 valuable comments, but remaining errors are the author's only responsibility. 
 * 
 
 ON PRICE RISK AND THE INVERSE FARM SIZE-PRODUCTIVITY RELATIONSHIP 
 
 The existence of an inverse relationship between farm size and farm working well has been watched/followed by 
 farming-based and development money-flow experts for some time.1 Crop yields per unit area helped grow that decline with size 
 of holdings follow from regular (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) of more intensive labor use on small farms than large (Berry and Cline 
 1979, Cornia 1985, Sen 1981). This common scientific finding has drawn a few different explanations, with 
 important effects/results/suggestions for both policy and explanation. The most popular depend on labor market (existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things) with a clearly 
 Chayanovian flavor. Small, poor (person) families are believed to face a lower opportunity cost of labor than large, 
 commercial farms. As a result, small farms apply their own labor in such amounts that the expected not important 
 value product of household labor applied to home (producing crops/helping something grow) is less than a market wage-based measure of the 
 opportunity cost of labor (Carter and Wiebe 1990, Chayanov 1966, Hunt 1979, Sen 1966, 1975). 
 A closely related but clear/separate possible approach assumes that principal-agent problems and the connected labor 
 supervision costs make/give effective labor costs higher on farms large enough to hire labor than on poor (person) plots (Carter 
 and Kalfayan 1989, Feder 1985). Finally, a third, less formally developed labor markets explanation has been suggested/said 
 by Binswanger and Rosenzweig (1986). They note that (not totally pure/not totally correct) information in labor search results in a positive 
 chance of misallocation of labor. Labor-selling families that do not find casual labor (give out things in a different way) the time they 
 had planned for wage work hard to work on their own farm instead, up to the point where the not important utility of home 
 production equals the not important utility of fun. Since the household wanted work, the not important utility of the wage 
 (and this way of production) necessarily went beyond that of fun, so at least some large amount of money labor time goes to home 
 farming. Exactly the reverse happens for labor-hiring families who do not hire casual labor; they fall short of 
 planned labor applications. 
 In each of the above models, the inverse relationship between farm size and working well per unit land helped grow 
 depends on (not totally pure/not totally correct) labor markets.2 Such explanations suggest the criticality of incorporating some flavor of labor 
 
 1 
 
 Amartya Sen (1962) launched modern question (or investigation) into the issue with his analysis of India's Studies in 
 the Money flow of Farm Management. Chayanov (1966) had identified the issue with respect to Russian 
 farming much earlier this century. 
 2 
 
 Feder (1985) (shows or proves) further that multiple market failures are necessary. In other words, farmers can 
 deal with a single market failure (e.g., for wage labor) without the shadow wage having to move away from the 
 
 -2market failure into possible analysis of poor farming. More than that, if labor market mistakes unavoidably 
 make/give small farmers more productive, then it might follow that land redistribution can stimulate farming-based 
 working well, adding an (wasting very little while working or producing something) argument to the equity aims of such policy. These guesses were important for 
 some years. 
 In addition to smaller farms' more intensive application of labor inputs, Bharadwaj (1974) refers to the sensitivity 
 of cropping patterns to farm size as an explanation of the inverse relationship, with smaller farms giving-out a higher 
 proportion of area to more moneymaking and labor-intensive crops.3 Especially, Bharadwaj notes that differences in 
 cropping patterns resolve an seen/obvious grouping bias obvious in scientific studies: inverse relationships which seem 
 to hold at farm level often seem not to hold for individual crops. While Bharadwaj's findings approve the effects/results/suggestions 
 for explanation of the more mainstream, labor market failures explanations, they yield more confusing policy 
 effects/results/suggestions. 
 One more view is presented by Bhalla (1988), Bhalla and Roy (1988), and Benjamin (1991), among others4, 
 who suggest/say  a size-sensitivity in the quality of factor gifts, especially soil life-creating ability. These authors claim that 
 more intensive labor use on small farms reflects mostly the superior life-creating ability of soils on smaller plots, by that/in that way 
 warranting more intensive labor per unit area. These results conflict with those of Bharadwaj (1974) and Carter 
 (1984), each of whom thought about/believed soil quality and other inputs (e.g., crop-watering/rinsing with water, draught animals) and found that these 
 accounted for only a small part of/amount of the watched/followed difference/different version in working well across farm sizes. But if correct, the 
 soil quality (quality of changing over time or at different places) argument interferes with (wasting very little while working or producing something) arguments for land reform and hints that cheap 
 neoclassical explanation might not be inappropriate for carefully studying poor farming. 
 The (complete/harsh/simple)  differences in effects/results/suggestions for policy and explanation of the (not totally pure/not totally correct) labor markets and changeable soil 
 quality explanations are especially troubling because each is very hard to prove scientifically. Reliable data 
 
 market wage. But if another market (e.g., for land or credit) also is (not totally pure/not totally correct), then the inverse relationship 
 comes out. 
 3 
 
 It should be noted that size-sensitivity of cropping patterns of the opposite nature (i.e., with larger farms 
 helping grow a greater proportion of area in higher-value crops) is often suggested/said, as in Fafchamps (1992). 
 4 
 
 Sen (1975) raises this point more (showing little concern/in a relaxed way). 
 
 -3on labor portion and soil quality are rare. 
 
 More than that, to the best of my knowledge no existing data set 
 
 includes both, by that/in that way preventing (happening together) direct testing of the competing guesses. An idea-based 
 (nobody can win) results. 
 This paper offers an different explanation of the inverse relationship based on three scientifically sound pretty/interesting 
 facts. First, farmers in poor countries cannot fully hedge uncertain staple crop prices through futures or 
 insurance contracts, nor by forward sales at the time labor portion decisions are made. The connection between 
 risk disgust and labor portion is well known (Block and Heineke 1973, Roe and Graham-Tomasi 1986, Srinivasan 
 1972). Although risk disgust has usually been defined in the narrow Arrow-Pratt sense of income risk disgust, 
 it is a plain/honest/easy extension to think about  the case of price risk disgust (i.e., doubt (related to/looking at/thinking about) both income 
 and personal prices).5 Second, land is unevenly distributed across the farming-based population. Even under if 
 technologies and preferences are uniform among agents, differences in land gifts create a blended 
 (community of people/all good people in the world). Third, families' net farming-based (instances of buying things for money) are inversely related to (areas of owned land). Small farms tend to be 
 net produce purchasers while large farms tend to be net sellers. These three common features of poor 
 farming combine to cause an endogenous land-related class structure, seen as blended labor portion 
 behavior across classes of farmers, much as in Roemer (1982). This next section proves (in a way when you carefully examine something) that price risk 
 and clear/separate land-related classes be enough in explaining the often-watched/followed inverse relationship between farm size and 
 working well, even with competitive labor markets and uniform soil quality. The following section offers an informal 
 scientific (act of showing or proving) of the believability of this explanation. The ending/deciding section draws out some of the 
 effects/results/suggestions of this explanation for both policy and explanation. 
 
 An Farming-based Household Model 
 
 5 
 
 Srinivasan explains the inverse relationship by yield risk. He defines utility over income alone, forces 
 restrictions on the coefficients of risk disgust and on how risk enters production, and assumes constant returns 
 to scale in production. Although highly (serving to severely limit or control), his is an important and much under-appreciated (thing that's given/work that's done) 
 to the books on the inverse relationship. The present work (completes/goes along with) his paper, exploring the other major 
 source of farming-based doubt: prices. 
 
 -4Assume an farming-based household shows Von Neumann-Morgenstern utility defined over consumption of 
 fun(LL)6 and two goods: a staple food (S), and a non-staple (N). The staple can either be produced or (bought something for money), 
 the nonstaple is available only through market (instance of buying something for money). The household has an gift of land (T) and of labor 
 time (L0). Production is strictly increasing in land and labor, and curved in labor. Labor used in production is a 
 function of household labor (LH) and hired labor (LD), but might not be just the sum of the two if there exists a labor 
 supervision problem (Feder 1985, Stiglitz 1986). Labor markets are competitive by idea (you think is true) but, to separate the 
 (numbers that change/things that change) of interest, land and credit markets are assumed not to exist. Just as the household can hire labor in, so 
 can it hire out its time (LS) at a known (coming from the outside of something) wage (w). The household faces a time restriction, LS + LL + LH 
 a‰¤ L0. Its income comes from wage labor, farming-based production and (coming from the outside of something) moves (from one place to another) (I). 
 This is a two-period model. All product prices are unknown when production decisions (i.e., labor portion 
 decisions) are made but are showed before consumption decisions are made. The household's utility (biggest increase/best possible extent) 
 problem can be expressed as 
 
 Max 
 L D, L H, L L 
 
 E MaxU(L L, N, S) 
 
 (1) 
 
 N, S 
 
 s.t. P SS P NN a‰¤ Y 
 Ë† 
 Y 
 w[L S L D] P SF(L,T) 
 I 
 D 
 H 
 LË† e(L ) L 
 L0 a‰¥ L H L L L S 
 
 where E is the mathematical expectation operator, PS is the staple price, PN is the non-staple price, and Y* is 
 endogenous income. The effective labor function, e(.), converts hired labor units into household labor equals 
 such that e(LD)/LD takes values over the closed period of time (or space) [0,1]. This is a perfectly general creation, permitting 
 hired work hard to be a perfect substitute or non-substitutable for family labor (or any (middle-position) substitutability). This way 
 the present model nests within it as special cases those explanations which depend on labor supervision problems. Farm 
 
 6 
 
 Superscripts distinguish among products (that are bought and sold)  across subcategories and time. Subscripts represent derivatives. 
 
 -5size-dependent patterns of labor use are strong to differences/different versions in labor market (detailed description of exactly what is required), as will become clear 
 shortly. 
 The household sets apart labor (may or may not happen, depending on something) on ex-post best choice of consumption amounts. A (number or thing that changes) 
 indirect utility function, V(LL,PN,PS,Y*) which is the dual of U(.) can be received/made from (Epstein 1975). 
 
 V(.) is 
 
 (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree zero in (PN,PS,Y*) and, therefore, invariant to unit of measurement. So set PN=1 and let 
 P=PS/PN and Y=Y*/PN. Since Y is itself a function of P, V(.) has multiple (random/including random data points) arguments. The household 
 shows Arrow-Pratt income risk disgust (VYY&amp;lt;0). The labor portion problem can be represented as 
 Max EV(L L, P, Y) : Y 
 
 w[L 0 L L L H L D] PF(e(L D) L H , T) I 
 
 (2) 
 
 L D, L H, L L 
 
 where V(L L, P, Y) 
 
 Max U(L L, N, S) : P[S F(e(L D) L H ,T)]_) N w[L 0 L L L H L D] I 
 N, S 
 
 The first-order necessary conditions for an best are 
 w.r.t. hired labor : E VY[PFL w] a‰¤ 0 ( 0 if L D &amp;gt; 0 ) 
 w.r.t. household labor : E VY[PFL w] a‰¤ 0 ( 0 if L H &amp;gt; 0 ) 
 ( 0 if L L &amp;gt; 0 ) 
 w.r.t. fun : E VL VYw a‰¤ 0 
 D 
 
 H 
 
 (3) 
 (4) 
 (5) 
 
 L 
 
 As pointed out already, this analysis is very general with respect to labor in that the effective labor function 
 allows for hired and household work hard to be either perfect or (not totally pure/not totally correct) substitutes. In the case where they are perfect 
 substitutes, (3) and (4) are identical. If hired labor is not a perfect substitute for household labor (i.e., if e(LD)&amp;lt;LD), 
 there are pieces/parts of the land distribution for which border solutions to (3) win (Carter and Kalfayan 1989). 
 Therefore we (focus mental and physical effort) on (4), which will likely have an interior solution if the household has land, since 
 household labor is at least as (producing a lot with very little waste) as hired labor.7 
 Under price doubt, solution of the first-order condition (4) yields the following: 
 
 7 
 
 Formally, F(.),P, and w must be such that 
 . Even under simple technology and fixed, 
 (less-than-best) prices in poor farming, wages are unlikely to be so high as to violate that condition. 
 
 -6Proposition 1: If an farming-based household faces a (random/including random data points) price for a valuable thing that it both produces and 
 uses/eats, then the household will apply labor more than the amount that would balance labor's not important value 
 product with the winning/most common wage rate if and only if that price is positively related to the not important utility of 
 endogenous income. 
 Proof: 
 E VYPFL 
 E V Yw 
 E VY[PFL PFL ]_) 
 E VY[w PFL ]_) 
 FL COV(VY,P) E VY[w PFL ]_) 
 COV(VY,P) &amp;gt;(&amp;lt;) 0 a‡" w &amp;gt;(&amp;lt;) PFL 
 where P E P 
 H 
 
 H 
 
 H 
 
 H 
 
 H 
 
 H 
 
 H 
 
 (6) 
 
 The covariance term in the above proof is inverse (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) the household's not important income risk higher cost. 
 This is obvious from testing the sure feeling equal of the household's utility (biggest increase/best possible extent) problem. 
 Finkelshtain and Chalfant (1991) have pointed out that in total/totally/with nothing else mixed in producer explanation Arrow-Pratt income risk disgust 
 (VYY&amp;lt;0) hints that COV(VY,P)&amp;lt;0, this way the familiar result that production under price doubt is less than under 
 sure feeling (Sandmo 1971). In a household model, however, the relation of VY to P is confusing, varying inversely 
 through the household's production activities and directly through its consumption activities. This way a more (intelligent/obvious) 
 (say again)ment of Suggestion/possible plan 1 would be that if a valuable thing of uncertain price is more important to a household as 
 a consumption good than as a source of income, the household will clearly "overemploy"8 labor. Given fixed 
 land holdings, hyperexploitation of labor hints greater output than would happen if labor were employed only up 
 to the point where its not important value product equalled the market wage. 
 In signing the covariance in (6), the household's marketed extra (Ma‰¡F-S) of the staple and its preferences 
 (related to/looking at/thinking about) price risk become important. The not important utility of endogenous income can be identified by Roy's Identity. 
 (using different things) then produces the following expression: 
 
 8 
 
 The term "overemploy" is used to contrast the present result with that which would get under the 
 sure feeling (going against known facts). The term "underemploy" will be used in a almost the same  spirit in the rest of the paper. 
 
 -7- 
 
 sign(COV(VY,P)) 
 where VY 
 this way 
 
 aˆ‚VY 
 aˆ‚P 
 
 sign( 
 
 aˆ‚VY 
 aˆ‚P 
 
 ) 
 
 VP 
 M 
 VPP 
 M 
 VPP 
 
 VP aˆ‚M 
 M 2 aˆ‚P 
 aˆ‚M VY 
 
 M 
 
 aˆ‚P M 
 
 (7) 
 
 Equation (7) points to/shows that one must know something about the curvature of household preferences (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 price risk (VPP) in order to sign the covariance of the staples price and the not important utility of endogenous income. 
 If and only if VPP&amp;lt;0 do producers favor stable to variable prices. Almost-curviness of the (number or thing that changes) indirect utility 
 function in prices makes/gives these preferences confusing. Turnovsky, Shalit and Schmitz (1980) and Newbery and 
 Stiglitz (1981) (show or prove) that where income is (coming from the outside of something) VPP depends on the income and price elasticities of gross 
 demand for staples, the budget share of gross expenses on the product, and on the household's coefficient of 
 relative risk disgust. Changing their results to account for the endogeneity of income, one can get the following 
 expression for VPP9: 
 
 M VY 
 
 VPP 
 
 P 
 
 (8) 
 
 [Îµ Î²(Î· R)]_) 
 
 where: 
 
 aˆ‚M P 
 aˆ‚P M 
 
 Îµ 
 
 the price ability to stretch of marketed extra 
 
 Î² 
 
 budget share of marketed extra 
 
 R 
 
 Arrow Pratt coefficient of relative risk disgust 
 
 Î· 
 
 aˆ‚M Y 
 aˆ‚Y M 
 
 income ability to stretch of marketed extra 
 
 PM 
 Y 
 YVYY 
 VY 
 
 The total/totally/with nothing else mixed in personal explanation used by Turnovksy, Shalit and Schmitz, and by Newbery and Stiglitz produces an 
 the same equation, with the elasticities and budget share defined over gross consumption rather than marketed 
 extra: 
 
 9 
 
 See the Add on for a full derivation. 
 
 -8S VY 
 
 VPP 
 
 P 
 
 [Îµ Î²(Î· R)]_) 
 
 (9) 
 
 Under that (detailed description of exactly what is required), the bracketed term relating commonly guessed demand limits/guidelines is (good) enough to sign 
 VPP, since S, VY, and P are all positive. Call this term Da‰¡Îµ Î²(Î· R) . However, in the big picture  of a household model, 
 the jointness of consumption and production requires/results in use of the marketed extra idea  deeply set within (8). Now 
 D alone does not sign VPP. Nonetheles, although M, Î², Î·, Îµ switch signs depending on whether the household is 
 a net buyer or a net seller of the staple, the necessary and (good) enough for VPP&amp;lt;0 is R &amp;gt; Î· Îµ/Î² , just as in the pure 
 personal explanation model. 
 Now substitute (8) into (7) to get: 
 aˆ‚VY 
 
 VY 
 
 aˆ‚P 
 
 P 
 VY 
 
 sign(COV(VY,P)) 
 
 [Îµ Î²(Î· R)]_) 
 
 aˆ‚M VY 
 aˆ‚P M 
 
 [Î²(Î· R)]_) 
 P 
 sign(Î²[R Î·]) 
 
 (10) 
 
 (based on what's seen or what seems obvious), whether a staple food matters more to a household as an income source or as a consumption good this way 
 depends on the household's coefficient of relative risk disgust, and its budget share and income ability to stretch of 
 marketed extra. The COV(VY,P) increases with budget share and income ability to stretch and (lowers in number/gets worse) with relative risk 
 disgust. This leads to Suggestion/possible plan 2 which depends only on a household's (capable of being seen and known) marketed extra. 
 Suggestion/possible plan 2: If S is a (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) good, and a household is a net seller of S, then it will underemploy labor. 
 Proof: 
 
 (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) good, net seller household a‡' Î², R &amp;gt; 0 , Î· &amp;lt; 0 a‡' 
 Î²(Î· R) &amp;lt;0 a‡" COV(VY,P) &amp;lt; 0 a‡" w &amp;lt; PFL 
 H 
 
 This is nothing more than the well-known Sandmo (1971) result: price doubt reduces income risk disliking 
 firms' hiring of factors of production, by that/in that way reducing output. Very differently, the clear labor portion government 
 getting in the case of a net buyer families is one of labor overemployment if the household is price risk disliking. 
 Suggestion/possible plan 3: If S is a (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) good and a household is a price risk disliking net buyer of S, then it will overemploy 
 labor. 
 Proof: 
 
 -9(i) (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) good, net buyer a‡' R, Î· &amp;gt; 0 , Îµ, Î² &amp;lt; 0 
 Îµ 
 (ii) VPP &amp;lt; 0 a‡" R &amp;gt; Î· 
 Î² 
 (i) , (ii) a‡' R &amp;gt; Î· a‡' Î²[Î· R] &amp;gt; 0 a‡" COV(VY,P) &amp;gt; 0 a‡" w &amp;gt; PFL 
 
 H 
 
 Price risk disgust is this way a (good) enough condition -- but not a necessary condition -- for the overemployment of labor 
 by net buyer families. 
 Since production is strictly increasing in labor, suggestions (or plans) 2 and 3 combined are (good) enough for an inverse 
 relationship between farm size and working well per unit of land helped grow if marketed extra is positively related 
 to farm size and at least some significant subset of net buyers are likely to be price risk disliking. The former is 
 (intelligent/obvious) and a common finding in scientific research on poor farming (e.g., Greer and Thorbecke 1986, 
 Bernier and Dorosh 1992), and so will be assumed true generally for poor farming.10 But the potential 
 for price risk disgust among net buyer families is less (intelligent/obvious), challenges the claims of much of the books 
 on price (making steady/making firm and strong), and so needs (act of showing or proving). 
 
 Are Net Buyers Price Risk Disliking ? 
 The (related to careful studying or deep thinking) books on price risk (Oi 1961, Waugh 1944, Turnovsky, Shalit and Schmitz, Newbery and 
 Stiglitz) has tended to dismiss concerns about price (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong), claiming that VPP&amp;gt;0 almost always gets. That 
 test is based on the pretty/interesting demand limits/guidelines like that shown in Table 1.11 There are two potential 
 hidden traps in this analysis. First, the claim is based on limit/guideline guesses from high-income country data. Second, 
 the sample mean limit/guideline guesses are used, but these limits/guidelines are known to change/differ  with income. This section 
 offers some quick calculations to (show or prove) that the usual claim may not be strong to applications in lowincome countries. 
 In the big picture  of poor (person) farming, where budget shares of staples and relative risk disgust are usually quite 
 high and price elasticities low, these limit/guideline values might change/differ  enough to make VPP&amp;lt;0 likely. For example, a 1990 
 
 10 
 
 The present model suggests/says (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea) and so ignores crop choice and the possibility of size-sensitive 
 cropping patterns (Bharadwaj 1974, Fafchamps 1992). The model could usefully be extended to the n-crop case. 
 11 
 
 This is taken directly from Turnovsky, Shalit and Schmitz, (in which/during which/in what way/in what) they use the (coming from the outside of something) income form 
 of VPP: (9) above. 
 
 - 10 - 
 
 Table 1 
 Pretty/interesting Demand Limits/guidelines 
 
 survey of 825 rice-producing families in Madagascar 
 (Bernier and Dorosh 1992) yields demand limit/guideline 
 guesses which, when combined with common findings 
 for a coefficient of relative risk disgust in poor 
 farming (Antle 1987, Binswanger 1980), yield VPP&amp;lt;0 
 using the same equation (9) formula (Table 1). The 
 
 R 
 Îµ 
 ÃŸ 
 D 
 
 Turnovsky, 
 Shalit &amp; Schmitz 
 
 Madagascar 
 Rice Farmers 
 
 1.00 
 0.60 
 0.20 
 0.30 
 0.08 
 
 1.33 
 0.23 
 0.27 
 0.54 
 -0.32 
 
 survey-based Madagascar limit/guideline guesses may be 
 more reasonable descriptions of patterns winning/most common in poor farming than the stylizations used by 
 Turnovsky, Shalit and Schmitz. If so, price risk disgust would appear important in at least some (surrounding conditions). 
 Description of the price risk disgust possibilities of particular classes within the farming-based part/area, 
 however, needs/demands two improvements. First, the endogenous income construction of (8) is preferred to the (coming from the outside of something) 
 income version in equation (9) since farming-based families are producers as well as people of staple crops. 
 Second, we need to allow all four demand limits/guidelines (Î², Î·, Îµ, R) to change/differ. Just as there exist class differences in 
 production behavior (Roemer 1982), so too does consumption behavior change/differ  across classes defined by wealth 
 gifts. A big scientific books has (showed/shown or proved) that the (connected/related) limits/guidelines change/differ  in a planned way 
 with income and wealth (Antle 1987, Binswanger 1980, Pinstrup-Anderson and Caicedo 1978, Pinstrup-Anderson, 
 LondoÃ±o and Hoover 1976, Pitt 1983, Timmer 1981, Timmer and Politician 1979, Waterfield 1985). Within the 
 farming-based part/area it is reasonable to guess a strictly positive monotonic mapping from either income or wealth 
 to land holdings. If the hidden (under) limits/guidelines and marketed extra amount change/differ  in a planned way with land holdings, 
 so too might preferences with respect to price risk. These patterns, the absolute/without any limits limit/guideline guesses above, and 
 data on land holdings from Madagascar's last farming-based (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.) (MPARA/FAO 1988) are used here to construct 
 (very simple/rough and rude) stylizations of land gift-dependent price risk preferences for farmers in the Central Highlands area 
 of Madagascar. These are purely stylizations; none of the data used was collected for this sort of analysis and, 
 as a result, there are important scientific weaknesses. 
 
 Anyway, this exercise makes the point that for 
 
 reasonable limit/guideline values a significant subset of net buyer families is likely to be price risk disliking. 
 
 - 11 In Madagascar's Central Highlands, the survival/income land gift (i.e., the holding which can just provide 
 survival/income food needed things for a household of average (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.)) is about 0.73 hectares.12 The 
 middle-point of the land distribution is only about 0.8 hectares, with a dense clustering around the survival/income gift. 
 Mapping land gifts into net sales of staples around the survival/income gift hints that 46% of 
 farming-based families in the area are net buyers. This estimate lies in the midrange of earlier findings for five 
 Sub-Saharan African countries (Weber et al. 1988). Existing smallholder household production analysis confirms 
 the existence of the inverse relationship in the Madagascar survey area (Place 1991). 
 The base limits/guidelines from Table 1, (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) by the S/M ratio, are assumed to describe the middle-point group (those 
 holding 
 
 0.75-0.99 
 
 hectares). 
 
 Table 2: Land-Gift Dependent Guesses of Z 
 
 Limits/guidelines then change/differ  across the 
 other groups according to the 
 patterns and rates found in the 
 studies referred to earlier. The result is 
 Table 2 relating land distributional 
 data, net (instances of buying things for money), and pretty/interesting 
 v 
 
 a 
 
 l 
 
 u 
 
 e 
 
 Z a‰¡ [Îµ Î²(Î· R)]_) 
 
 s 
 
 o 
 
 f 
 
 sign(M) . 
 
 Land Holdings 
 (hectares) 
 
 % Farming-based 
 Families 
 
 Marketed Extra 
 % Gross Consumption 
 
 0.00-0.24 
 0.25-0.49 
 0.50-0.74 
 0.75-0.99 
 1.00-1.49 
 1.50-1.99 
 2.00-4.99 
 5.00-9.99 
 &amp;gt;10.00 
 
 7.6% 
 16.9% 
 21.7% 
 16.7% 
 18.2% 
 9.0% 
 8.8% 
 1.1% 
 0.001% 
 
 -74.2% 
 -51.4% 
 -21.4% 
 10.6% 
 21.5% 
 32.5% 
 43.5% 
 57.1% 
 84.0% 
 
 -0.21 
 -0.02 
 0.10 
 -0.36 
 -0.90 
 -1.04 
 -1.18 
 -1.25 
 -1.41 
 
 Weighted Avg. 
 
 100.0% 
 
 -5.9% 
 
 -0.44 
 
 Z 
 
 Z is of interest only for signing VPP. This way its sign, rather than 
 its importance, matters. Z&amp;lt;0 gets for more than half the net buyer population. These pretty/interesting data are obviously 
 sensitive to differences/different versions in limit/guideline guesses. They are only tools for answering a context-specific scientific question, so the finding need not be general. In fact one would not expect (ability to be applied to broader situations) since the inverse 
 relationship is not itself a everywhere thing/event (Bhalla and Roy 1988). Anyway, these quick 
 
 12 
 
 This is guessed from (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) data on paddy and the (related to how much energy is in food) needed things of adult male survival/income 
 farmers in the tropics, average yields on watered and non-watered lands, rates of unplanteding and after-harvest 
 paddy loss, and average household size as measured in adult male equals. The described/explained calculations are 
 available from the author by request. 
 
 - 12 calculations suggest the believability of price risk disgust within a big part of the net buyer population in 
 some poor farming-based (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), as needed/demanded for Suggestion/possible plan 3. 
 
 End/end result and Effects/results/suggestions 
 The previous analysis (shows or proves) that differences in families' marketed extra in an (surrounding conditions) of uncertain prices is enough to explain an inverse relationship between farm size and working well if some small farmers are 
 price risk disliking. While the creation of the model was general enough to allow for labor market mistakes, 
 nowhere were such mistakes assumed. Neither were any differences in the quality of land gifts nor in 
 cropping patterns thought about/believed. So, the present model provides an other choice to existing explanations of the inverse 
 relationship between farm size and working well per unit helped grow area. Given everywhere price doubt and 
 uneven land distribution in poor farming, this is an (intelligent/obvious) explanation for an often-watched/followed thing/event. 
 What are the effects/results/suggestions of this explanation for explanation and policy? For explanation it most obviously highlights the 
 importance of including doubt into models. Second, and maybe more extremely, it focuses on the 
 importance of recognizing "structure" less in the form of market stiffities, as do many "(related to what holds something together and makes it strong)ist" macroeconomists, and more in the Marxian (and scientifically showable) sense of blended factor gifts. That 
 fairly identical conditions often create totally opposite responses by equally clear agents is a recognized 
 but (not well developed) dimension of neoclassical explanation. 
 In policy terms, the present results, like Bharadwaj's work, are more confusing than those of either the 
 (not totally pure/not totally correct) labor markets or changeable soil quality explanations. Because the relative working well of small farmers 
 results from their relative food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) (i.e., their dependence on markets for food), the working well effects of land 
 reform would depend upon the ex post gifts of the ex ante class of net food buyers. Modest land moves (from one place to another) 
 to small farmers could improve average yields, while land redistribution which left poor people (good or well enough) gave/given 
 to provide for their own needs could actually reduce farming-based yields. Interestingly, domestic staple food price 
 (making steady/making firm and strong) to reduce the (highly skilled people working in low-paying jobs) of labor by larger farmers, combined with modest land redistribution, 
 to take advantage of the stress-caused care of land poor persons, might be the most effective extratechnological way to stimulate farming-based working well. That such seems to have been the path followed 
 
 - 13 over the past twenty years by a few east Asian countries which have enjoyed above average yield increases gives 
 added (reward or reason for doing something) to explore further other choice explanations and effects/results/suggestions of things such as the inverse 
 relationship. 
 
 - 14 APPENDIX 
 Take Roy's Identity, changed for marketed extra, rearrange terms and (make different) with respect to both P and Y. 
 Then substitute expressions and move around/mislead and trick the resulting terms to get familiar limits/guidelines, although with an (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 
 (understanding/ explanation) due to the marketed extra term. 
 
 M 
 VPP 
 VPY 
 VPP 
 VPP 
 
 VP 
 VY 
 
 a‡" VP 
 
 VY M 
 
 aˆ‚M 
 aˆ‚P 
 aˆ‚M 
 VYY M VY 
 VYP (by matching) 
 aˆ‚Y 
 aˆ‚M 
 aˆ‚M 
 M VYY M VY 
 VY 
 aˆ‚Y 
 aˆ‚P 
 M VY 
 [Îµ Î²(Î· R)]_) 
 P 
 VYP M 
 
 VY 
 
 The last expression is (8) above. 
 
 REFERENCES 
 Antle, John M. (1987), "Econometric Guess of Producers' Risk Attitudes," American Journal of Farming-based 
 Money flow, 69, 3, pp. 509-522. 
 Benjamin, Dwayne (1991), "Can Unseen Land Quality Explain the Inverse Working well Relationship?", 
 University of Toronto Department of Money flow Working Paper #9112. 
 Bernier, Rene E. and Paul A. Dorosh (1992), " Restrictions on Rice Production in Madagascar: The Farmer's 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important)," Cornell Food and Nutrition Policy Program book. 
 Berry, R. Albert and William R. Cline (1979), Land-related Structure and Working well in Developing Countries 
 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press). 
 Bhalla, Surjit S. (1988), "Does Land Quality Matter", Journal of Development Money flow, 29: pp. 45-62. 
 &mdash;--_: and Prannoy Roy (1988), "Mis-(detailed description of exactly what is required) in Farm Working well Analysis: The Role of Land Quality," Oxford 
 Money-based Papers, 40, 1, pp. 55-73. 
 Bharadwaj, Krishna (1974), Production Conditions In Indian Farming (London: Cambridge University Press). 
 Binswanger, Hans P. (1980), "Attitudes Toward Risk: Experimental Measurement in (away from cities) India," American Journal 
 of Farming-based Money flow, 62, 3, pp. 395-407. 
 Block, M. K. and J. M. Heineke (1973), "The Portion of Effort Under Doubt: The Case of Risk-Disliking 
 Behavior," Journal of Political (process of people making, selling, and buying things), 81, 2, pp. 376-385. 
 Carter, Michael R. (1984), "Identification of the Inverse Relationship Between Farm Size and Working well: An 
 Scientific Analysis of Poor (person) Farming-based Production," Oxford Money-based Papers, 36, pp. 131-145. 
 
 - 15 &mdash;&mdash; and John Kalfayan (1989), "A General Balance Exploring things of the Land-related Question," University of 
 Wisconsin-Madison Department of Farming-based Money flow Working Paper 279. 
 &mdash;&mdash; and Keith Wiebe (1990), "Access to Capital and Its Hit/effect on Land-related Structure and Working well in Kenya," 
 American Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 72, 5, pp. 1146-1150. 
 Chayanov, Alexander V. (1966), The Explanation of Poor (person) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) (Homewood, IL: Richard Irwin). 
 Cornia, Giovanni Andrea (1985), "Farm Size, Land Produces and the Farming-based Production Function: An Analysis 
 for Fifteen Developing Countries," World Development, 13, 4, pp. 513-534. 
 Epstein, L. (1975), " Disaggregate Analysis of Person Choice Under Doubt," Econometrica, 43, 5-6, pp. 
 877-892. 
 Fafchamps, Marcel (1992), "Cash Crop Production, Food Price Dangerous nature/wild up and down prices and (away from cities) Market (Combination of different things together that work as one unit) in the Third 
 World," American Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 74, 1, pp. 90-99. 
 Feder, Gershon (1985), "The Relation Between Farm Size and Farm Working well," Journal of Development 
 Money flow, 18, 2-3, pp. 297-313. 
 Finkelshtain, Israel and James A. Chalfant (1991), "Marketed Extra Under Risk: Do Poor people Agree With 
 Sandmo?," American Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 73, 3, pp. 557-567. 
 Greer, Joel and Erik Thorbecke (1986), "Food Poorness Profile Applied to Kenyan Smallholders," Money-based 
 Development and Cultural Change, 35, 1, pp. 115-141. 
 Hunt, Diana (1979), "Chayanov's Model of Poor (person) Household useful thing/valuable supply Portion," Journal of Poor (person) Studies, 
 6, pp. 247-285. 
 MPARA/FAO (1988), Projet Recensement National de l'Agriculture et Systeme Permanent des Statistiques Agricoles, 
 8 volumes (Antananarivo). 
 Newbery, David M.G. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1981), The Explanation of Valuable thing Price (making steady/making firm and strong) (Oxford: 
 Clarendon Press). 
 Oi, Walter Y. (1961), "The (quality of something that makes people like it or want it) of Price (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) Under Perfect Competition," Econometrica, 29, pp. 58-64. 
 Pinstrup-Anderson, Per and Elizabeth Caicedo (1978), "The Potential Hit/effect of Changes in Income Distribution on 
 Food Demand and Human Nutrition," American Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 60, 3, pp. 402-415. 
 &mdash;--_:, Norha Ruiz de LondoÃ±o and Edward Hoover (1976), "The Hit/effect of Increasing Food Supply on Human 
 Nutrition: Effects/results/suggestions for Valuable thing (things that are important) in Farming-based Research and Policy," American Journal of 
 Farming-based Money flow, 58, 1, pp. 131-142. 
 Pitt, Mark M. (1983), "Food Preferences and Nutrition in (away from cities) Bangladesh," Review of Money flow and Statistics, 
 65, 1, pp. 105-114. 
 Place, Frank (1991), "Household Farming-based Production in the Central Highlands of Madagascar," UNDP/World 
 Bank report. 
 
 - 16 Roe, Terry and Theodore Graham-Tomasi (1986), "Yield Risk in a Pattern of behavior Model of the Farming-based Household," 
 in Inderjit Singh, Lyn Squire and John Strauss, editors, Farming-based Household Models (Baltimore: Johns 
 Hopkins University Press). 
 Roemer, John E. (1982), A General Explanation of Abuse and Class (Cambridge: Harvard University Press). 
 Sandmo, Agnar (1971), "On the Explanation of the Competitive Firm Under Price Doubt," American Money-based 
 Review, 61, 1, pp. 65-73. 
 Sen, Abhijit (1981), "Market Failure and Control of Labor Power: Towards An Explanation of 'Structure' and 
 Change in Indian Farming. Part I," Cambridge Journal of Money flow, 5, pp. 201-228. 
 Sen, Amartya K. (1962), "An Aspect of Indian Farming," The Money-based Weekly, once-a-year number February 1962. 
 &mdash;&mdash;, (1966), "Poor people and (existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things) With or Without Extra Labour," Journal of Political (process of people making, selling, and buying things), 74, pp. 
 &mdash;&mdash;, (1975), Employment, Technology and Development (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
 Srinivasan, T.N. (1972), "Farm Size And Working well: Effects/results/suggestions of Choice Under Doubt," Sankhya: The 
 Indian Journal of Statistics, Series B, 34, 4, pp. 409-420. 
 Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1986), "The New Development Money flow," World Development, 14, 2, pp. 257-265. 
 Timmer, C. Peter (1981), "Is There 'Curvature' In The Slutsky Matrix?" Review of Money flow and Statistics, 63, 
 3, pp. 395-402. 
 &mdash;&mdash; and Harold Politician (1979), "Guessing Consumption Limits/guidelines for Food Policy Analysis," American 
 Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 61, pp. 982-987. 
 Turnovsky, Stephen J., Haim Shalit and Andrew Schmitz (1980), "Consumer's Extra, Price (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong), and 
 Person Welfare," Econometrica, 48, 1, pp. 135-152. 
 Waterfield, Charles (1985), "Disaggregating Food Consumption Limits/guidelines," Food Policy, 10, 4, pp. 337-351. 
 Waugh, F.V. (1944), "Does The Person Benefit From Price (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong)?" Quarterly Journal of Money flow, 58, pp. 
 602-614. 
 Weber, Michael T., John M. Staatz, John S. Holtzman, Eric W. Crawford, and Richard H. Bernsten (1988), 
 "Informing Food Security Decisions in Africa: Scientific Analysis and Policy Talk," American Journal of 
 Farming-based Money flow, 70, pp. 1044-1052. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
