AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 (set of machines) and (away from cities) development: ideas from a Grameen 
 Bank village phone effort in Bangladesh* 
 Abdul Bayes* 
 Jahangirnagar University, Savm; Dhaka, Bangladesh 
 
 Abstract 
 The plan/purpose of the present paper is to test the role of (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.) within the contexts of (away from cities) development in 
 general and of poorness reduction especially. Bangladesh has been selected as a case study due to the (quality of being unlike anything else in the world) it displayed 
 in an new and interesting program for expanded telecom (set of machines), in which Grameen Bank (GB) of Bangladesh, the village-based 
 micro-finance organisation, leased cellular mobile phones to successful members. GB calls these phones village pay phones 
 (VPPs). The effects ofVPPs are tested from two angles: sellers of services (telephone lessees/owners) and buyers of services 
 (villagers). The findings of the study lead to two basic ends/end results: first, (trying to reach the goal of/trying to complete the requirements of) practical policies can turn telephones 
 into production products (that are bought and sold), especially through lowering transaction costs, and second, the services starting from telephones in 
 villages are likely to deliver (even) more benefits to the poor than to the non-poor. The VPPs also seem to have visible and 
 positive effects on the permission and social status of phone-leasing women and their families. For villagers in general, 
 phones offer added/more non-money-based benefits such as improved police, more fast and effective communications 
 during disasters, stronger relationship (gluing or joining together/friendship forming), etc. GB's style of managing communications can help significantly to expand 
 access to this important  information input for all segments of people/of the group, reduce (state where two things are not the same) and so improve the broad-based, 
 pro-poor (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) of (away from cities) development activities.© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.) technology; Microfinance; Grameen Bank; (away from cities) development; (male/female status) 
 
 One should hardly have to tell professors that 
 information is a valuable useful thing/valuable supply: knowledge is 
 power. And yet it occupies a bad neighborhood  house/living in the 
 town of money flow/money-based studies. Mostly, it is ignored ... 
 Stigler (1961) 
 
 1" This paper is based on group/(working well together) research work between the 
 Center for Development Research (ZEF), Bonn and Jahangirnagar 
 University, Bangladesh. The author is owing Prof. Dr. Joachim 
 von Braun, David Colman and unnamed reviewers for their 
 valuable comments and suggestions during the preparation of this 
 paper. 
 *Fax: +880-2-7708383. 
 E-mail address: bayes@juniv.edu (A. Bayes). 
 
 1. Introduction 
 In Bangladesh, as in many other countries of the 
 developing world, the role of (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.) 
 in money-based development does not seem to be duly 
 appreciated. The telecom part/area has received very little 
 attention from policy makers, and the country has seen slow (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of its network over the years. 
 The country's present (set of machines) is carefully thought about/believed 
 to be not enough in range, technology and the quality of services. A report produced both/together by World 
 Bank and Bangladesh Center for Advanced Studies 
 (BCAS) presented the limits of telecom services in Bangladesh (World Bank and BCAS, 1998, 
 pp. 55): 
 
 0169-5150/011$- see front matter© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S0169-5150(01)00083-4 
 
 262 
 
 A. Bayes/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 - the telephone density of 0.39 lines per 100 people 
 is one of the world's lowest (India: 1.0, Nepal: 0.5, 
 Pakistan: 2.1, Sri Skinnya: 1.0, Thailand: 2.5); 
 - the waiting time for a connection is more than 10 
 years and the installation charge of US$_$ 450 for a 
 new line is one of the highest in the world (e.g. 
 Pakistan US$_$ 90, India US$_$ 60); 
 - the charge for calling the UK, US$_$ 1.50/min, is 
 about six times higher than the charge for calling 
 Bangladesh from the UK; 
 - on average, only 2 of 10 calls are successfully completed; the complaint rate averages 50 complaints 
 per 100 lines per year, clearly pointing to/showing the poor 
 quality of services. 
 By and large, the present underdevelopment and 
 poorness of Bangladesh - a country with a per person 
 income of US$_$ 300 and half of its population living below the poorness line - is related to the underdevelopment of basic (set of machines), both physical and human. 
 Almost all areas away from cities remain mostly (unable to be used or understood) and are as a result unable to take advantage 
 of opportunities good for growth and development 
 by, for example, the diffusion of modern technology, 
 extension services, and fast and effective measures 
 for dealing with disasters such as floods. A number 
 of studies have decided on a (proof that one thing definitely causes another) link between lacking (set of machines) and the slow rate of development 
 in areas away from the cities of Bangladesh (e.g. Ahmed and Horseain, 
 1984, pp.l21; Kessides, 1993, pp. 14-23). 
 Given this sad situation, the Grameen Bank 
 (GB) of Bangladesh stepped into providing some solutions. The GB introduced cellular mobile phones 
 in some areas away from cities - (what people commonly call a/not really a) village pay phones 
 (VPPs) -to be operated under its micro-credit programs. The GB entered into the (away from cities) telecom part/area 
 based on the following basic reasons. First, unevenness in the world of information is one of the principal causes of (state where two things are not the same), backwardness and poorness. 
 The lack of access to information is a powerful factor 
 tending to cause to continue poorness in areas away from cities. Second, 
 telephone services can have a visible influence on 
 production, marketing and other important money-based 
 decisions arguing with (away from cities) families. Third, technology (by itself/in and of itself)  cannot be the solution to the problems of 
 (away from cities) development and poorness reduction unless the issue of 'who controls the technology' can be settled. 
 Fourth, even if particular people are unable to buy 
 
 a phone, they should have access to phone service as 
 and when they need it. 
 The following are the goals of this paper: 
 - To learn how and to what extent VPPs can 
 (help increase/show in a good way) the (related to how much money and power people have) uplift of villagers, especially of the poor, by affecting (related to how much money and power people have) 
 limits/guidelines which hold back families. 
 - To test the money-based effects of cellular mobile 
 phones at the household and village levels: at the 
 household level, by guessing the net increase in 
 income came/coming from selling phone services and 
 deciding/figuring out how this increase affects household 
 poorness and food consumption; at village levels, by 
 guessing the personal extra (CS), marketing 
 margins, changes in working well levels (based on 
 case studies). 
 - To test particular social hits/effects. These include 
 changes in the social balance, permission of 
 the (not having money or education), relationship networks and the law 
 and order situation in the villages. 
 - To make suggestions (related to/looking at/thinking about) the design and 
 creation of public policies which are meant 
 to secure/make sure of wider and better access to telecom 
 services among the poor. 
 The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 outlines 
 the data sources employed. Basic information on (away from cities) 
 phone users are given in Section 3, while the effects 
 of phones are discussed in Section 4. Finally, policy 
 ends/end results are drawn in Section 5. 
 
 2. Research approach and data sources 
 To decide/figure out how VPPs affect (away from cities) development 
 and poorness reduction, both owners (sellers of services) and users (buyers of services) were surveyed. 
 The sample of phone owners consisted of 50 people in 50 different villages located at distances of 
 40-50 km from city-based Dhaka. This sample 
 made up/was equal to about 60% of all VPP owners at the time 
 of the survey. 1 The owners were selected at random 
 from a list given by the GB Head Office, Dhaka. 
 The sample of users of VPP services consisted of 400 
 people. This sample was drawn at random from 
 1 By early 2001, 700-800 village pay phones were operating in 
 Bangladesh. 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 lists given by the phone owners, and accounts 
 for 27% of all VPP users in the villages (leaving out/keeping out 
 owner-users). 
 This study uses both first (or most important) and secondary data. 
 The first (or most important) data were collected through a field survey 
 done in the months of June through August 1998. 
 Structured lists of questions were given at both 
 the household and village levels. Focus-group discussions were held, and GB branch managers and local 
 people were requested to provide added/more input (related to/looking at/thinking about) their impressions of the (possible greatness or power) and actual 
 effects of VPPs. What's more, case studies of these effects were developed, which needed/demanded intensive analysis. For its secondary data, the study depends on different 
 published and unpublished documents from the government of Bangladesh and GB. 
 
 3. Basic information on phone users 
 3.1. Money-based status of users 
 
 263 
 
 Table 2 
 Phone use according to money-based status (number of calls, % in 
 brackets)a 
 Money-based status 
 
 Total 
 
 Users 
 
 Poor 
 
 Non-poor 
 
 Owners 
 Villagers 
 Whole sample 
 
 76 (45.0) 
 192 (21.5) 
 268 (25.3) 
 
 93 (55.0) 
 699 (78.5) 
 792 (74.7) 
 
 169 (100) 
 891 (100) 
 1060 (100) 
 
 a Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 phone calls (Table 2). The combined groups of 
 the poor made 268 calls and, this way, accounted for 
 one-fourth of all phone calls. On the other hand, the 
 non-poor made 792 calls, which make upd about 
 three-fourths of the total. Within the owner/user 
 group, the share of calls made by the poor and 
 the non-poor appear to be more or less evenly distributed (45 against/compared to/or 55%), while among the villagers, 
 most phone calls were found to have been made by 
 non-poor families (roughly 78% ). It is important 
 that the strength of use by the poor is 50% greater 
 than by the non-poor. 
 
 The money-based status of phone users is shown in 
 Table 1. Using the FAO's definition of 'poor', as discussed at length in the original research report (Bayes 
 et al., 1999), 15% of the phone users in the sample 
 could be categorised as poor (very poor 5%, and 
 moderately poor about 10% ). The majmity of the users 
 -over four-fifths- fell into the non-poor group. Of 
 the owner/users group, 14% were moderately poor and 
 86% were categorised as non-poor. Of the villagers, 
 6, 9 and about 85% fell into the very poor, moderately poor and non-poor groups, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 The (male/female status) distribution of phone callers is shown in 
 Table 3. Among the owners of phones, 60% of users 
 
 (male/female status) 
 
 Owners 
 
 Villagers 
 
 All 
 
 3.2. Phone calls according to money-based status 
 
 Male 
 Female 
 Total 
 
 68 (40) 
 101 (60) 
 169 (100) 
 
 623 (70) 
 268 (30) 
 891 (100) 
 
 691 (65) 
 369 (35) 
 1060 (100) 
 
 During the week coming before the survey, the phone 
 users in the sample are reported to have made 1060 
 
 a Source: information collected through added/more telephone 
 interviews, 1998. 
 
 3.3. Phone use according to (male/female status) 
 
 Table 3 
 Phone use according to (male/female status) (numbers of calls, % in brackets)" 
 
 Table 1 
 Money-based status of phone users (% in brackets)a 
 Money-based status 
 
 Very poorb 
 
 Medium-level poorc 
 
 Non-poorct 
 
 Total 
 
 Owners 
 Villagers (users) 
 
 22 (6.1) 
 
 7 (14.0) 
 33 (9.3) 
 
 43 (86.0) 
 301 (84.6) 
 
 50 (100) 
 356 (100) 
 
 a Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 b 1850 cal per person. 
 c 2122 cal per person. 
 d Above 2122 cal per person. 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 264 
 
 were women and 40% men. Among the villagers, however, 30% of users were women and 70% men. For 
 the sample as a whole, 65% of all calls are reported to 
 have been made by men, and 35% by women. So, 
 it appears that VPPs provide (away from cities) women with the 
 opportunity to use this modern communications technology. 
 3.4. Mode of payment 
 
 On the institutional side, Grameen Tele Communication (GTC) is the service provider buying airtime in 
 bulk from Grameen Phone Limited (GPL), the network 
 operator. The GTC provides cellular mobile phones to 
 GB members under a leasing arrangement. The price 
 of a phone is given by the GB, and members have 
 to pay back this sum through weekly instalments within 
 the said period of 2 or 3 years. The telephone 
 costs 18,000 Tk., but with the interest that builds up, the 
 sum to be repaid within 2 or 3 years totals 23,050 Tk. 
 (1 US$= 40 Tk.). The weekly instalment ranges from 
 220 to 160 Tk., depending on whether the repayment 
 period is 2 or 3 years. It was found that 45% of VPPs 
 were operated by the owners themselves, while 50% 
 were operated by the owner's husband, son or daughter, and the remaining 5% were operated by other people. 
 3.5. Importance of phone calls 
 
 A breakdown of the phone calls according to their 
 (pertaining to each person or thing) levels of importance is presented in Table 4. 
 
 Table 4 
 Phone calls according to degree of need (% of calls made)" 
 Money-based status 
 
 Degree of need 
 Important Less 
 important 
 
 Very poor 
 Moderately poor 
 Non-poor 
 Whole sample 
 a 
 
 88.9 
 85.5 
 85.0 
 85.0 
 
 11.1 
 12.0 
 11.7 
 11.7 
 
 No need 
 
 All 
 
 2.5 
 3.3 
 3.0 
 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 
 Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 It appears that 85% of the phone calls made by the 
 
 sample users are 'important' calls. 'Less important' 
 calls make up/be equal to about 12% and 'could be avoided' calls 
 3%. The last two types of calls are usually made by the 
 moderately poor and non-poor groups. The very 
 poor group seems to make no unnecessary calls, even 
 though their share of 'less important calls' remains 
 more or less the same as that of other groups. 
 3.6. Purposes of phone calls 
 
 Keeping in mind the problems of overlap, we have 
 categorised the calls into a few groups: Money-based; 
 Health (emergency and guidance); Social/Personal 
 (family- and office-related); Payments; and other 
 (Table 5). The poor and non-poor groups accounted for more or less the same proportion of 
 money-based/finance-related calls (45.9 and 46.9%, (match up each pair of items in order)). Within the (made up of different things) poor group, however, the very poor seem to use phones mostly 
 
 Table 5 
 Purposes of phone calls made by users (number of calls, % in brackets)" 
 Purposes 
 
 Market prices of valuable things 
 Employment opportunities 
 Land transactions 
 Business-related 
 Payment 
 All money-based/finance 
 Family/personal 
 Health-related 
 Other 
 Total 
 a 
 
 Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 Money-based status 
 Very poor 
 
 Medium-level!y poor 
 
 All poor 
 
 All non-poor 
 
 2 
 13 
 11 
 5 
 2 
 33 
 30 
 15 
 5 
 83 
 
 3 
 4 
 14 
 13 
 
 (4.8) 
 (6.4) 
 (22.2) 
 (20.5) 
 
 34 
 16 
 II 
 2 
 63 
 
 (53.9) 
 (25.4) 
 (17.5) 
 (3.2) 
 (100) 
 
 5 
 17 
 25 
 18 
 2 
 67 
 46 
 26 
 7 
 146 
 
 50 
 50 
 65 
 231 
 33 
 429 
 323 
 94 
 68 
 914 
 
 (2.4) 
 (15.7) 
 (13.2) 
 (6.0) 
 (2.5) 
 (39.8) 
 (36.1) 
 (18.1) 
 (6.0) 
 (1 00) 
 
 (3.4) 
 (11.6) 
 (17.1) 
 (12.4) 
 (1.4) 
 (45.9) 
 (31.5) 
 (17.8) 
 (4.8) 
 (100) 
 
 (5.5) 
 (5.5) 
 (7.1) 
 (25.3) 
 (3.5) 
 (46.9) 
 (35.3) 
 (10.3) 
 (7.5) 
 (100) 
 
 265 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 for money-based purposes, making 33.9% of all their 
 calls with these purposes in mind. The poor group also 
 makes (compared to other things) more phone calls for health-related 
 purposes than the non-poor group (17.8 and 10.3%, 
 (match up each pair of items in order)). 
 The non-poor group, on the other hand, makes (compared to other things) more phone calls for family/personal (things to carefully think about) (35 against/compared to/or 32% ), payments (4 against/compared to/or 1%) and 
 business-related purposes (25 against/compared to/or 12%). That the non-poor give/reserve more of their calls to business-related 
 purposes is not surprising, because most of 
 the business activities in areas away from cities are carried out 
 by people falling into the non-poor group. However, 
 even the very poor group points to/shows that about 
 21% of their calls are made for business-related purposes. This goes to show that even the poorest, who 
 are involved in silly production of eggs, vegetables, 
 puffed rice, (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) rearing, etc. make phone calls in 
 order to keep informed about the business (surrounding conditions). The majority of the phone calls made by the 
 poor group deal with money-based and health (things to carefully think about). 
 
 4. The effects of village pay phones 
 4.1. Money-based effects 
 4.1.1. Net profit ofVPP owners 
 As was explained above, the GB leased phones to 
 its most successful members in the target villages. 
 The goal was to add to household income, 
 rather than replace it (at least over the short term). 
 As is the case with other business activities, the net 
 (money made/good thing received) (accomplished or gained) on telephone services equals total receipts/revenues from sales minus total costs incun·ed 
 to (understand/make real/achieve) these sales. To calculate the net (money made/good thing received) earned 
 from selling phone services, the following formula was 
 used: 
 
 + a2 X TMni + a3 
 -Uwi) + OCi + 0; 
 
 NP; =(at x TMti 
 
 x TMii 
 
 + Tw;) 
 
 where NPi is the net (money made/good thing received) (Tk. per week) on phone 
 services sold by household i, TM, the total minutes 
 of local calls per week, a 1 the returns on local calls 
 (2.4 Tk./min), TMni the total minutes of NWD calls 
 per week, a2 the returns on NWD calls (5 Tk./min), 
 
 Table 6 
 Net (money made/good things received) from selling phone services (number of owners, % in 
 brackets)" 
 Net (money made/good thing received) (Tk. per week) 
 
 &amp;lt;100 
 101-300 
 301-500 
 501-1000 
 Total 
 a 
 
 Number of owners(%) 
 8 (16) 
 
 17 (34) 
 20 (40) 
 
 5 (10) 
 50 (100) 
 
 Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 TMii the total minutes of ISD calls per week, a3 the 
 returns on ISD calls (7 Tk./min), Twi the total tips 
 received (Tk. per week), 1wi the instalment paid for 
 the phone (Tk. per week), OC; the opportunity costs 
 of the operator's time (Tk. per week), and Oi is the 
 other costs, e.g. line rent (Tk. per week). 
 Statistics on net (money made/good things received) are presented in Table 6. 
 The VPP owners earn an average net (money made/good thing received) of 277 Tk. 
 per week. The profit level ranges from as high as 683 
 Tk. per week to as low as -35 Tk. per week. The 
 (money made/good things received) building up from phone services make up/be equal to from 
 about one-fifth to one-fourth of the total income of the 
 sample families. Half of the sample owners collect  a 
 net (money made/good thing received) of &amp;gt;300 Tk. per week, and one-tenth earn 
 &amp;gt;500 Tk. per week. However, the net (money made/good things received) of 16% 
 of the sample phone owners fell &amp;lt; 100 Tk. per week. 
 
 4.1.2. Other choice means of communication 
 People who responded were also asked the following question: "how would you make happy the need for current calls 
 had there been no VPP in your village?" the responses 
 made by three different income groups are presented 
 in Table 7. The most often talked about/said other choice 
 is that one would either go, or hire a person to go 
 to the place concerned. The range of options across 
 income groups is worth talking about/saying. Among the very poor group, 68% would have needed/demanded physical ability to move around (involving time and transport). In the 
 moderately poor and non-poor groups, the similar figures were 56 and 47%, (match up each pair of items in order). In other 
 words, if no VPPs had been available, the poor would 
 have needed/demanded greater added/more physical ability to move around than 
 the non-poor. Just the opposite, however, is the case 
 when other sources of telephone service are used. The 
 non-poor would have used (compared to other things) more of that service than the poor. By and large, it seems that the 
 
 266 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 Table 7 
 Communication other choices to VPPs (% of people who responded)- 
 Other choices 
 
 Money-based status 
 Very 
 poor 
 
 Would not try 
 Telephone from 
 other phone 
 Post office 
 Have to go/Hire 
 person to go 
 Other 
 Total 
 a 
 
 Moderately 
 poor 
 
 Non-poor 
 
 26.5 
 
 36.5 
 
 2.3 
 43.0 
 
 5.9 
 67.6 
 
 7.1 
 56.4 
 
 6.8 
 47.3 
 
 100 
 
 100 
 
 0.6 
 100 
 
 Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 (not being there; not being present) of VPPs would cause (compared to other things) higher transaction costs for communications on the poor. 
 4.1.3. Personal extra 
 An guess of the CS cooperated with/produced/gave up by VPPs is presented 
 in Table 8. The CS is defined as the difference between the price people actually pay and the price 
 they would be willing to pay for a particular communication. For the purposes of the present study, CS is 
 defined as the price users would have paid for an different mode of communication, minus the price they 
 actually paid for the phone service. So, the extra 
 guessed could also be thought about/believed as the consumer's 
 real income benefits arising out of being able to make 
 a phone call. The calculation of the CS is based on the 
 following ideas (you think are true): 
 - Time and road-transport costs are included for the 
 (possible or/possible greatness or power or)  possible other choice means of communication. For example, we asked the people who responded how 
 much they would have to pay in time and transport 
 
 costs if their only communication other choice was 
 road transport. 
 - The opportunity costs of the time spent were calculated on the basis of winning/most common (away from cities) wage rates. 
 A uniform wage rate was used for both the poor 
 and the non-poor groups as the non-poor group may 
 have the choice of employing wage labour to get information at the poor group's wage rate, 
 rather than at their own higher reservation wage. 
 - The actual cost to phone users amounted to the price 
 they paid at the time of receiving the services. 
 From the data in Table 8, it can be seen that the 
 availability of VPPs provides average users in all income layers  with a fair amount of CS. For example, 
 while the cost of alternate communication is 71.58 
 Tk., using VPP's costs only 16.82 Tk., producing/giving up a extra of 54.77 Tk. per call or 165 Tk. per user per week 
 (assuming three phone calls a week). This compares 
 with household income of 1500 Tk. per week. In 
 other words, the extra so created amounted to 11% 
 of the household income of families with telephone 
 users. The most important (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) to be made in 
 Table 8 is, however, that the CS of the poor, at 77.86 
 Tk., is 50% higher than that of the non-poor. This 
 amount of CS, if converted now (away from cities) prices, 
 could buy 12 kg of rough rice. What's more, the 
 moderately poor gain a CS of 91.64 Tk., followed 
 by the very poor (61.30 Tk.). The non-poor 
 (50.78 Tk.) extract the lowest amount of CS. That 
 the poor would collect  the maximum CS following the 
 coming of VPPs is seen/obvious. The poor usually do not 
 have much in the way of other choices to communicate with the outside world, neither relatives to help 
 with a phone call, nor relatives to provide a ride to 
 the destination. For the poor, the coming of VPPs 
 
 Table 8 
 Guesses of personal extra (Tk. per phone call)a 
 Money-based status 
 
 Hours needed/demanded 
 by different 
 methods 
 
 Transport costs 
 involved in 
 different methods 
 
 Opportunity costs 
 of time needed/demanded for 
 different methods 
 
 Total costs of 
 different 
 methods 
 
 Total costs of 
 village pay 
 phones 
 
 Person 
 extra/ 
 phone call 
 
 Very poor 
 Moderately poor 
 All poor 
 Non poor 
 Whole sample 
 
 3.08 
 4.15 
 3.67 
 2.54 
 2.70 
 
 54.97 
 65.82 
 60.89 
 45.80 
 48.02 
 
 26.41 
 40.89 
 34.32 
 21.71 
 23.57 
 
 81.38 
 106.71 
 95.21 
 67.51 
 71.58 
 
 20.08 
 15.07 
 17.35 
 16.73 
 16.82 
 
 61.30 
 91.64 
 77.86 
 50.78 
 54.77 
 
 a Source: calculated from JU/ZEF Field Survey Data. 
 
 267 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 opened up a lower-cost other choice for exchanging 
 information. 
 4.1.4. Prices ofproducts and input supplies 
 One of the important effects of VPPs may be 
 that they help avoid sharp swings in demand, supply 
 and the prices of valuable things. The supporters of 
 VPPs guesse that the spreading around of market 
 information to remote villages would help raise farm 
 output prices and lower farm input prices through 
 the method of information diffusion. (in a true way), 
 differences that could be seen (either evening-out prices or smoothing supply) might be attributable 
 not only to telephones, but to a variety of other 
 factors such as roads, (TV, the Internet, etc.), etc. The related 
 'perceptions' of the local people (related to/looking at/thinking about) the utility 
 of the services were thought about/believed to be of value for this 
 research. (in almost the same way), attempts were made to decide/figure out 
 what views were held in control villages. A summary of the money-based and non-money-based benefits, as 
 perceived by the villagers, is presented in Table 9. 
 The average prices of farming-based valuable things (especially of paddy and eggs) were higher in target villages (with phones) than in control villages (without 
 phones). 
 
 For example, farmers in the target villages received 
 70-75% of the paddy prices paid by final people, 
 instead of 65-70% in control villages. The argument that market (wasting very little while working or producing something) is improved is highlighted 
 by one example in particular: the price of eggs in target villages was reported to be 13 Tk. per bali during the period of the survey, compared to 12 Tk. per 
 bali in control villages. Also, vegetable growers 
 in a target village informed us that VPPs helped them 
 by providing them with easy and instant access to the 
 winning/most common what people want to buy and supply situation and, 
 this way, helped them in making appropriate production decisions. Besides, they argued, VPPs have reduced the 
 role of (people or businesses who buy goods to sell to stores, not you) who often used to lie to/fool them in 
 the (not being there; not being present) of market information. 
 The supply of farming-based inputs such as diesel and 
 fertiliser is reported to be smoother and more stable 
 in target villages than in control villages. According 
 to dealers who do business with these inputs, VPPs 
 have made it possible to develop an impression of the 
 supply situation throughout the year, making it possible to guard against unforeseen (events that are dependent on other things that might or might not happen). On 
 the other hand, the lack of such communication facilities in control villages has been reported to (help increase/show in a good way) occasional shortages and price hikes, adding to 
 
 Table 9 
 Test of selected benefits" 
 Target villages (N = 50, averages) 
 
 Control villages (N = 10, averages) 
 
 70-75 
 
 65-70 
 
 13 
 12.50 
 17 
 
 11.50 
 72 
 
 Higher 
 Lower 
 
 Lower 
 Higher 
 
 Supply of inputs 
 Diesel 
 Fertiliser 
 
 Stable 
 Regular 
 
 Going up and down at times 
 Occasional problems 
 
 Others 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) death rate 
 Law and order situation 
 Communication during disasters 
 Communication with relatives 
 Transmission of new ideas 
 Ability to move around of people 
 Spoilage of (likely to go bad in a short time) products 
 Access to health-care services 
 
 Lower 
 Improved 
 Quick, effective 
 Anywhere, any time/day 
 Improved 
 Higher 
 Less 
 Faster/effective 
 
 Higher 
 Same 
 Slow, less effective 
 Anywhere, but fixed time/day 
 Same 
 Lower 
 More 
 Slower/less effective 
 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 Prices 
 Paddy (% of final person prices) 
 Eggs (Tk. per hali; hali = 4) 
 Exchange rate (Tk. per Ryal) 
 Cost of information/knowledge (Tk.) 
 Chickens/ducks 
 Chick feeds 
 
 a 
 
 Source: case studies and discussions with villagers during JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 12 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 268 
 
 producers' cash load at the margin. Another example involves market clearness/open honesty (related to/looking at/thinking about) the rate of 
 exchange between Taka and Saudi Ryal at the village 
 level. The VPPs are also reported to have increased 
 the working well, ability (to hold or do something) use and a money-making state 
 of small animals and (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) businesses/projects by (a) helping the regular and easy delivery of inputs at lower 
 cost, (b) spreading around market prices for produce and, 
 this way, helping to secure/make sure of payment of a fair price and (c) 
 reducing the extent of/the range of the risks connected with such 
 business. 
 
 4.2. Poorness and food situation effects 
 The phone-owning families were asked questions such as: "in how many months of the year were 
 your household members able to eat well before you 
 entered the phone business, and in how many months 
 of the year can they eat well now?" the difference 
 between the number of months 'before' and the number of months 'after' was taken as a (substitute-related) (number or thing that changes) 
 for the change in food consumption. Since the question (or investigation) involved the situations before and after the 
 families had entered the phone services business, 
 (understanding/ explanation) of the responses depends on the ceteris 
 paribus idea (you think is true). In order to test this fully, 
 however, further research on consumption effects is 
 needed. 
 Table 10 points to/shows that none of the families reported any (worsening / rusting, crumbling, etc.) in the situation during the 
 (connected/related) periods, although 14% reported the same 
 situation as before. One-fourth of the people who responded 
 
 Table 10 
 Change in the food-consumption situation of phone-owning 
 families a 
 Extent of change 
 in months 
 
 Number of 
 people who responded 
 
 Total 
 
 Total 
 
 (%) 
 
 (%) 
 
 0 
 I 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 10 
 Total 
 
 7 
 4 
 12 
 3 
 2 
 3 
 2 
 I 
 50 
 
 14 
 8 
 24 
 6 
 4 
 6 
 4 
 2 
 100 
 
 14 
 22 
 78 
 89 
 88 
 94 
 98 
 100 
 100 
 
 a 
 
 Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 reported that their food situation had improved by 
 3 months (i.e. these families reported that they 
 can now 'eat well' in three more months than they 
 could earlier), and one-fifth of the families responded that their food situation had improved 
 by &amp;gt;3 months. In all, 86% of the phone-owning 
 families reported that their food situation had 
 improved. 
 
 4.2.1. Dealing with disasters 
 One major benefit of VPPs was seen in JulySeptember 1998, when Bangladesh was hit by the 
 worst flood in modern history and two-thirds of the 
 country's area remained put underwater for &amp;gt;2 months. 
 People and transport began to get stuck on the way. 
 When people got stuck in or near target villages, 
 mobile phones proved to be very valuable for sending 
 messages to worried relatives or informing employers 
 or calling relief (services businesses/government units). During field visits that took 
 place after the floodwater moved back, it was learned 
 that bills for VPPs rose during the flood months to 
 (in a big way) higher averages than in earlier months 
 due to the increased demand for phone services. GB 
 (people in charge) confirmed this things. On the other 
 hand, local government (people in charge) informed us that the 
 availability of VPPs enabled them to take stock of the 
 situation quickly during the flood. 
 4.3. Socio-cultural effects 
 4.3.1. Law and order situation 
 In a few of the sample villages, it was reported that 
 the law and order situation had improved as a result of 
 the availability of VPPs. In the event of any crime (of stealing) 
 or theft, villagers in target villages were able to inform law-enforcement (services businesses/government units) quickly by phone. In 
 addition, police (services businesses/government units) in the area also 
 reported that fast communication with target villages 
 added/gave to decreasing crimes rates. 
 4.3.2. Across the ocean communication 
 In almost all villages, a fairly large number of people are reported to be working in other countries. Many of them 
 belong to poor families who sold land and other valuable things to pay for their travel. The residents of target 
 villages informed us that communication with the outside world had become very fast and regular following 
 the (the act of reaching a destination) of VPPs in villages. 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 4.3.3. Health 
 It was pointed out earlier that roughly one-tenth of 
 all calls deal with health-related matters, especially 
 among poor people. As a result of the availability of 
 VPPs, villagers can now contact clinics, doctors or emergency vehicles quickly, even at night. This was not possible 
 in the past. During discussions with focus groups and 
 interactions with the local elite and social workers, it 
 was showed that the greatest benefit brought about 
 by VPPs was the ability to call doctors and clinics 
 quickly. In a country where the infant death rate is 
 91 per 1000 live births and the mother-based death rate 
 is also very high, VPPs' (thing that's given/work that's done) to saving lives 
 can hardly be (made to appear much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is). 
 4.3.4. Permission of women 
 Different studies in the big picture  of micro-credit programs in Bangladesh argue that there have been 
 big positive developments in the permission of women (e.g. Amin et al., 1998, pp. 36). 
 Findings (related to/looking at/thinking about) permission are presented in 
 Table 11. It may be watched/followed that sample families' 
 decision-making processes are ruled by joint 
 decisions made by both the husband and the wife. 
 That is, whenever household-level decisions have to 
 be made relating to/connected to family affairs, the use of 
 GB credit, or the spending of phone income, both 
 members of the pair participate. For example, 72% of 
 the people who responded replied that the decisions on family 
 affairs (e.g. education for children, the marriage of 
 daughters or sons, etc.) are made by both partners 
 on the basis of back and forth/equal between people discussion. The percentage 
 is 60% when the use of GB credit is at issue. 
 When the issue involved is the spending of earnings 
 from telephone services, however, 58% of the owners 
 make combined decisions, while 36% decide completely on 
 their own. In other words, sample women appear to 
 have greater (north-south position/freedom) in deciding how to spend phone 
 
 269 
 
 income than is the case when the other two issues are 
 involved. For example, 36% of the people who responded decide 
 completely on their own where and how to spend phone 
 (money made/good things received), compared to 16 and 30% for the other two 
 cases, (match up each pair of items in order). Chi-square test results point to/show 
 that these differences are (meaningful numbers). 
 Another indicator of permission is the degree of 
 ability to move around of women in and around the village. Usually/(in the past), Bangladeshi women are 'locked in' the house 
 and rarely have the right to move freely around the 
 village. Of course, the role of GB and other NGOs has 
 broken this chain a little bit by giving women 
 opportunities to come out of the household and become involved in income-creating activities. However, most of those activities have been kept to/restricted to  the 
 reasons where they live (kitchen gardening, (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 rearing, sewing, etc.). Ownership of a mobile phone 
 seems to have opened a new dimension in this respect. The team of (people who work to find information) was able to watch/notice 
 that the mobile phones gave their owners greater ability to move around within the village than they had before. This is 
 because incoming calls for villagers make it necessary 
 to take the phone to them, and if no family members 
 are found to be available, the women themselves have 
 to rush about with the mobile phone. This job they 
 have to perform even during the night. Since many of 
 the phones are placed in their shops in a nearby hat 
 or shop-related (small market), owners were found to go 
 to the phone whenever needed. So, mobile phones 
 appear to have improved women's ability to move around not only 
 within the village, but also outside it. 
 Two added/more parts of the ability to move around issue should 
 be talked about/said. First, women in the village come to 
 the owner's house to make phone calls, and second, 
 sample women reported that the mobile phones expanded the extent of/the range of their ability to move around even beyond the 
 local markets. For example, whenever they decided to 
 visit relatives far away from their villages, they could 
 
 Table 11 
 Who makes decisions (number of responses, % in brackets)" 
 Decision 
 
 About family affairs 
 About use of GB credit 
 About spending income from phone 
 a 
 
 Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 Decision makers 
 Self 
 
 Husband 
 
 Both 
 
 Total 
 
 Chi-square (df) 
 
 8 (16) 
 15 (30) 
 18 (36) 
 
 6 (12) 
 5 (10) 
 3 (6) 
 
 36 (72) 
 30 (60) 
 29 (58) 
 
 50 (100) 
 50 (100) 
 50 (100) 
 
 33.89 (2) 
 19.17 (2) 
 20.53 (2) 
 
 270 
 
 A. Bayes/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 contact their families by phone and inform them of 
 their time of (the act of reaching a destination), which reduces family tensions and 
 conflicts. 
 
 4.3.5. Changes in social balance and status 
 Many phone-owning families did not appear to 
 be poor families at the time of the survey. On 
 the opposite, they appeared to be (compared to other things) well-off 
 within the big picture  of their money-based conditions: moderately furnished houses, some TV sets, sanitary latrines, tube-wells, etc. Between 5 and 10 years ago, 
 however, many of these families were below the 
 poorness line, and GB micro-credit programs helped 
 them to slowly escape from grinding poorness. However, for their money-based uplift, the women had to depend on the help of some their village's rich 
 elite. Now, however, they are reported to be standing on their own feet. Interestingly, some of the people who came to their reasons to make phone calls 
 were the (compared to other things) rich villagers who had earlier helped them with food, clothing and shelter. Reportedly, customer/financial supporter-client relationships grew up between 
 some of them. For example, about one-fourth of the 
 phone owners reported that the people who depend 
 on them for phone calls include some people who 
 once lent them money to help them overcome money problemss. (in almost the same way), 12% of the phone owners reported that some phone users had once hired 
 them as servants. And 34% reported that they 
 were helped in different ways by many of the users 
 (Table 12). 
 The women in control of cellular mobile phones are 
 proud of their present business. According to them, 
 it has not only helped them earn added/more income, 
 but ownership has also gave to them a certain 
 amount of fame. Everyone in their village and in (next to) villages now knows them and identifies their 
 
 Table 12 
 Partial social change (number, % in brackets)- 
 Previous status of callers 
 
 Number 
 
 Used 
 Used 
 Used 
 Used 
 Total 
 
 12 
 15 
 6 
 17 
 50 
 
 to 
 to 
 to 
 to 
 
 lend money 
 help maintain family 
 hire owner as household maid 
 help in different ways 
 
 - Source: JU/ZEF Field Survey, 1998. 
 
 (24) 
 (30) 
 (12) 
 (34) 
 (100) 
 
 'bari' (group of houses) by the name of the technology they own, e.g. Phone Bari (house of the phone) or 
 by the name of the owner (e.g. Nurjahan's bari). This 
 was not the case when the same women used to begin/try traditional activities such as (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) rearing, rice 
 husking or grocery selling. Their social status is further improved by the increased income that seems to be 
 raising their household's standard of living. Villagers 
 now respect phone owners. Some of them are also invited to social functions (even to marriage (formal, special events or series of actions) 
 of the village's elite), something which would have 
 been (too terrible to think about) in the big picture  of (away from cities) Bangladesh 
 earlier. 
 4.3.6. Knowledge and confidence 
 Discussions with phone owners point to/show that phone 
 ownership provides not only weekly income, but also 
 knowledge about many things which used to be almost unknown to sample women. For example, when 
 business people approach them to make phone calls 
 to different markets, the women, who stand beside the caller, get to know the names of the markets and the 
 valuable things in which they generally deal. When villagers receive calls from outside the country, the phone 
 owners get to know the names of the places from 
 which the calls start. Sometimes owners are told 
 about the currency or the (related to how much money and power people have) conditions 
 in that particular country. So, each day, owners get 
 to know new things and expand the edge of something/unexplored area of their 
 knowledge. Mobile phone ownership has given these 
 women confidence. The fact that they are collecting the 
 rewards of their good records of repayment and the 
 fulfilment of other judging requirements needed/demanded by GB adds/gives 
 to this confidence. Once they assumed that they would 
 have to sell eggs, puffed rice or cow milk throughout their lives in order to make out a living. They could 
 hardly have dreamed that they would now own a modern 
 communication technology such as a cellular mobile 
 phone. 
 4.3. 7. Strengthening relationship networks 
 Another important effect of VPPs can be seen in 
 the strengthening of relationship networks. The coming of 
 VPPs has enabled villagers to stay in touch with relatives living outside the village. In typical Bangladeshi 
 (community of people/all good people in the world), collecting news about immediate family members and other relations in far places is a repeating 
 concern. In the past, it was not possible to main- 
 
 A. Bayes I Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 tain a level of relationship interaction just like that 
 which VPPs now allow at such low transaction costs. 
 Without VPPs, efforts to maintain relationship 
 networks were not only expensive, but also (compared to other things) 
 ineffective. 
 
 5. Ends/end results and policy effects/results/suggestions 
 The availability of village pay phones results in 
 big (related to how people and cultures interact) benefits in areas away from cities. For 
 example, the ownership of the phones by (compared to other things) 
 poor families tends to raise their social status and 
 pave the way for change in the social balance. 
 Mobile phones make women more mobile both within 
 and outside their villages. Also, increased 
 income from phones also raises their exchange (government money) in the market and, this way, helps to reduce 
 their poorness. Villages with phones also report that 
 they are very useful in dealing with natural bad events and improving law-enforcement. Given these 
 multi-dimensional benefits of village phones, the study 
 arrives at the following general ends/end results and policy 
 effects/results/suggestions. 
 5.1. Parting with old perceptions 
 Telephones should be treated not only as a person good, but also as a production good, especially 
 in poor areas away from cities. There, telephones are not a domain reserved for (compared to other things) rich, as has been 
 thought by some, but a market in which lower income 
 groups also have big stakes once they gain 
 access. These findings call for a fast re-orientation 
 in the thinking of policy-makers. The development of 
 telecom services in areas away from cities appears to be a factor 
 powerfully (helping increase/showing in a good way) and supporting the goals 
 of (away from cities) development and poorness reduction. Further 
 research on the role of communications technology 
 is needed to increase our understanding of these 
 links. 
 5.2. (removal of controlling laws) and opportunities for 
 the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) 
 
 271 
 
 of VPPs in Bangladesh is a (something produced along with something else) of policies 
 designed to bring about gradual (removal of controlling laws), liberalisation and (turning things over from the government to private companies), which the government has 
 been chasing after in the telecom part/area for some 
 years. Progress in this direction should be fast. Allowing the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) to play a competitive 
 role in the telecom business would reduce the cost of 
 calls and increase the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of the system. The 
 BTTB should be prepared to accept the presence and 
 activities of the (people and businesses that are not part of the government). The government can 
 keep/hold ownership of fixed lines while (giving power, property, or rights) the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) with cellular phones. Investment must be 
 stimulated in the part/area. Quite obviously, ability (to hold or do something) is 
 seriously limited. A public-private partnership may 
 be needed/demanded in order to (understand/make real/achieve) the investments needed, 
 with a view to reducing international traffic jams and 
 increasing interconnections. 
 5.3. Communications technology for the poor 
 The GB's style of managing mobile phones in 
 villages can improve the technology's broad-based, 
 pro-poor (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting). In Bangladesh, the (compared to other things) 
 rich sections of villages have usually/(in the past) 
 owned, managed and led the introduction of modern 
 technologies (e.g. crop-watering/rinsing with water). Such patterns of ownership have (claimed to be) resulted in unfair distributions of income and wealth. The fact that (compared to other things) 
 poor people can also own and access modern information technology may go a long way towards 
 reducing poorness and restoring a more fair 
 distribution. 
 The strong institutional abilities (to hold or do something) of poor peoples' 
 organisations, such as micro-finance associations, can 
 help efforts to make the poor the managers of 
 new technologies. This may be carefully thought about/believed an added pay-off on earlier investments in the (creation and construction/ group of objects) 
 of such (away from cities) organisations. Many such organisations 
 in other parts of poor countries could also function as hosts for (related to sending and receiving phone calls, texts, etc.) services and so 
 quickly broaden access by the poor. In this big picture, 
 too, development policy, and not just the market, has 
 an important part to play. 
 
 References 
 The BTTB, the state telephone (one company that controls too much) in 
 Bangladesh, is hardly in a position to provide/deliver 
 telecom services to areas away from cities. The introduction 
 
 Ahmed, R., Horseain, M., 1984. Development Hit/effect of (away from cities) 
 (set of machines) in Bangladesh, IFRI/BIDS. Dhaka. 
 
 272 
 
 A. Bayes/ Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 261-272 
 
 Amin, R., Becker, S., Bayes, A., 1998. NGO-(helped increase/showed in a good way) micro credit 
 programs and women's permission in (away from cities) Bangladesh: 
 (numbers-based) and (not numbers-based) (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). J. Dev. Areas 32 (2). 
 Bayes, A., von Braun, J., Akhter, R., 1999. Village Pay Phones and 
 Poorness Reduction: Ideas from a Grameen Bracelet Effort in 
 Bangladesh - ZEF Discussion Paper on Development Policy, 
 No.8, Bonn. 
 
 Stigler, G.J., 1961. The money flow/money-based studies of information. J. Politician. Econ. 
 1 (LXIX). 
 Kessides, C., 1993. The (thing that's given/work that's done) of (set of machines) to Money-based 
 Development: A Review of Experience and Policy Effects/results/suggestions, 
 World Bank Discussion Papers 213. 
 World Bank and BCAS, 1998. Bangladesh 2020-A Long-run 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) Study, University Press, Dhaka. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
