AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 Hits/effects of the training and visit extension system on farmers' 
 knowledge and adoption of technology: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Pakistan 
 Syed Sajidin Hussain *,a,\ Derek Byerlee *·b, Paul W. Heisey c 
 a Farming-based 
 
 Money flow Research Unit, Tarnab, Peshawar, Pakistan 
 International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), 
 b Apdo. Postal6-641, Mexico City, D.F. 06600, Mexico, 
 c Liliongwe, Malawi 
 
 (Accepted 20 April1993) 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper provides (numbers-based) (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the hit/effect of the Training and Visit (T &amp; V) extension system in the 
 watered Punjab of Pakistan. Three models are carefully studied using limited (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) (moving backwards): the hit/effect of 
 T &amp; V on the number of extension contacts with farmers; the effect of extension contact on farmers' knowledge of 
 wheat technology; and the hit/effect ofT &amp; V on the adoption of improved wheat technology. The first model carefully studies 
 the hit/effect of T &amp; V on the amount of extension contact and the last thing just mentioned two models carefully study the effect on the amount. 
 and quality of extension contact. It is decided that T &amp; V has increased the amount but not the quality of 
 extension contact and this, in turn, has increased farmers' knowledge and adoption of technology. However, the 
 overall hits/effects have been small relative to those watched/followed in a almost the same  area in India. 
 
 Introduction 
 After a period in the 1960s and 1970s of (lowering in number/getting worse) interest in the role of extension in farming-based development, investment in extension systems increased very much in the 1980s. Much 
 of this increase was due to efforts by the World 
 Bank to redo extension systems using the 
 Training and Visit System (T &amp; V). The T &amp; V 
 system designed by Benor and others (1984) (fought for/pleaded for) a more controlled/punished and focused approach 
 * Corresponding authors. 
 Present address of Dr. Hussain: PATA Project, P.O. Box 14, 
 Mingora, Saidu Sharif, N.W.F.P., Pakistan. Tel. 536-5692. Fax 
 536-4259. 
 1 
 
 to extension through the following measures: (a) 
 removal of non-extension duties (e.g., supply of 
 inputs and collection of farming-based statistics) so 
 that village-level extension agents can focus on 
 information move (from one place to another); (b) increased extensionfarmer contact through a well-programmed 
 schedule of 2-weekly visits, often with 
 an increase in the ratio of extension workers to 
 farmers; (c) use of 'contact' farmers with close 
 links to extension and who are responsible for 
 passing extension messages to other farmers; (d) 
 increased training of village extension workers 
 through regularly managed and did/done courses; and (e) close 
 links between extension and research to secure/make sure of 
 the relevance of extension messages to farmers' 
 needs. 
 
 0169-5150/94/$07.00 © 1994 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
 SSDI 0 169-5150(93 )E0027 -K 
 
 40 
 
 S.S. Hussain et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 Although the T &amp; V system has been done in over 40 countries, including the major 
 countries of Asia and Africa, there has been 
 surprisingly little difficult/strict/high quality test of its effectiveness. Some (not numbers-based) tests have questioned the approach ofT &amp; V as being 'top down' 
 and missing a means for organizing farmers to 
 express their own demands for extension guidance 
 (e.g., Axinn, 1988; Roling, 1988). Others have 
 noted problems in (putting into) use of T &amp; V, especially the choice of contact farmers (Moore, 
 1984), poor research-extension links (Chapman, 
 1988; Goodell, 1983), and weak linkages with 
 farmers at the field level (Dejene, 1989). In other 
 cases, the information content of extension messages given to contact farmers is not spread around 
 to close-by farmers in the area (Luhe, 1991). 
 A few studies have made a somewhat more 
 (numbers-based) test of the hits/effects of T &amp; V, 
 noting improvement in the number of extension 
 contacts (e.g., Dejene, 1989) and, sometimes, 
 increases in technology adoption and yields (Due 
 et al., 1987). However, none of these studies has 
 tried to separate the effects of extension from 
 the effects of other factors that may influence 
 extension contact and adoption, 1 or even to compare changes in technology adoption or working well with the situation that might have won 
 without (putting into) use of the T &amp; V 
 system. 
 Only one study has made a difficult/strict/high quality (numbers-based) analysis of the hits/effects of T &amp; V extension by 
 comparing the degree of farmer-extension contact and farmers' knowledge and working well in 
 two (next to) areas of northern India - one area 
 with 4 years of experience with the T &amp; V system, 
 and one area using the usual system of extension (Feder, Slade and Sundaram, 1986; Feder, 
 Lau and Slade, 1985; Feder and Slade, 1986; 
 from now on together referred to as F &amp;S). That 
 study decided that the T &amp; V system increased 
 extension contact and led to more fast diffusion 
 
 1 In fact, the usual approach has been to relate extension 
 contact to adoption or yields, without (thinking about/when one thinks about) the fact that 
 farmers with extension contacts are often not representative 
 farmers in terms of education, farm size, etc. 
 
 of knowledge in the area served by the T &amp; V 
 extension approach relative to the (next to) nonT &amp; V area. F &amp; S guessed an increase of at least 
 7% in wheat working well as a result of T &amp; V 
 extension. 
 The goal of this paper is to provide further (numbers-based) (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the hits/effects ofT &amp; V 
 extension from the Punjab of Pakistan in an watered cropping system in the after-Green Revolution phase of development. The setting is quite 
 almost the same  agroclimatically to the area studied by 
 F &amp; S in northern India and the cropping system 
 also focusses on wheat. Also, as in northern India, the T &amp; V extension approach was first introduced in the Pakistan Punjab in 1979. Early indications, however, suggest that T &amp; V extension 
 was not successful in increasing farmer contact, 
 adoption rates or yields in the Pakistan Punjab 
 (Khan et al. 1984). Data for the analysis of this paper provide a somewhat longer period for test of the hits/effects of T &amp; V. 
 
 2. Model and data sources 
 T &amp; V extension may affect both the amount 
 and quality of extension guidance, which in turn 
 affect farmers' technical knowledge and skills to 
 directly increase working well (through higher 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in using existing inputs) or to 
 indirectly increase working well (through changes 
 in input levels, (in other words), higher allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something)). 
 At the same time, the amount and quality of 
 extension guidance should not be seen as being 
 completely (coming from the outside of something); rather these (numbers that change/things that change) may 
 themselves be a function of farmers' (features/ qualities/ traits), especially education, farm size, (set of machines), etc., which decide/figure out demand for extension 
 guidance. Analysis of all these possible influences 
 on working well is a complex job. In this paper, 
 our data set enables an analysis of (a) (things that decide other things) of the amount of extension contact, (b) 
 (things that decide other things) of farmers' technical knowledge, 
 and (c) (things that decide other things) of the adoption of improved 
 technology being recommended by the extension 
 service. Unlike F &amp; S we are unable to test the 
 effects ofT &amp; V on working well, since the data set 
 employed was designed to measure the factors 
 
 S.S. Hussain et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 influencing the diffusion of new wheat technologies. However, in the farming systems under study, 
 adoption of new technologies and practices being 
 recommended by the extension service is carefully thought about/believed a necessary condition for increasing working well (Hussain, 1989). 2 
 A further major issue in measuring the hit/effect 
 of T &amp; V is to identify what would have happened 
 without T &amp; V. In this paper, we follow 
 the approach employed by F &amp;S of choosing touching, (compared to other things) (group of things that are all pretty much the same) areas in the same 
 agroclimatic zone, in which T &amp; V extension has 
 been practiced only in part of the area. This is 
 helped in the Pakistan Punjab, since T &amp; V 
 was introduced in only a few districts as a pilot 
 project. Because of this we examine the two major cropping systems in the Punjab - rice-wheat and 
 cotton-wheat. In each system, we have a random 
 sample of about 50 farmers in one district where 
 T &amp; V has been practiced for 6 years, and a random sample of about 100 farmers in (next to) 
 districts in the same cropping system in which 
 T &amp; V has not been practiced. We recognize that 
 this method assumes that (a) the close-by 
 districts are agroclimatically (group of things that are all pretty much the same), and 
 (b) the effects of T &amp; V do not 'spill over' into 
 close-by districts. Relating to/connected to the first 
 idea (you think is true), cropping system is a practical substitute 
 for agroclimatic zone; because of this areas with almost the same 
 cropping systems should also be agroclimatically 
 almost the same. Relating to/connected to the second idea (you think is true), 
 we, like F &amp;S, believe it is unlikely that significant 
 spillovers of extension information would happen 
 from one district to the next. 
 Overall we have a sample of 295 farmers, 101 
 of which are in T &amp; V districts. For each 
 farmer, described/explained data were collected for the 1986 
 crop season on extension contact, knowledge of 
 
 2 
 
 It would also be desirable to test the hits/effects of extension 
 
 for all major crops in the surveyed cropping systems. In the 
 surveyed area covered in this study, cotton, rice, maize and 
 sugar-cane are the other major crops. We have no reason to 
 expect the effects of extension on the other crops to be 
 greater than for wheat, especially since wheat is the major 
 winter crop and also a priority crop for research and extension, given its very important role in Pakistan's food security. 
 
 41 
 
 extension recommendations, technical knowledge 
 with respect to modern inputs (e.g., improved 
 varieties, (material that makes plants grow better)s and herbicides), and farmers' 
 adoption of these practices. Except for extension 
 contact, all the data relate to knowledge and use 
 of technology for wheat, a major crop covering 
 90% of cropped area in the winter season and a 
 crop grown by all farmers in the sample. The 
 selection of wheat as the focus of this study also 
 enables comparisons with F &amp; S, who studied 
 wheat technology and working well also. 
 From this data set we can specify a few models that guess the amount and quality of extension guidance and its hits/effects: 
 2.1. Amount of extension contact 
 Eq. (1) models (numbers that change/things that change) influencing extension 
 contact: 
 EXT= f(EDUC, AGE, FSIZE, ROAD, TANDY) 
 
 (1) 
 
 where EXT is a binary (number or thing that changes) (0, 1) for extension 
 contact in the year coming before the survey, EDUC 
 the number of years of formal education, AGE 
 farmer's age (years), FSIZE farm size (ha), ROAD 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) (0, 1) if village is on a sealed 
 road, and TANDY dummy (number or thing that changes) (0, 1) for a 
 T &amp; V district. This equation follows the standard 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) that larger and more educated farmers will gain higher benefits from improved information (Feder and Slade, 1986) and that supply 
 of extension guidance will be easier or cost less for 
 farmers in (easy to get to, use, or understand) villages and for educated 
 farmers. We also guess that extension contact is more (existing all over a large area) in T &amp; V districts. This 
 equation then measures the effect of T &amp; V on 
 the amount of extension guidance. Since EXT is a 
 binary (number or thing that changes), this equation is guessed as a 
 logit model. 
 2.2. Effect of extension contact on knowledge of 
 recommended technology 
 Eq. (2) models (numbers that change/things that change) influencing farmers' 
 technical knowledge: 
 KNOWSCOR = f(EDUC, FSIZE, AGE, ROAD, RADIO, 
 TANDY,EXT,TANDY*EXT) 
 
 (2) 
 
 42 
 
 S.S. Hussain eta/./ Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 where KNowscoR represents an index of farmers' 
 knowledge of new wheat technology (defined below), and RADIO is a dummy (number or thing that changes) (0, 1) if the 
 farmer has listened to an extension-oriented program on the radio. This (number or thing that changes) represents an 
 different information source: the same radio 
 extension program is available in both T &amp; V and 
 non-T &amp; V areas. Other (numbers that change/things that change) are as defined 
 (before that/before now). 
 The extension (numbers that change/things that change) EXT, TANDY and 
 TANDY* EXT were included in two (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required): 
 - TANDY included alone measures possible effects of T &amp; V on both the amount and quality 
 of extension guidance for all farmers in T &amp; V 
 districts relative to farmers in non-T &amp; V districts. 
 - EXT and TANDY* EXT measure the effects of 
 the amount and quality of extension guidance, 
 (match up each pair of items in order). TANDY* EXT tests whether farmers 
 in T &amp; V areas who have extension contact 
 receive higher quality extension guidance than 
 farmers in non-T &amp; V districts. 
 Note that in this equation the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) 
 lies in a bounded range (e.g., zero to a specific 
 number depending upon the highest knowledge score); this way a two-tailed Tobit moving backward is 
 applied. 
 2.3. Adoption of recommended technology 
 
 Finally, Eq. (3) models (numbers that change/things that change) influencing 
 technology adoption. 
 ADOPTi =f(EDUC, FSIZE, AGE, ROAD, RADIO, 
 TANDY,EXT,TANDY*EXT) 
 (3) 
 where ADOPTi is a (number or thing that changes) measuring adoption/ 
 non-adoption of improved practice i or the level 
 of improved practice i, and other (numbers that change/things that change) are as 
 (before that/before now) specified. 
 The analysis thinks about/believes the adoption of three 
 practices widely (helped increase/showed in a good way) by extension - new 
 wheat varieties, use of phosphorus, and chemical 
 weed control. Although farmers in the study areas have had 15-20 years of experience with 
 modern wheat varieties introduced with the 
 Green Revolution, the disease resistance of these 
 varieties can break down over time, and research 
 and extension were (helping increase/showing in a good way) newer disease-resistant varieties released in the previous 5 years 
 to replace the older varieties. Also, farmers 
 
 have (large/relatively large) experience with using nitrogenous (material that makes plants grow better)s, but adoption of phosphatic (material that makes plants grow better)s began only after about 1975. Most farmers 
 now use phosphatic (material that makes plants grow better)s, and the analysis of 
 adoption provides (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the effects of extension in the later stages of adoption of a practice. Finally, weeds have become a major factor 
 limiting wheat yields, and both extension and the 
 (people and businesses that are not part of the government) are (helping increase/showing in a good way) use of chemical weed 
 control. However, adoption of herbicides is in the 
 early stages, with only about 10% of surveyed 
 farmers using herbicides. Because of this we carefully study 
 adoption in three different situations - replacement of an already adopted practice with a 
 newer practice (variety), the later stages of adoption of a new practice (phosphatic (material that makes plants grow better)), and 
 the early stages of adoption of a new practice 
 (herbicide). 
 To represent adoption of these practices, 
 ADOPT may be a binary (number or thing that changes) (0, 1) (e.g., for 
 use of a new variety) in which case a logit model 
 is employed, or it may lie in a bounded range 
 (e.g., zero to any level of phosphorus use) in 
 which case a Tobit model is most appropriate. 
 The above (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) for Eqs. (1)-(3) suggest 
 partially recursive models. Certain (numbers that change/things that change) (e.g., 
 EDUC and TANDY) are assumed to affect extension 
 contact (ExT), and EXT in combination with other 
 factors is assumed to affect farmers' knowledge 
 (KNowscoR) and adoption (ADOPT). The ideas (you think are true) of Least Squares guess are obviously 
 appropriate for Eq. (1). However, some (detailed description of exactly what is required) bias might be expected by guessing Eqs. (2) 
 and (3) in the present form without any restrictions on the covariance matrix (Judge et al., 1982). 
 This way the effect of extension on knowledge and 
 adoption might be underestimated. 
 3. Scientific results 
 
 Before presenting results of the guessed 
 models, it is worth noting some background information on the area analysed. The survey area 
 covering the major cropping systems of the Punjab is mainly watered by narrow waterway and is carefully thought about/believed 
 to be one of the most productive areas of 
 Pakistan. Wheat is the major winter crop and is 
 grown under two cropping systems: rice-wheat 
 
 S.S. Hussain et al. 1Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 43 
 
 Table 1 
 Results of Tobit moving backward for factors affecting farmers' technical knowledge in the Punjab, Pakistan 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 CONSTANT 
 EDUC 
 LNFSIZE 
 LNAGE 
 ROAD 
 RADIO 
 TANDY 
 
 KNOWSCORE 
 Model2 
 
 Modell 
 
 Model2 
 
 Modell 
 
 Model2 
 
 0.98 *** 
 (1.68) 
 0.92 * 
 (5.34) 
 0.10 
 (1.35) 
 0.05 
 (0.32) 
 -0.06 
 (- 0.38) 
 0.16 * * 
 (2.22) 
 -0.13 
 (-0.78) 
 
 1.11 *** 
 (1.92) 
 0.84 * 
 (4.70) 
 0.04 
 (0.48) 
 0.01 
 (0.04) 
 -0.07 
 ( -0.40) 
 0.14 ** 
 (1.97) 
 
 0.62 
 (1.42) 
 0.51 * 
 (3.88) 
 0.01 
 (0.20) 
 0.06 
 (0.51) 
 0.07 
 (0.48) 
 0.12 *** 
 (1.67) 
 -0.06 
 ( -0.44) 
 
 0.67 
 (1.56) 
 0.47 * 
 (3.54) 
 -0.02 
 ( -0.35) 
 0.04 
 (0.34) 
 0.06 
 (0.48) 
 0.11 
 (1.58) 
 
 -0.45 
 ( -1.05) 
 0.78 * 
 (5.01) 
 0.13 *** 
 (1.85) 
 0.05 
 (0.45) 
 -0.15 
 (0.98) 
 0.04 
 (0.49) 
 -0.11 
 (- 0.75) 
 
 -0.32 
 ( -0.76) 
 0.72 * 
 (4.49) 
 0.08 
 (1.09) 
 0.01 
 (0.12) 
 -0.16 
 (1.04) 
 0.03 
 (0.30) 
 
 EXT 
 TANDV*EXT 
 Chi-squared 
 n 
 
 KNOWTECH 
 
 KNOWREC 
 
 Model 1 
 
 53.1 * 
 295 
 
 0.70 * 
 (3.13) 
 0.41 
 ( -1.35) 
 63.2 * 
 295 
 
 24.9 * 
 295 
 
 0.32 
 (1.58) 
 -0.06 
 ( -0.23) 
 29.4 * 
 295 
 
 49.0 * 
 295 
 
 0.57 * 
 (3.00) 
 -0.50 *** 
 ( -1.94) 
 60.0 * 
 295 
 
 *, * * and * * * point to/show (meaningful numbers) at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, (match up each pair of items in order). Figures in parentheses are t-values. 
 
 and cotton-wheat. Even after 6 years of T &amp; V 
 extension, the amount of extension contact was 
 still low in the T &amp; V districts. Only 43% and 24% 
 of farmers in the T &amp; V districts in each cropping 
 system had had any contact with extension in the 
 year before the survey. Very differently, Feder, Slade 
 and Sundaram (1986) found 65% of farmers in 
 T &amp; V areas of northern India had had contact 
 with extension in the month before the survey. 
 Also, the level of farmers' technical knowledge in the Pakistan Punjab is (compared to other things) low. 
 Only half of farmers in T &amp; V districts had any 
 knowledge of new varieties or could distinguish 
 (material that makes plants grow better) (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.); less than 7% could name a 
 recommended herbicide. Finally, only 41% and 
 9% of farmers in T &amp; V districts had adopted 
 newer wheat varieties and herbicides, (match up each pair of items in order). Most farmers (80%) had adopted phosphatic (material that makes plants grow better)s but at less than half of the 
 recommended dose. These levels of knowledge 
 and adoption are much lower than similar figures for India reported by F &amp; S. 
 Moving backward results of the guessed models for 
 the amount and quality of extension guidance and 
 its hit/effect are presented below. We at first ran 
 all (moving backwards) separately for each cropping sys- 
 
 tern. There were some differences in results between the two cropping systems, but the major 
 ends/end results presented below hold for both cropping systems, which for simpleness of presentation 
 are combined in the following analysis. 
 Because there are no standard goodness of fit 
 tests for Logit, Probit and Tobit models, we figure out/calculate  chi-squared statistics to test the combined effects 
 of the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)). The chi-squared 
 values for most of the models are highly significant. 
 
 3.1. Amount of extension contact 
 The logit moving backward results for factors affecting the amount of extension contact are given in 
 the following equation: 3 
 EXT= -4.38+ 1.05 EDUC+0.35 LNAGE+0.56 LNFSIZE 
 ( -3.95) * (3.35) * 
 (1.32) 
 (3.66) * 
 + 0.48 ROAD + 0. 75 TANDV (Chi-squared = 40.38 * ) ( 4) 
 (1.41) 
 
 (2.43) * 
 
 3 *, * * and * * * point to/show (meaningful numbers) at the 1%, 
 5%, and 10% levels, (match up each pair of items in order). t-values are given in parentheses. 
 
 44 
 
 S.S. Hussain et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 where LNAGE and LNFSIZE are the logarithm of 
 AGE and FSIZE, (match up each pair of items in order). 4 
 The results point to/show that farmers' education 
 (Enuc) and farm size (LNFSIZE) had a positive and 
 highly significant effect on the amount of extension contact. These results are agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the 
 F &amp;S findings for the Indian Punjab that larger 
 and more educated farmers have better access to 
 improved information (e.g., extension). T &amp; V extension also had a positive and (meaningful numbers) effect on the amount of extension contact. 
 More regular visits and greater extension contacts 
 have also been reported under the T &amp; V system 
 in Sri Skinnya (Samarsingh et al., 1988). Other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) such as ROAD had the expected positive 
 effect on the chance of extension contact, but 
 the effects were not significant. 
 3.2. Knowledge of recommended technology 
 
 Increased extension contact may not be very 
 useful unless it improves farmers' knowledge of 
 new technology leading to higher working well. 
 Table 1 shows Tobit moving backward results for factors 
 affecting farmers' knowledge as measured by a 
 score of farmers' correct answers to a series of 
 questions on improved wheat technology (KNowscaR). A total of six knowledge (numbers that change/things that change) were 
 linearly grouped to form the knowledge score 
 (number or thing that changes). These included farmer's knowledge of 
 (1) names of new wheat varieties, (2) recommended doses of (material that makes plants grow better)s, (3) (material that makes plants grow better) nutrient 
 composition, (4) (material that makes plants grow better) nutrient carry-over effects, (5) herbicide names and doses and (6) the 
 appropriate herbicides for different weed species. 
 Weights of 1 and 0 were given to correct and 
 wrong answers to these six questions, (match up each pair of items in order), and KNowscoR is then the total score with 
 a possible range from 0 (wrong answers to all 
 questions) to 6 (correct answers for all questions). 
 Model 1 measures possible overall effects of 
 T &amp; V and Model 2 measures the effect of both 
 amount as well as quality of extension guidance for 
 4 We have specified log changes of the continuous 
 (numbers that change/things that change) (e.g., FSIZE and AGE) in order to avoid the heteroscedasticity problem usually watched/followed in linear models 
 (Maddala, 1983). 
 
 those farmers who have contact with extension. 
 T &amp; V extension appeared to have no effect on 
 farmers' knowledge of new technology for farmers as a whole in T &amp; V districts (column 1 of 
 Table 1). On the other hand, those farmers with 
 extension contact (ExT) had a much higher 
 knowledge score, even after allowing for their 
 better educational status (Model 2). The interaction of T &amp; V with extension contact was (related to numbers) non-significant and negative, suggesting no 
 effect of T &amp; V on quality of extension guidance. 
 Other (numbers that change/things that change) which have positive and (related to numbers) highly significant effects on farmers' knowledge score are Enuc (level of formal education) 
 and RADIO (farmer listens to an extension-oriented radio program). 5 
 We also sub-divided the (number or thing that changes) for knowledge score, KNowscoR, into two parts/pieces: 
 knowledge of recommendations (KNOWREc) and 
 general technical knowledge (KNOWTECH). The 
 KNOWREC (number or thing that changes) represents the possible influence of extension in a communications role (e.g., 
 whether the farmer knows the (material that makes plants grow better) dose recommended by the extension system), while the 
 KNOWTECH (number or thing that changes) represents the effects of extension in an educational role (i.e., whether the 
 farmer understands the nutrient_ composition of 
 different commercial (material that makes plants grow better) products or the 
 possible carry-over effects of different (material that makes plants grow better) 
 (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) from one season to the next). In both 
 cases, the KNOWREC and KNOWTECH (numbers that change/things that change) have 
 a possible value range from 0 to 3. 6 It was 
 guessed that T &amp; V extension has focused on extension in a communications rather than 
 educational role (Byerlee, 1987). In fact, extension contact in Model 2 showed a positive and 
 
 5 RADIO might be influenced by EDUC and TANDY in which 
 case the models of Eqs. (2) and (3) may be mis-specified. This way 
 (moving backwards) were run for both models with and without the 
 including in something of the changeable RADIO, but there was no significant 
 effect on the ends/end results. 
 6 The KNOWREC (number or thing that changes) was built from farmers' answers to questions about names of new varieties, (material that makes plants grow better) 
 recommendations, and types and doses of herbicides. The 
 KNOWTECH (number or thing that changes) was based on questions (related to/looking at/thinking about) farmers' 
 knowledge of (material that makes plants grow better) nutrient composition, possible carryover effects of different (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.), and knowledge of different 
 types of herbicides and their effects on different weed species. 
 
 S. S. Hussain et al. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (I 994) 39-47 
 
 45 
 
 Table 2 
 Moving backward results for factors affecting adoption of recommended technologies in Punjab, Pakistan 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Use of new variety 
 Modell 
 -1.44 *** 
 ( -1.69) 
 0.57 ** 
 (2.19) 
 0.25 * * 
 (2.01) 
 0.22 
 (1.03) 
 -0.19 
 ( -0.68) 
 0.12 
 (0.62) 
 -0.43 *** 
 ( -1.63) 
 
 EDUC 
 LNFSIZE 
 LNAGE 
 ROAD 
 RADIO 
 TANDY 
 EXT 
 TANDV*EXT 
 
 Chi-squared 
 n 
 
 *, * * 
 
 and 
 
 *** 
 
 17.2 
 295 
 
 * 
 
 Model2 
 
 Modell 
 
 (Logit) 
 CONSTANT 
 
 Level of phosphorus 
 
 Use of herbicide 
 Model2 
 
 Modell 
 
 (Logit) 
 -1.73 ** 
 ( -2.03) 
 0.68 * 
 (2.56) 
 0.26 ** 
 (2.01) 
 0.25 
 (1.18) 
 -0.07 
 ( -0.25) 
 0.19 
 (0.92) 
 
 -0.50 
 ( -1.35) 
 0.33 
 (0.69) 
 16.3 * * 
 295 
 
 -12.18 * 
 ( -3.66) 
 1.58 * 
 (2.64) 
 0.22 
 (0.89) 
 1.95 * 
 (2.46) 
 1.45 * 
 (2.78) 
 0.34 
 (0.67) 
 0.87 *** 
 (1.66) 
 
 -12.70 * 
 ( -3.64) 
 1.26 * * 
 (2.04) 
 -0.04 
 (0.15) 
 2.15 * 
 (2.55) 
 1.20 * 
 (2.34) 
 0.19 
 (0.37) 
 
 Model2 
 (Tobit) 
 
 62.22 * 
 (4.28) 
 
 O.Dl 
 (0.00) 
 2.38 
 (1.50) 
 -3.43 
 ( -0.91) 
 1.49 
 (0.40) 
 3.42 
 (1.27) 
 -5.32 
 ( -1.52) 
 
 1.60 * 
 (2.58) 
 0.38 
 (0.57) 
 39.2 * 
 295 
 
 45.2 
 295 
 
 * 
 
 61.94 * 
 (4.06) 
 -0.25 
 ( -0.07) 
 1.53 
 (0.93) 
 -3.76 
 (- 0.95) 
 2.41 
 (0.68) 
 3.62 
 (1.32) 
 
 6.38 
 (1.03) 
 -5.70 
 ( -0.78) 
 11.9 *** 
 295 
 
 11.2 
 295 
 
 point to/show (meaningful numbers) at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, (match up each pair of items in order). Figures in parentheses are t-values. 
 
 (meaningful numbers) hit/effect on farmers' technical knowledge (KNOWTECH) but had no significant 
 hit/effect on farmers' knowledge of recommendations (KNOWREc). These results suggest that extension has more of an educational role. The fact 
 that the coefficients for TANDY * EXT were in 
 both cases negative adds support to the idea that 
 T &amp; V has not improved the quality of extension 
 guidance; rather the effects of T &amp; V are the result 
 only of increased amount of extension contact. 
 The most important factor in increasing farmers' knowledge (both knowledge of recommendations and technical knowledge) was the educational level of farmers. The coefficient for education (EDuc) is positive and (related to numbers) highly significant in all models, supporting (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from 
 other studies that formal education plays an important role in increasing farmers' knowledge 
 about new farming-based technologies (Lockheed et 
 al., 1980). 
 
 3.3. Adoption of recommended technology 
 Finally, we examined factors affecting the 
 adoption of the three (related to computers and science) parts/pieces 
 being (helped increase/showed in a good way) by extension. Results of the guessed Logit and Tobit models are presented in 
 Table 2. Overall extension contact (measured by 
 EXT) has a significant effect on adoption of chemical weed control, but not on use of new varieties 
 or phosphorus (material that makes plants grow better). T &amp; V extension may 
 have some effect on the overall adoption of 
 chemical weed control as shown by the positive 
 coefficient for TANDY in model 1 (significant at 
 the 10% level); in contrast the effects of T &amp; V for 
 new varieties and phosphorus use tends to be 
 negative. Chemical weed control is the newest 
 technology and is still at an early stage of adoption, and this may explain the importance of 
 extension contact in the adoption of this technology. However, as in the case of the effects of 
 
 46 
 
 S.S. Hussain et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 extension on knowledge score there is no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that the T &amp; V system increases the quality 
 of extension guidance. 
 Other important ((related to numbers) significant) (numbers that change/things that change) affecting adoption are education, farm size 
 and age of the person who responded. Education improves/increases adoption of improved varieties and 
 herbicides, again focusing on the role of formal 
 education in using new technology. Also, farm 
 size has an overall good effect on the adoption of new technology, especially new varieties, 
 possibly reflecting the greater ability of larger 
 farmers to experiment with new ways of doing things. However, extension radio programs have no effect on 
 adoption, (even though there is the existence of) their seen/obvious positive effect 
 on farmers' knowledge. As expected, none of 
 these (numbers that change/things that change) influences adoption of phosphatic 
 (material that makes plants grow better), which is in the late stage of adoption. 
 
 4. Why is T&amp;V less effective in Pakistan? 
 
 The results suggest that although T &amp; V extension has increased the amount of extension guidance, it has not been very effective relative to 
 traditional extension in increasing farmers' technical knowledge or the rate of adoption of new 
 technology - that is, the quality of extension 
 guidance has not improved with introduction of 
 T &amp; V. These results contrast with those of F &amp; S 
 in a similar area of India. We guess 
 that there are two major reasons for the seen/obvious 
 lack of hit/effect of T &amp; V on extension quality in 
 Pakistan. First, there were problems of starting the T &amp; V system as planned. For example, Khan et al. (1984) found that 20% of the 
 contact farmers in the T &amp; V area did not even 
 recognize that they were in fact contact farmers 
 and so the information flow of extension messages often stopped at the contact farmer. Also, 
 communication between research and extension 
 in the T &amp; V target area is weak. The (not being there; not being present) of a 
 research-extension coordinator may be one reason for this lack of planned linkage, as noted in 
 other T &amp; V projects (Dejene, 1989). 
 Second, because an effective (able to change and get better) research 
 program is missing extension, messages are often 
 inappropriate to farmers' facts or conditions (that surround someone). Adap- 
 
 tive research in the area is usually targeted for 
 clearly stated/particular valuable things and doesn't have a farming systems 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Recommendations developed by 
 (able to change and get better) research are usually not locationspecific. Rather, they are made for a wide area 
 without taking into account the (large/relatively large) (quality of changing over time or at different places) in the (related to how much money and power people have) and agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 facts or conditions that surround farmers in what appears at first 
 to be a (compared to other things) (group of things that are all pretty much the same) watered (surrounding conditions). For example, wheat produces /gives up are low in part 
 because of an increasing habit/desire to plant wheat 
 late in both the rice-wheat and cotton-wheat 
 cropping systems due to late collecting of the 
 previous crop. Although it is (money-based)/cheaply clear to trade-off wheat yields in this way, recommendations for (material that makes plants grow better) use and crop-watering/rinsing with water are 
 made assuming that the crop is planted on time 
 (Byerlee, Akhter and Hobbs, 1987). Because of this a much 
 stronger program of (able to change and get better) research put into use with a farming systems (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) and 
 closely linked to extension is needed in order to 
 develop more appropriate extension messages .. 
 
 5. Ends/end results 
 Although the T &amp; V extension system has been 
 widely (helped increase/showed in a good way) in many countries, it has been 
 subject to little difficult/strict/high quality test. The results 
 presented in this paper for the Pakistan Punjab 
 point to/show that T &amp; V, after 7 years of experience, 
 had had less impact than people thought on farmers' 
 technical knowledge or on adoption of improved 
 practices. The T &amp; V system does seem to have 
 increased the amount of extension contact, probably because the ratio of extension agents to 
 farmers has been increased in the T &amp; V districts 
 carefully studied. Those farmers who have more extension contact do tend to have better technical 
 knowledge and have also adopted chemical weed 
 control earlier. However, T &amp; V has not had any 
 effect on the quality of extension contact. Since a 
 major goal of the T &amp; V system is to increase 
 the quality of extension guidance and to make extension messages more widely known through the 
 contact-farmer approach, our results do not support the ends/end results of Feder and Slade (1986) on 
 
 S.S. Hussain et al. /Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 39-47 
 
 the positive effects of T &amp; V in a almost the same  watered 
 area in India. 7 In our experience, the limited 
 success of T &amp; V in Pakistan reflects problems of 
 putting into use (for example, a small proportion 
 of farmers had contact with extension, relative to 
 India), as well as lack of (able to change and get better) research to 
 make recommendations more related to farmers. 
 (even though there is the existence of) the seen/obvious lack of hit/effect of T &amp; V 
 extension watched/followed in this study, the analysis does 
 provide interesting results on the effects of other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) on farmers' extension contact, technical 
 knowledge and adoption. Education and farm 
 size are more important (numbers that change/things that change) than T &amp; V in 
 influencing extension contact, underlining the 
 well-known bias of extension toward improveducated and richer farmers. Farmers' educational level, measured in terms of years of formal 
 education, also has a regularly large and significant effect on farmers' technical knowledge and 
 adoption. Radio programs also appear to be partly 
 effective as an extension device. Other (numbers that change/things that change) 
 such as age and access to a good road do not 
 appear directly to affect farmers' technical knowledge and adoption, once differences in education 
 and extension contact have been taken into account. These results reinforce the importance of 
 investment in formal education in increasing working well in after-Green Revolution farming 
 (Lockheed et al. 1980; Phillips, 1987). 
 
 6. References 
 Axinn, G.H. (1988) T&amp;V (Sad and Vain) extension? Interpaks Interchange, 5(3): 6. 
 Benor, D., Harrison, J.Q. and Baxter, M. (1984) Farming-based 
 extension: The Training and Visiting system. World Bank, 
 Washington, DC. 
 Byerlee, D. (1987) Maintaining the speed and power in after-Green 
 Revolution farming: a micro-level (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) from 
 Asia. MSU Int. Dev. Pap. 10, Michigan State University, 
 East Lansing, MI. 
 
 However, a more complete test in Pakistan would 
 require measuring differences in working well through a production function approach; unfortunately a full (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 of the production function is not possible with the data at 
 hand. 
 7 
 
 47 
 
 Byerlee, D., Akhter, M.R. and Hobbs, P. (1987) (causing agreement with) 
 conflicts in (one after the other) double cropping patterns through 
 plant breeding: the example of cotton and wheat in Pakistan's Punjab. Agric. Syst., 24: 291-304. 
 Chapman, N. (1988) The hit/effect of T and V extension in 
 Somalia. In: Training and Visit Extension in Practice, 
 edited by J. Howell. Occas. Pap. 8, Farming-based Management Unit, Across the ocean Development Institute, London. 
 Dejene, A (1989) The Training and Visit farming-based extension in rainfed farming: Lessons from Ethiopia. World 
 Dev., 17; 1647-1659. 
 Due, J.M., Naftali, M. and Malone, V. (1987) Does the T&amp;V 
 system reach female-headed families? Some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from 
 Tanzania. Agric. Adm. Ext., 26: 209-217. 
 Feder, G., Lau, L.J. and Slade, R.H. (1985) The hit/effect of 
 farming-based extension: a case study of the Training and 
 Visit system in Haryana, India. Staff Work. Pap. 756, 
 World Bank, Washington, DC. 
 Feder, G. and Slade, R. (1986) The hit/effect of farming-based 
 extension: the Training and Visit system in India. World 
 Bank Research (person who watches something), 1(2): 139-161. 
 Feder, G., Slade, R.H. and Sundaram, A.K. (1986) The Training and Visit extension system: an analysis of operations 
 and produces. Agric. Adm. 21: 33-59. 
 Goodell, G.E. (1983) Improving managers' (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) concerning extension, training and research relevance at the 
 local level: new approaches and findings from Southeast 
 Asia. Agric. Adm., 13: 39-55. 
 Judge, G.G., Hill, R.C., Griffiths, W.E., Lutkepohl, H. and 
 Lee, T.C. (1982) Introduction to the Explanation and Practice 
 of Econometrics. Wiley, New York. 
 Khan, M.J., Sharif, M. and Sarwar, M. (1984) Watching and 
 test of Training and Visit system of farming-based 
 extension in Punjab, Pakistan. Pub!. 212, Punjab Money-based 
 Research Institute, Lahore, Pakistan. 
 Lockheed, M.E., Jamison, D.J. and Lau, L.J. (1980) Farmer 
 education and farm (wasting very little while working or producing something): a survey. Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). 
 Change, 29: 37-76. 
 Lube, N. (1991) Move (from one place to another) of technology or trade-related trade? The 
 (away from cities) extension service in the Atlantic Area of control/area of land of Benin as 
 a market for (workingto reach agreement/getting through) useful things/valuable supplies. Q. J. Int. Agric., 30: 
 249-263. 
 Maddala, G.S. (1983) Limited dependent and (not numbers-based) (numbers that change/things that change) in econometrics. Econometric Soc. Monogr. 3, Cambridge University Press, UK. 
 Moore, M. (1984) Institutional development, the World Bank, 
 and India's new Farming-based Extension Programme. J. 
 Dev. Stud., 20: 303-317. 
 Phillips, J.M. (1987) A comment on farmer education and 
 farm (wasting very little while working or producing something): a survey. Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 35: 
 637-644. 
 Roling, N. (1988) Extension science: Information systems in 
 farming-based development. Wye Studies in Farming-based and 
 (away from cities) Development, Cambridge University Press, UK. 
 Samarsingh, G.S.H.M., Lawrence, L.D., Gartin, S.A. and 
 Odell, K.S. (1988) T&amp;V system in Sri Skinnya: Whether it 
 has produced the needed or valuable things? J. Ext. Syst., 1: 75-79. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
