 Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 Links between money-based (easing government rules) and (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply 
 worsening in the developing areas 
 Edward B. Barbieraˆ--,1 
 Department of (surrounding conditions), Centre for (surrounding conditions) and Development Money flow, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper examines (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the effects of money-based (easing government rules) and (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) on (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening in 
 developing countries. The principal useful thing/valuable supply effects of concern are processes of land use change leading to forestland (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), worsening and (chopping down trees). The main (popular things/general ways things are going) in (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) of interest are trade (easing government rules) and (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide 
 changes in developing countries that have 'opened up' the agroindustrial parts/areas, this way increasing their export-orientation. Such 
 changes have clearly helped/encouraged agroindustrialization, (away from cities) development and money-based growth, but there is also concern that 
 there may be direct and indirect hits/effects on (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening. The direct hits/effects may happen as increased farming-based 
 activity leads to (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) of forests and increased land worsening from 'unsustainable' production methods. However, 
 there may also be indirect effects if agroindustrial development displaces landless, near-landless and (away from cities) poor generally, 
 who then move to not important farming-based lands and forest edge of something/unexplored area areas. This paper explores these direct and indirect 
 effects of (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) and agroindustrialization on (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening both generally, plus through examining case 
 study (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). The paper focuses in particular on the examples of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something), trade (easing government rules) and farming-based 
 development in Ghana, and maize part/area (easing government rules) in Mexico under North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). 
 Â© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: O1; Q0 
 Keywords: (chopping down trees); Money-based (easing government rules); Ghana; Mexico; (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening; (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Since their initial putting into use in the early 1980s, 
 an important long-term goal of (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide 
 and trade (easing government rules) changes in developing countries has been to (give out things in a different way) useful things/valuable supplies to key part/area, 
 such as farming and manufacturing, to make them 
 more productive and export-oriented (Kahn, 1987; Lal 
 aˆ-- Tel.: +44-1904-434-060; fax: +44-1904-432-998. 
 E-mail address: eb9@york.ac.uk (E.B. Barbier). 
 1 Present address: Department of Money flow and Finance, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071-3985, USA. Tel.: 
 +1-307-766-2178; fax: +1-307-766-5090. 
 
 and Rajapatirana, 1987). A important element of this 
 reform plan has been the elimination of policy 
 distortions that hold back productive investment and 
 (related to computers and science) change as sources of long-term farming-based growth and agroindustrialization (Stiglitz, 1987; 
 Jaeger, 1992). Increasing 'globalization' of farming 
 in developing countries has also happened. 
 Such money-based (easing government rules) changes have clearly 
 benefited many developing countries through (helping increase/showing in a good way) (away from cities) development, farming-based exports and money-based growth. However, many developing areas also 
 suffer from a 'cumulative (when one thing definitely causes another)' link between (away from cities) 
 poorness, land worsening and (chopping down trees): poor (away from cities) families leaving alone (and forgetting) insulted/got worse land for 'frontier' 
 
 0169-5150/00/$ - see front matter Â© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 0 ) 0 0 0 9 1 - 8 
 
 300 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 forested lands, (chopping down trees) and cropping of poor soils 
 lead to further worsening, which in turn leads to 
 land (being left alone, with no help) and added/more forestland (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), and so on (Barbier, 1997). 2 An important issue 
 is whether the money-based (easing government rules) changes put into use in developing countries have further increased 
 such processes of (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening. On the 
 one hand, there is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that unintended (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damage, including land worsening and forest 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), can happen when (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes in 
 developing countries are begun/tried while other policy, market and institutional failures that in particular 
 affect poor (away from cities) smallholders are ignored (Reed, 1992; 
 Munasinghe and Cruz, 1995). On the other hand, a (related to studying numbers) analysis of 53 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) countries has pointed to/showed 
 that forest clearing increases with population, but (lowers in number/gets worse) with income per person and farming-based yields, 
 suggesting that improved farming-based performance and 
 development may help reduce (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening (Barbier and Burgess, 1997). This would suggests 
 that a more productive and competitive farming-based 
 part/area, as well as better money-based growth performance 
 generally, should reduce pressures for greater forest 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) for farming-based (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). 
 If the increased farming-based activity arising through 
 money-based (easing government rules) changes in developing countries has led to increased (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening, 
 especially added/more forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), it may have 
 done so both directly and indirectly. The direct hits/effects may have happened as increased farming-based activity results in the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of (helped to grow) area, this way 
 leading to further (chopping down trees). That is, the effects of 
 greater (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) and agroindustrialization on the 
 farming-based part/area make it more and more money-making for 
 farming families to convert more forestland to (producing crops/helping something grow). However, there may also be indirect effects 
 on (chopping down trees) if agroindustrial development dis2 In Africa, this poorness-worsening linkage appears to be directly related to the low working well and input use of African 
 smallholder farming generally, which in turn leads to land 
 worsening, spoiled or declining produces and long/big use of 
 land (Reardon et al., 1999). In Latin America, land (being left alone, with no help) 
 and edge of something/unexplored area farming-based (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) are things commonly seen in the 'nutrient mining' process, within which/by which road building and insecure property 
 rights make land in edge of something/unexplored area forests (not in a natural way/in a fake way) cheap and available 
 to landless and near-landless traveling workers to the edge of something/unexplored area (Schneider, 
 1994; Southgate, 1994). Closeness to cities and roads may also be 
 factors explaining fast land use changes (Mamingi et al., 1996). 
 
 places (away from cities) families dependent on farm labour and 
 unskilled workers in extra agroindustries. If these 
 displaced families move to not important farming-based 
 lands and forest edge of something/unexplored area areas to look (for)  new land to 
 help grow, then the result is greater (chopping down trees). 
 This paper aims to explore these possible direct and 
 indirect effects of money-based (easing government rules) and (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) on (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening. Although the 
 main focus will be on the price effects arising from the 
 macroeconomic and part/areaal policy changes generally 
 showed as 'economic (easing government rules)', the findings 
 could be generalized to other 'price shocks' that come up 
 through processes of (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) and agroindustrialization. These would include the coming into view or reorganization of processing businesses, loss of traditional 
 export markets, competition from imported substitutes 
 and greater exposure to worldwide  market ups and downs. 
 The outline of the paper is as follows. The first 
 half develops a basic model of group farming-based 
 smallholder production that is dependent either on 
 land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) or yield improvement. The purpose 
 of the model is to (show or prove) how input and output price changes may influence the rate of land use 
 change, as well as the demand for land in farming-based production. Such relationships are important, as 
 money-based (easing government rules) changes unavoidably influence 
 prices in the farming-based part/area, this way affecting on the 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) for farming-based land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). By drawing 
 on (before that/before now) published material on two case studies, the rest of the paper focuses on scientific 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the way in which money-based changes and 
 price changes hit/effect on the demand for farming-based 
 land. The two examples are (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something), 
 trade (easing government rules) and farming-based development in 
 Ghana, and maize part/area (easing government rules) in Mexico 
 under the North American Free Trade Agreement 
 (NAFTA). Finally, Section 6 summarizes the principal findings and discusses their effects/results/suggestions for the 
 wider issues of agroindustrialization, (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) 
 and development in developing countries. 
 
 2. A model of land use decisions in a (away from cities) 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 The purpose of the following model is to illustrate 
 how changing input and output prices can influence 
 the land use decisions of (away from cities) families in the 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 farming-based part/area of a developing country. To focus 
 on these price effects, the model of land use choice 
 is highly pretty/interesting, and some parts of the hits/effects 
 of price shocks on the extensification of farming-based 
 systems in developing countries have been ignored. 
 The model developed here is broadly almost the same as 
 recent approaches that model the farming-based production behaviour of a representative (away from cities) household 
 with access to a stock of non-farming-based land (e.g. 
 a forested area) to decide/figure out the received/made from demand 
 by the household for converted land (Panayotou and 
 Sungsuwan, 1994; Lopez, 1997, 1998; Cropper et 
 al., 1999). However, in this books, changing/different ideas (you think are true) have been employed about the 'supply' of 
 converted land available to the (away from cities) household. For 
 example, both Cropper et al. (1999) and Panayotou 
 and Sungsuwan (1994) employ a almost the same  farming-based 
 household model, but whereas the former assume that 
 a marketed supply of converted land is available to 
 families, the last thing just mentioned assume that (away from cities) families 
 convert land under open access conditions. In contrast, Lopez (1997) develops a model of bush-unplanted 
 (or shifting) (producing crops/helping something grow), in which the household converts land from the commonly managed pool of 
 forested land available to a village. Such a model 
 has been extended to examine the competing uses of 
 land and labour by the household for farming-based production instead of products (e.g. (wood burned for heat), poles 
 and food) came/coming from the common forested land 
 (Lopez, 1998). The model developed here follows 
 Panayotou and Sungsuwan (1994) and Lopez (1997) 
 in assuming that the 'pool' of non-farming-based land 
 available to the household is non-marketed and freely 
 (easy to get to, use, or understand), but other uses of labour and the common 
 land are ignored (e.g. as in Lopez, 1998). Although 
 this is clearly a simplification of household land and 
 labour decisions, it does allow the focus to be on the 
 influence of input and output price changes on land 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), in common with other household land use 
 models developed for this purpose (Lopez, 1997). 
 Assume a representative (away from cities) household that is a 
 price taker in all markets for the valuable things that 
 it both uses/eats and produces. This way the (money made/good thing received) and 
 utility making the most of decisions of the household are 
 serious and stubborn recursively, and so best household 
 production is serious and stubborn first and independently of 
 consumption and fun choices (Singh et al., 1986). 
 It will be convenient to rot the farming-based 
 
 301 
 
 production, Y, of this household into the stock of 
 plantable land (e.g. measured in hectares, ha), N, multiplied by farming-based working well or yield per hectare, 
 q. The last thing just mentioned is assumed to be figured out by/decided by the 
 amount of (bought) inputs, X, and household labour 
 gave out to agriculture, LA . This way the basic farming-based production technology is 
 Y = Nq(X, LA ), 
 qX &amp;gt; 0, qXX &amp;lt; 0, qL &amp;gt; 0, qLL &amp;lt; 0. 
 
 (1) 
 
 However, the stock of farming-based land is not constant 
 but grows by the amount of new land brought into 
 production, (in other words) n(L), through giving-out some household labour, L, to convert forest and other available 
 non-farming-based land. It is also assumed that a proportion of farming-based land is taken out of production, 
 or 'fallowed', each time period at a constant rate, a. 
 The net (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in farming-based land is therefore 
 dN 
 = NË™ = n(L) aˆ' aN, 
 dt 
 nL &amp;gt; 0, nLL &amp;lt; 0, N(0) = N0 . 
 
 (2) 
 
 So, the total gift of (household and hired) 
 labour, T, is used either for farming-based production, 
 LA , or land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), L. Given an group output 
 price, p, input price, w, and cost of converting land, 
 c(L), group (money made/good things received), Î , for the household are 
 Î  = pY aˆ' wX aˆ' c(L), 
 
 cL &amp;gt; 0, cLL &amp;gt; 0. 
 
 (3) 
 
 Representing r as the rate of discount, the goal 
 function of making the most of group (money made/good things received) of the farming-based part/area can be written as 
 aˆž 
 
 Max J = 
 
 Î  eaˆ'rt dt 
 
 (4) 
 
 0 
 
 subject to Eqs. (1)-(3). The Hamiltonian for the above 
 intertemporal (biggest increase/best possible extent) problem is 
 H = pNq(X, T aˆ' L) aˆ' wX aˆ' c(L) 
 +Î»[n(L) aˆ' aN]. 
 
 (5) 
 
 The controls of the problem are X and L. The state 
 (number or thing that changes) is N, with the similar co-state (number or thing that changes) 
 
 302 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 Î», which also represents the shadow value of land in 
 terms of added/more farming-based (money made/good things received). 3 
 The above problem can be easily solved for the 
 best path to a steady-state balance. However, 
 the goal here is not to show/represent this solution but 
 to show how prices and other factors influence both 
 the rate of (away from cities) land use change (i.e. dN/dt) and 
 the demand for land (i.e. N) along the best path. 
 For example, substituting the first-order condition for 
 best (bought) input portion, pNqX = w, into 
 (2) yields 
 aw 
 , 
 NË™ = n(L) aˆ' 
 pqX 
 aw 
 dNË™ 
 &amp;gt; 0, 
 = 2 
 dp 
 p qX 
 
 a 
 dNË™ 
 =aˆ' 
 &amp;lt; 0, 
 dw 
 pqX 
 dNË™ 
 a 
 =aˆ' 
 &amp;lt; 0. 
 d(w/p) 
 qX 
 
 (6) 
 
 This way Eq. (6) points to/shows that the rate of land use 
 change will increase as a result of higher farming-based 
 returns (i.e. an increase in p/w or p). The best path 
 for farming-based land use, N(t), could be increasing or 
 declining towards its long run steady-state level. If best (away from cities) land use is falling over time (dN/dt &amp;lt; 0), 
 then an increase in relative returns to agriculture will 
 flatten the curve, and the rate of decline in (away from cities) land 
 use is slowed down over time. If best land use is 
 rising (dN/dt &amp;gt; 0), then an increase in p/w or p will 
 steepen this path, and land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) will therefore be 
 more fast over time. 
 3 
 
 Assuming an interior solution, the first-order conditions of (5) 
 
 are 
 pNqX = w, 
 
 Î»nL = cL + pNqL , 
 
 Î»Ë™ = (r + a)Î» aˆ' pq(X), 
 
 lim eaˆ'rt Î»(t)N(t) = 0, 
 
 ta†'aˆž 
 
 as well as Eq. (2). The first equation is the standard condition 
 pointing to/showing that (bought something for money) inputs are applied up to the point where 
 their value not important product equals their cost. The second equation 
 controls the best portion of household labour, which happens 
 where the not important benefits of bringing added/more land into (producing crops/helping something grow), Î»nL , equals the not important costs of (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), cL + pNqL . 
 These costs consist of the direct (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) costs plus the opportunity costs of giving-out any labour from farming-based production. 
 The third equation decides/figures out the rate of bringing new land into 
 production (i.e. the amount of hectare converted per time period), 
 as reflected in changes in the shadow value of the land over time, 
 dÎ»/dt. This rate of (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) is influenced by the relative cost 
 and benefit of holding on to an added unit of (converted) land 
 today. The final equation is the standard transversality condition. 
 
 An equation for the best level of land use in 
 each period, N (t), can be received/made from by (making different) 
 the first-order condition pNqX = w with respect to 
 time, and assuming dL/dt = 0. 4 Substituting this 
 expression for dN/dt in (2) and rearranging 
 wqXX Ë™ 
 1 
 n(L) + 
 X , 
 a 
 p(qX )2 
 qXX Ë™ 
 dN 
 X 
 0 if XË™ 
 0. 
 = 
 d(w/p) 
 (qX )2 
 
 N (t) = 
 
 (7) 
 
 Expression (7) points to/shows that the current amount of 
 land used in farm-related, (in other words) the 'demand' for land, 
 depends not just on the rate of land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), n(L), 
 and unplanteding, a, but also on the level of farming-based 
 returns, p/w, the rate of change in the not important working well of (bought) inputs, qXX /qX , and the rate 
 of input use over time, dX/dt. The last thing just mentioned is also important in deciding/figuring out the hits/effects of an increase in 
 farming-based returns on land use, dN/d(p/w). That is, 
 if the use of inputs is growing over time, (in other words) 
 dX/dt &amp;gt; 0, then farming-based land use will increase 
 with a rise in farming-based returns, dN/d(p/w) &amp;gt; 0. If 
 input use is falling, then dN/d(p/w) &amp;lt; 0. 
 The above result hints that the level of input use 
 may therefore have important effects/results/suggestions for the (reward or reason for doing something) effects of increasing farming-based returns on the 
 demand for land. For instance, if farming is now 
 seen as low input use, then one would expect 
 future levels of input application to be higher than current levels, (in other words) dX/dt &amp;gt; 0. Under such conditions, the 
 (reward or reason for doing something) effects of an increase in farming-based returns 
 would be to increase land use, (in other words) farming-based production is more land long/big. In contrast, if (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 already involves a high level of input application, then 
 4 The last thing just mentioned idea (you think is true) that the amount of labour gave out to 
 land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) does not grow over time helps to simplify the 
 later analysis and resulting conditions. It is not very important to 
 the overall result. However, the idea (you think is true) is not silly. 
 As T is fixed, then it follows that dL/dt = aˆ'dLA /dt. This way if the 
 labour used for land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) is not growing over time, then 
 the labour gave out to farming-based production is not falling. This 
 is equal to assuming that, from time period to time period, 
 the household sets apart mostly the same amount of labour for 
 (usually done) production tasks, such as weeding, planting, collecting, 
 etc., and also has about the same amount of remaining labour 
 'left over' to bring new land into (producing crops/helping something grow). Of course, the best 
 portion of labour needs/demands that, at any time t, the household 
 sets apart labour at the margin between the two tasks, according 
 to the first-order conditions pointed to/showed in the previous note. 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 future levels of input use are unlikely to grow significantly or may even (lower in number/get worse), and as a result, land 
 use will tend not to increase with rising returns to 
 agriculture, (in other words) farming-based production is more land 
 intensive. This way whether price (reward or reason for doing something) effects lead to 
 more land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) to agriculture will in turn be influenced by whether (away from cities) families depend mainly 
 on land or (bought something for money) inputs to expand production. 
 This result illustrates a common problem identified in the (away from cities) poorness and useful thing/valuable supply worsening 
 books. Namely, poor (away from cities) families often have 
 limited access to credit and (bought something for money) inputs, and 
 such restrictions may worsen (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening. For example, Reardon et al. (1999) use the 
 term 'capital-lacking (process by which something becomes stronger or worse)' to describe 
 the process within which/by which a farmer depends excessively 
 on labour -- unassisted by improved technologies 
 -- to increase working well. This involves cropping 
 more densely, weeding and collecting carefully, 
 and so forth. Over time, this type of (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) is 'unsustainable' as it uses up/reduces soil (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) 
 and cannot be sustained without moving/changing toward 
 'capital-led' investments such as (not living) (material that makes plants grow better)s. Of course, the other choice to such investments is 
 to bring new land into (producing crops/helping something grow), which is the link 
 to forest and not important land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) described in 
 this paper. Although Reardon et al. (1999) suggest 
 that 'capital-lacking (process by which something becomes stronger or worse)' is (existing all over a large area) 
 especially in Africa, it is clear that such low input 
 farming-based production is something commonly seen in many poor 
 (away from cities) smallholders throughout poor countries 
 (Barbier, 1997). 
 
 3. Effects/results/suggestions for money-based (easing government rules) and 
 land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) 
 The above ideas of the relationships between 
 changing farming-based returns, price (reward or reason for doing something) effects 
 and land use suggest that money-based (easing government rules) policies, through influencing both farming-based input and 
 output prices, may have important effects/results/suggestions for the 
 (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply hits/effects of farming-based development. If 
 such changes increase the farming-based returns faced by 
 farmers, the results in terms of greater land use 
 may be more obvious for low input instead of 
 high input farming. 
 
 303 
 
 However, such a pretty/interesting model of land use choice 
 is necessarily very overly-simple, and will definitely 
 do not (take control of) some of the key transmission processes 
 through which money-based (easing government rules) and other price 
 shocks may affect the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) and extensification decisions of poor farmers. For example, an important aspect missing from the model is the portion of 
 household labour to off-farm work. As Reardon and 
 Barrett (1999) have argued, labour freed from farming-based production on existing lands will generally not 
 be set apart and given out to bringing more land into (producing crops/helping something grow) if 
 off-farm work pays more than farm work at the margin, or if non-farming-based income is weakly covariate with farm income, making labour (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) 
 across parts/areas an appealing plan for smoothing income in a highly (random/including random data points) (surrounding conditions). Second, the 
 model assumes a representative household, yet there 
 may be events where (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) mixed-up nature across 
 families may be great and significantly influence 
 the hit/effect of policy changes. For example, De Janvry 
 et al. (1995) decided that the farming-based families 
 most at risk from the hits/effects of the NAFTA changes 
 in Mexico are non-(branched out/done different things) maize sellers who depend heavily on the price of maize for their welfare. 
 Also, the (coming from the outside of something) effects of price shocks are 
 not as obvious as suggested by the above model. (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Ghana of the effects of (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide 
 changes on the price-(change to make better/related to changing something) process in local markets hints that price (quality of quickly responding to things) and dangerous nature/wild up and down prices 
 in outlying markets will depend on their degree of (dependent on each other) with the main central markets in which 
 the price changes are started (Badiane and Slicely, 
 1998). Finally, the model abstracts from the choice of 
 product mixes and technology available to the farming household. As Reardon et al. (1999) have pointed 
 out, this choice set available to the household is one 
 of the important things influencing its abilities to respond to 
 the money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) arising out of policy changes. 
 Incorporating all these possible influences on would 
 (definitely/as one would expect) require a much wider idea-based model 
 of (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply household behaviour than the one 
 adopted here (see, e.g., Reardon and Vosti, 1995; Reardon et al., 1999). Anyway, by focussing on how 
 input use and price (reward or reason for doing something) effects may affect land 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) by families, the above model does illustrate an important transmission process identified in 
 the books. To (show or prove) further the importance 
 of this process, the rest of the paper discusses 
 
 304 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 recent evidence of the influence of price 
 shocks on the land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) decisions of farming-based 
 families. 
 Although Eq. (7) provides useful ideas of how 
 input use and price hits/effects influence the demand for 
 land, this equation cannot itself be guessed scientifically. However, solution of the first-order conditions 
 of the above model should also yield the received/made from demand for farming-based land use as a function of input and output prices and the other limits/guidelines of the 
 model. 5 For example, if the model was extended to, 
 say, two competing land-using activities, then the received/made from demand for land by one activity would now be 
 influenced by the farming-based returns of that activity, 
 by the returns of the competing activity and by any 
 (coming from the outside of something) factors affecting this demand. Specifically, 
 the demand for land for use in farming-based activity i 
 would be 
 N i = N i (P i , W i , P j , W j , Z) 
 Pi Pj 
 , 
 ,Z , 
 Ni = Ni 
 Wi Wj 
 
 or 
 (8) 
 
 where Ni is the demand for land by farming-based activity i, Pi the price of output produced by that activity 
 and Wi the price of inputs used by that activity, Pj the 
 price of output of the competing farming-based activity 
 j and Wj the price of inputs used by that activity. The 
 changeable Z represents (coming from the outside of something) factors that may also 
 influence the demand for land, such as population, 
 income per person, roads and clearly stated/particular government programmes and payments. The last thing just mentioned factors are important to include in any demand for land guess. For 
 example, as noted in Section 1, it is through these effects that the 'indirect' hits/effects of trade (easing government rules) 
 and (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes on labour 'displacement', 
 money-based growth and targeted public investments 
 may influence land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in farming. 
 The rest of this paper is concerned with specific computer programs of Eq. (8) to guess land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) 
 in developing countries, to illustrate the potential direct and indirect hits/effects of money-based (easing government rules) 
 on this (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). The first case study is for Mexico, 
 5 Benhin and Barbier (1998) show how this is done with a 
 almost the same  model involving competing land using activities, and then 
 guess clearly stated/particular forms of the resulting demand relationships to 
 decide/figure out the influence of prices and other (coming from the outside of something) factors. A 
 almost the same  approach can be applied to the model of this paper. 
 
 and is based on the analysis by Barbier and Burgess 
 (1996), who guess the demand for planted farming-based area for the period 1970-1985 leading up to the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide and maize part/area (easing government rules) changes 
 put into use as part of the NAFTA. The guessed results for farming-based land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) serve as the basis 
 of discussing how the NAFTA changes may influence this relationship, through the 'direct' hits/effects on 
 prices and returns and the 'indirect' hits/effects of population displacement and other money-based factors. The 
 second case study is for Ghana, and is based mostly 
 on the analysis by Benhin and Barbier (1998), who 
 employ a piecewise linear moving backward to (take control of) the effects of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) policies on the demand 
 for maize and cocoa land over the 1965-1995 period. 
 
 4. A case study of Mexico 
 Current guesses of the rate of (chopping down trees) in 
 Mexico range from 0.4 to 1.5 million ha per year. However, all guesses suggest that (chopping down trees) is much 
 higher in the (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) than mild/not extreme areas (Masera 
 et al., 1992). A major cause of this (chopping down trees) has 
 been the increase in land under rainfed farming-based 
 production. Road building and timber extraction may 
 also have added/have given through 'opening up' new areas 
 of forest for invasion by other activities (Barbier 
 et al., 1993). 6 (away from cities) poorness also appears to be a significant factor in explaining land use change across 
 Mexico (Deininger and Minten, 1999). About 
 70% of the land in Mexico is owned by ejidos (shared landowners), 25% is owned by people and 
 5% by Amerindian communities (World Bank, 1989). 
 Barbier and Burgess (1996) have employed panel 
 analysis to guess a relationship almost the same as  Eq. (8) 
 above for farming-based planted area at the state level in 
 Mexico over 1970-1985 to decide/figure out the main factors affecting forestland (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) in the pre-NAFTA 
 period in Mexico. The guessed relationship was 
 6 Fast (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of animals production and the demand for 
 (area of grassy land)land have added/have given (in a big way) to (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forest loss. 
 In some areas, poorly managed timber extraction and forest fires 
 have led to worsening and loss of forests (Barbier et al., 1993). 
 The study by Barbier and Burgess (1996) also includes an analysis of the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in animals numbers. However, due to space 
 (things to carefully think about), the last thing just mentioned analysis is not discussed here. The interested reader is referred to the original study. 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 then used by Barbier and Burgess to examine the 
 effects on (chopping down trees) of (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes 
 put into use during the after-NAFTA period. The results of the analysis showed that maize and (material that makes plants grow better) 
 prices appear to have been the main influences on the 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of planted area. For example, a 10% increase in the maize-(material that makes plants grow better) price ratio would cause 
 a 3.2% increase in farming-based area planted. Population growth also affected farming-based activities. 
 This way the guessed relationship pointed to/showed that, prior 
 to the NAFTA changes, the (serving to compare two or more things) returns to 
 farming-based production in Mexico had a major hit/effect 
 on farming-based land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) activities, and so on 
 overall forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another). Following the ideas of 
 the possible model, this hints that the majority 
 of farming-based production in Mexico was mostly 
 low input and long/big in land use, which conforms 
 to the general impression of ejido-based crop (producing crops/helping something grow) by most (away from cities) smallholders in Mexico 
 (World Bank, 1989; Masera et al., 1992; Barbier et al., 
 1993). 
 These guessed relationships were used by Barbier 
 and Burgess (1996) to examine the price (reward or reason for doing something) 
 effects on land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of money-based (easing government rules) changes in Mexico resulting from NAFTA. Of 
 particular interest to this paper are the maize part/area 
 changes that affect the maize-(material that makes plants grow better) price ratio 
 faced by farmers. It was guessed that, due to the 
 Government of Mexico's policy of supporting the 
 (away from cities) producer price well above the world price of 
 maize, complete (easing government rules) of the maize market 
 would cause the price to fall much, possibly as much as 50% (Levy and van Wijnbergen, 
 1992a). The price elasticities guessed by Barbier 
 and Burgess point to/show that a 10-50% drop in real maize 
 prices should cause a 3-16% decrease in farming-based 
 planted area. Over the period 1989-1991 Mexico 
 also reduced (in a big way) its payments in (material that makes plants grow better). 
 For example, country-level real prices for urea, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulphate increased 
 by 58, 74 and 60%, (match up each pair of items in order). As a result, the 
 price of (material that makes plants grow better) to farmers rose sharply. The elasticities guessed by Barbier and Burgess suggest that 
 (material that makes plants grow better) price increases of around 50-70% should 
 cause farming-based planted area to decrease by around 
 10-13%. 
 The possible results of these maize part/area changes 
 on the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of planted area and animals num- 
 
 305 
 
 bers are good examples of the 'first-order', or direct, effects of changes in pricing on the (rewards or reasons for doing something) 
 for edge of something/unexplored area (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) by (away from cities) families. However, there are also likely to be 
 some 'second-order', or indirect, effects resulting from 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide and part/areaal changes that may produce 
 opposite (reward or reason for doing something) effects, possibly even outweighing the first-order hits/effects. Especially, (away from cities) traveling to forested areas may increase as a result of the 
 hits/effects of money-based reform on the returns and value 
 of existing farming-based land. 
 For example, as a result of all of the (easing government rules) 
 changes and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) changes begun/tried (not very long ago), 
 Mexico is expected to go through a long change to 
 sustained money-based growth with big return traveling to areas away from cities (Levy and van Wijnbergen, 1992b). The positive motivator to convert 
 forestland, based on increases in the (away from cities) labour force 
 and falling (away from cities) wages, may outweigh the (rewards or reasons for doing something) 
 to reduce farming-based (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) due to more real 
 GDP per person or a falling maize-(material that makes plants grow better) price ratio (Barbier and Burgess, 1996). The author's overall 
 findings are that the pursuit of an open development 
 plan combining high money-based growth and (easing government rules) appears to lessen farming-based area (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) 
 more than reliance on (easing government rules) alone. However, 
 if Mexico is subject to big return traveling to 
 areas away from cities and goes through a long change to sustained 
 money-based growth, then increases in the labour force 
 and falling (away from cities) wages may more significantly cause 
 greater (chopping down trees). This way the ability of the Mexican 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and (away from cities) labour market to change to fit an open 
 development plan may also be a key (thing that decides something) 
 of the overall hits/effects on (chopping down trees) of trade (easing government rules) and agroindustrialization. 
 The maize part/area changes are also likely to hit/affect 
 on land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) indirectly through affecting the 
 supply of labour, the value of land holdings, and the 
 distributional hits/effects of welfare changes on different 
 income groups. For example, as noted above, the effect of the big reduction in the producer price 
 of maize in Mexico as a result of market (easing government rules) is expected to lead to a reduction in output and 
 this way planted area. This may also cause/start a large fall in 
 land values for rainfed land to nearly one-quarter that 
 of watered land, by that/in that way making survival/income farmers, rainfed farmers who are net sellers of maize, and 
 landless (away from cities) workers worse off (Levy and van Wijn- 
 
 306 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 bergen, 1992a). 7 Although survival/income farmers will 
 benefit from lower person prices, they will be doubly affected by the loss in value of their rainfed get 
 and in employment opportunities as day workers. The 
 overall lack of employment and income opportunities 
 could cause (away from cities) workers and survival/income farmers to 
 move towards edge of something/unexplored area forest areas, or to convert remaining forestland that is available to them locally. 
 These 'second-order' effects of trade (easing government rules) on 
 (chopping down trees) could outweigh the first hits/effects of the 
 reduction in the maize-(material that makes plants grow better) price ratio on planted 
 farming-based area (Barbier and Burgess, 1996). 
 An investment programme in land improvements 
 to increase the working well of rainfed land could possibly lessen the negative distributional effects/results/suggestions of NAFTA on the maize subsector (Levy and 
 van Wijnbergen, 1992b; Barbier and Burgess, 1996). 
 Such a programme could involve investments not only 
 in crop-watering/rinsing with water (set of machines) for 1.1 million ha of rainfed land but also in drainage, land levelling, ditch 
 clearing and soil (protecting something from harm). The distributional hits/effects of maize (easing government rules) in Mexico are especially reduced if the land improvement programme 
 is combined with greater access by Mexican farmers 
 to the US fruit and vegetable market (Levy and van 
 Wijnbergen, 1992b). As a result, (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of (away from cities) farm employment opportunities on existing farming-based get, or off-farm employment opportunities 
 generally, could be an important lessening factor in 
 reducing (chopping down trees). This hints that a land improvement investment programme for existing rainfed 
 farmers, especially in States and areas likely to experience/likely to get 
 high (chopping down trees) rates, could provide indirect (rewards or reasons for doing something) for controlling (chopping down trees) by increasing the 
 demand for (away from cities) labour. 
 7 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) presented by De Janvry et al. (1995) suggests 
 that the farming-based families most at risk from the hits/effects of 
 the NAFTA changes in Mexico are nondiversified maize sellers 
 who depend heavily on the price of maize for their welfare. At 
 the time of the changes, maize accounted for over half the crop 
 area collected in Mexico and employs about one-third 
 of (away from cities) workers (World Bank, 1989). In 1989, out of a total 
 production of 12.8 million t, 8.8 million t were produced by rainfed 
 farmers, and (away from cities) own consumption accounted for 3.6 million t. 
 At most only 15% of all producers were net sellers, consisting of 
 250 000 large-scale producers on watered land and 80 000 rainfed 
 farmers. The remaining 1.92 million producers were survival/income 
 maize farmers located on rainfed lands (Levy and van Wijnbergen, 
 1992a). 
 
 5. A case study of Ghana 
 The once-a-year rate of (chopping down trees) in Ghana has remained fairly constant over the last few years, around 1.3% 
 over 1990-1995 (FAO, 1997). 8 The most important 
 causes of forest loss have been (having no limits, rules, or barriers) logging 
 and land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) for farming (ITTO, 1993). The 
 main problem has been the opening up and (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 of not important forested lands for crop (producing crops/helping something grow). (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of farming-based land is now guessed at a 
 rate of 2.5% every year (Benhin and Barbier, 1998). The 
 working well of land and labour in farming is very 
 low due mostly to the long/big use of traditional technology and methods of (producing crops/helping something grow), and in the (not being there; not being present) 
 of intensive production methods, increasing helped grow 
 area is the main driving force in boosting the production of tree crops, such as cocoa, and food crops, such 
 as maize. 
 Since 1983, Ghana has begun/tried a series of complete macroeconomic and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 changes aimed at reversing the money-based decline of 
 previous 20 years. Under the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 Programme (SAP), improved prices for cocoa and 
 maize and improved credit facilities have been an (reward or reason for doing something) to expand production (ISSER, 1992). Also, payments have been removed on inputs to cocoa 
 production such as insecticides, and on key (material that makes plants grow better)s in maize farming such as ammonium sulphates. A 
 critical issue is how these price hits/effects of the SAP 
 have affected the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of farming-based land and 
 this way (chopping down trees). To examine these effects, Benhin 
 and Barbier (1998) have analysed the influence of 
 the (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes on the demand for cocoa 
 and maize land over the 1965-1995 period. By using 
 piecewise linear (moving backwards), the authors were also able 
 to tell/show the difference between the price effects in the pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) 
 against/compared to/or the after-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, through guessing 
 equations almost the same as  Eq. (8) above. 
 The analysis pointed to/showed that the price of maize was 
 not an important factor in maize farmers' demand 
 for land during the pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, and any 
 8 The forest reserves of Ghana now contain most of the country's 
 remaining (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) moist forest, most of which exist in separated 
 pieces. The total area of forest reserves is 2.6 million ha, which 
 contain 11% of total land area. In contrast, unreserved forests 
 contain only 500 000 ha. Once-a-year crops and tree crops account 
 for 1.2 and 1.7 million ha, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 increases in the price of ammonium sulphate (material that makes plants grow better)s actually led to greater land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). 9 However, 
 for the after-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, a 1% increase in the 
 fell behind price of maize led to a 0.23% increase in 
 the demand for maize land in the current year. With 
 the removal of (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) or controlled prices under the (change to make better/related to changing something) programme, the price of maize 
 became more market-serious and stubborn, and so a significant (serious thought/something to think about/respect) in maize land decision making in 
 this time. Even though input prices have increased in 
 the after-(change to make better/related to changing something) period with the removal of payments on farm inputs such as ammonium sulphate, 
 the increased availability of the (material that makes plants grow better) to farmers 
 and the relative higher returns to maize production, 
 as compared to the pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, has meant 
 that maize farmers have started to increase their 
 (material that makes plants grow better) use. This way (material that makes plants grow better) and land have become 
 (completes/goes along with) in the after-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, and a 1% 
 increase in the price of ammonium sulphate was guessed to cause a 0.05% fall in the demand for maize 
 land. Anyway, input use is still (compared to other things) low 
 for most maize survival/income farmers in Ghana, and so 
 increased production is still mostly low input and dependent on land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). Finally, a 1% increase in 
 population density led to a 1.2% increase in collected 
 maize land in both the pre- and after-(change to make better/related to changing something) periods. This hints that population increases in Ghana 
 lead to increasing demand for maize and therefore 
 maize land. This is not surprising given the importance of maize as a food crop in Ghana. It also 
 provides some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that any 'displacement' of 
 labour due to (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) and agroindustrialization 
 in Ghana could lead to greater maize land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), 
 if this displaced labour is soaked up through increased 
 survival/income maize production. 
 
 9 Benhin and Barbier (1998) argue that the lack of a price effect 
 on land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) was expected, as the (compared to other things) low and spoiled 
 (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) price paid to farmers in the pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) time  offered 
 little (reward or reason for doing something) for farmers to expand production. More than that, the 
 poor storage facilities and the government's inability to buy 
 all maize produce at the (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) price meant that any excess 
 supply of maize was a cost to the farmer, who had to dispose 
 of it at a (compared to other things) lower price in the open market. The results 
 also point to/show that land and (material that makes plants grow better)s were substitute inputs in the 
 pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) period. Given the poor returns to maize during this time, maize farmers could not afford higher prices for (material that makes plants grow better) and 
 therefore tended to substitute land for (material that makes plants grow better) in production as 
 the price of this input rose. 
 
 307 
 
 Overall, and returning to the ideas of the possible model of this paper, the above price effects suggest that maize production in Ghana is mostly still 
 low input and long/big in land use. This is expected, 
 as Reardon et al. (1999) suggest that 'capital-lacking 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse)' is (existing all over a large area), especially for food 
 crop production, across Africa. This way there is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 that the increasing returns to maize production going along with the (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes in Ghana may 
 have resulted in greater land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and (chopping down trees). Also, the changes may lead to an 'indirect' (chopping down trees) hit/effect if they lead to a larger (away from cities) population 
 dependent on survival/income maize production. 
 Because their analysis of forest loss pointed to/showed that 
 maize land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) was not significantly related 
 with (chopping down trees) in Ghana over the 1965-1995 period, Benhin and Barbier were unable to guess clearly the hits/effects of the above maize price changes 
 on forest loss. 10 However, their (chopping down trees) analysis did point to/show that forest loss was highly related 
 with cocoa land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). Because of the last thing just mentioned result, the authors were therefore able to guess the 
 effects of price changes over the 1965-1995 period 
 on cocoa land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), and then calculate how 
 these price changes in turn affected (chopping down trees). The 
 resulting ability to stretch guesses point to/show strongly that either a rise in the producer price of cocoa or a fall in 
 input prices (represented by the price of insecticide) 
 leads to greater forest loss. So, cocoa production in 
 Ghana has also tended to be low input and long/big 
 in land use. The results also obey the possible ideas of Eq. (6). That is, over the 1965-1995 
 period, cocoa land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) was generally increas10 The lack of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of a direct (proof that one thing definitely causes another) relationship between 
 maize land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and (chopping down trees) in Ghana over 1965-1995 
 was somewhat surprising. However, one possible explanation is that 
 the industrial roundwood explanatory (number or thing that changes) in the (chopping down trees) 
 analysis might have (taken/took control of) much of the effects of changes in 
 maize land on forest loss. There is (a lot of information that proves something) that logging 
 increases the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of farming-based activity in the (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forest 
 area by providing access to (before that/before now) (unable to be used or understood) areas. Amelung 
 and Diehl (1992) found that more than 70% of the first (or most important) forest 
 areas brought under (producing crops/helping something grow) are first insulted/made worse by commercial 
 logging. (chopping down trees) rates due to farming-based (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) are 
 reported to be eight times greater in logged-over forests than 
 undisturbed forests (Benhin and Barbier, 1998). Barbier (1994) 
 also reports that in many African countries, around half of the 
 area that is, at first, logged is (after that) deforested, while there 
 is little if any (chopping down trees) of (before that/before now) unlogged forestlands. 
 
 308 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 ing, and so forest loss happening (i.e. dN/dt &amp;gt; 0), 
 and any increase in the returns to cocoa led to a more 
 fast rates of land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and forest loss. 
 However, there is (large/relatively large) difference in the 
 importance of the price effects in the pre- and 
 after-(change to make better/related to changing something) periods. Before the SAP, a 10% rise 
 in the rate of change in the producer price of cocoa 
 led to about 0.03% increase in forest loss, whereas the 
 same level of an increase in the after-(change to make better/related to changing something) period 
 would produce a 0.12% rise in forest loss. It is possible 
 that, because of the fast rise in producer prices in the 
 after-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, the rate of hit/effect was less 
 strong than in the pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) period, when producer prices were kept (not in a natural way/in a fake way) low. Also, there is 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that during the SAP farmers have tended to 
 invest in existing cocoa lands because of expectations 
 of higher prices, suggesting that cocoa farmers have 
 at least shifted partially from converting forests to 
 investing in existing cocoa land in response to rising 
 output prices. (in almost the same way), in the pre-(change to make better/related to changing something) period 
 a 10% increase in the price of insecticides led to a 
 0.4% fall in the rate of forest loss, whereas during the 
 SAP time, the same level of increase in the price of insecticides produces a 0.004% fall in the rate of forest 
 loss. The high level of payments for insecticide use in 
 the pre-SAP time  may have encouraged more insecticide use for cocoa production, including helping 
 bringing new land into (producing crops/helping something grow), and any increase in 
 the price of insecticide would have had a large hit/effect 
 on overall returns, this way reducing the rates of cocoa 
 land (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and (chopping down trees). Because of the removal of payments and the rise in input prices, cocoa 
 farmers may have been using much less insecticide 
 for most of the SAP time, and an increase in the price 
 of insecticide might have had much less of an hit/effect 
 on overall cocoa farm returns and (chopping down trees). 
 Finally, the above hits/effects of the SAP on the demand for farming-based land in Ghana are grouped. As 
 farming in Ghana is highly (related to a large area)ized and very 
 (many different kinds of people or things), money-based (easing government rules) may have different 
 hits/effects on the usual, (related to a large area) farming-based parts/areas 
 of Ghana. One such part/area is the mostly shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) farming-based systems of Western Ghana. 
 Lopez (1997) has been able to guess the key (things that decide other things) of both farming-based output and the demand for 
 (helped to grow) land by individual farming families in 
 this area. First, it was guessed that energy, measured in terms of the proportion of land under forest 
 
 cover, adds/gives 15-20% of the value of farming-based 
 output in the bush-unplanted systems. Second, a decrease 
 in the wage rate or an increase in farming-based prices 
 faced by farmers in Western Ghana will lead to an 
 increase in the area of land that they will help grow. 
 Through a general balance model, Lopez (1997) is 
 able to confirm that the overall price hits/effects of trade 
 (easing government rules) will on an average cause a 2.5-4.4% decline in energy in Western Ghana as a result of farmers increasing helped grow area. This way although reducing 
 trade distortions may increase overall income in the 
 national (process of people making, selling, and buying things), in Western Ghana poor smallholders dependent on low input and long/big bush-unplanted 
 cropping systems could lose through greater land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) and worsening. 11 
 
 6. End/end result 
 This paper has explored the likely effects of 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes leading to greater (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) in developing countries on (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening. The principal issue of concern has been the 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of farming-based land and forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another). 
 Two possible results of money-based (easing government rules) on 
 this process have been identified. First, if such changes 
 aim to improve the working well and export-orientation 
 of farming, they will do so through influencing 
 both farming-based input and output prices, this way affecting the returns faced by farmers. Any resulting 
 increase in these returns may therefore cause (away from cities) 
 families to convert more forestland to farming-based production. Second, (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide changes and 
 going along with agroindustrialization may also affect 
 11 One warning to the analysis by LÂ´ 
 opez is that it is often very 
 hard to (describe the future) how (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide price changes in Ghana, 
 which are targeted mainly on (controlled by one central place) farming-based markets, will 
 affect more (only happening or existing in one small place), outlying markets such as those in Western 
 Ghana. A recent study in Ghana of the effects of (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide 
 changes on the price-(change to make better/related to changing something) process in local markets suggests 
 that price (quality of quickly responding to things) and dangerous nature/wild up and down prices in outlying markets will 
 depend on their degree of (dependent on each other) with the main central 
 markets in which the price changes are started (Badiane and 
 Slicely, 1998). The hint/result/effect is that the price transmission 
 process from central to outlying markets that happens after, e.g., 
 trade (easing government rules) may not lead to the expected changes in 
 local prices, this way making it hard to (describe the future) the hits/effects of an 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide reform on the land management decisions of poor 
 smallholders in remote and not important farming areas. 
 
 E.B. Barbier / Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 299-310 
 
 land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) indirectly through affecting the supply of (away from cities) labour and the welfare of different income 
 groups. If this leads to increased 'displacement' of 
 families, who are then soaked up in survival/income 
 farming-based parts/areas, then greater land worsening 
 and (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) may also result. Most importantly, if 
 farming-based production is seen as low input 
 and long/big land use, then higher returns are likely 
 to increase the demand for more land to be brought 
 under (producing crops/helping something grow). As this type of production shows 
 much of (away from cities) smallholder farming in the developing 
 world (Barbier, 1997; Reardon et al., 1999), then it is 
 possible that any improved farming-based returns from 
 increased (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) and agroindustrialization may 
 result in greater, rather than less, pressures on (away from cities) 
 useful thing/valuable supply worsening -- at least over the short and 
 medium term while farming-based development makes 
 the change from low input and long/big to more 
 high input and intensive use of land production. 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the direct and indirect hits/effects of money-based (easing government rules) on land use and forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 were also explored through examining case study (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Mexico and Ghana. Up to the (putting into) use of the reforms, farming in both Mexico and 
 Ghana was mostly low input and long/big in its use 
 of land. As a result, both case studies point to/show that 
 both direct and indirect (away from cities) useful thing/valuable supply worsening effects can accidentally result from (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) and trade (easing government rules) policies. However, the 
 evidence also hints that any increased 
 pressures on land worsening and (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) arising 
 from freedom-creating changes can be lessened somewhat, 
 gave/given that greater investments and efforts are targeted<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
