183 
 
 Farming-based Money flow, 9 (1993) 183-201 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam 
 
 Analysis of the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of state rubber 
 farms in Vietnam 
 Tran Vo Hung Son 
 
 a, 
 
 Tim Coelli 
 
 b 
 
 and Euan Fleming 
 
 c 
 
 School of Money flow, Hochiminh University, Hochiminh City, VietNam 
 b Department of Econometrics and c Department of Farming-based Money flow and Business 
 Management, University of New England, Armidale, N.S. W, Australia 
 a 
 
 (Accepted 18 November 1992) 
 
 ABSTRACT 
 This study involves an analysis of the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of natural rubber production by 
 state farms in Vietnam. A time-changing/different (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function model for 
 unbalanced data is guessed for 33 farms. Individual farm technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) are 
 reported and discussed. One of the main results concerns the bimodal distribution of 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices. A few farms operate near the production edge of something/unexplored area while the bulk 
 operate well away from the edge of something/unexplored area. Some effects/results/suggestions are drawn from the results as a 
 guide to future policy research work in the rubber industry because of recent moves by the 
 Vietnamese government towards money-based reform. 
 
 RESEARCH PROBLEM 
 
 Over the last few years, the Vietnamese government has begun/tried (large/relatively large) money-based changes, and is thinking about yet further changes. The farming-based part/area is seen as a possibly leading part/area in these changes because 
 of its important (things that are given/work that's done) to both employment and output. Existing 
 organisation structures in farming are mostly based on socialist principles of 
 public ownership of the means of production and reliance for technical aid 
 on the former USSR and East (related to Europe) countries. Their possible ability to 
 add/give to a reformed farming-based part/area is coming under increasing 
 attention. 
 The rubber industry contains mostly state farms now, 
 although private owners are being encouraged to increase their area of 
 Writing to: Euan Fleming, Department of Farming-based Money flow and Business 
 Management, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W. 2351, Australia. 
 0169-5150j93j$06.00 © 1993- Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved 
 
 184 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 plantings under current reform plans. The state-owned rubber companies 
 have been the receiver of money of money and technical help from Eastern 
 Europe since Vietnamese (re-joining as one). 
 The problem is whether the farms operated by these state-owned companies operate at a level of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (good) enough to permit their 
 future survival as an organisational form in the rubber industry. Given the 
 importance of the rubber industry to the farming-based part/area and the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a whole, this is a critical issue. If their level of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) is low, it would suggest that farming-based policy makers might 
 need to think about  whether greater technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) can be (accomplished or gained) by 
 rebuilding the industry or increasing the amount of rubber production 
 under private ownership, either as (large farms with crops) or smallholdings. 
 It is hard to provide an definite answer to this issue without a 
 comparison of both technical and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farms in the 
 Vietnamese rubber industry with those in rubber businesses in other places in 
 the world. However, a study of the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of state rubber 
 farms in Vietnam should at least give an idea of how many such farms are 
 operating near the edge of something/unexplored area of technically (producing a lot with very little waste) production under winning/most common conditions in Vietnam. Further, it should also be possible to 
 compare the attributes of those firms operating near the edge of something/unexplored area with those 
 of farms operating far from this edge of something/unexplored area. 
 GOALS AND HYPOTHESES 
 
 The general research goal in this study is to measure and compare the 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of state rubber farms in Vietnam. The comparison of 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) takes three forms: 
 (a) between four selected state-owned rubber companies (Dong-Nai, 
 Dong-Phu, Dau-Tieng and Tay-Ninh); 
 (b) specifically, between Dong-Nai Rubber Company, which follows the 
 French management style and has nine red soil farms (thought about/believed more 
 productive) and six grey soil farms, and the other three companies, 
 which are in grey soil area and apply an native (to) management style 
 more in the usual state farm mode; and 
 (c) between farms owned by these selected rubber companies in the red 
 and grey soil areas. 
 Thirty-four farms owned by these four rubber companies are carefully thought about/believed. 
 Five guesses are tested: 
 (1) There is no difference in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms within and 
 between the rubber companies under (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). 
 (2) There is no difference in mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms from 
 the different companies. 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 185 
 
 (3) There is no difference in mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms in 
 red and grey soil areas. 
 (4) There is no difference in mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms of 
 Dong-Nai Rubber Company and other companies. 
 Also, a fifth guess is tested, to decide/figure out whether a (random/including random data points) 
 edge of something/unexplored area production is preferred to ordinary least squares (OLS) guess. 
 BACKGROUND TO THE RUBBER INDUSTRY IN VIETNAM 
 
 The farming-based part/area produces nearly half of the gross domestic 
 product of Vietnam and employs around two-thirds of its labour force. 
 Natural rubber has been the major cash crop, and has been continuously 
 exported over the past 30 years. Vietnam now ranks ninth in the world 
 production of natural rubber and seventh in area of land under rubber 
 (producing crops/helping something grow). 
 Natural rubber can be (pulled out or taken from something else) from many trees or plants. However, so far, only Hevea brasiliensis has been used for commercial 
 production anywhere in the world. Hevea brasiliensis is a tree from which 
 rubber may be gotten by tapping (i.e., the controlled wounding of the 
 bark of the trunk). 
 Organisational structure 
 
 The natural rubber part/area has three parts/pieces: 
 (a) state farms belonging to rubber companies which are under the control 
 of the Vietnam Rubber Corporation (VNRC); 
 (b) state farms under the control of local rubber companies; and 
 (c) smallholdings (private ownership). 
 The smallholdings make up/be equal to a small proportion of the total rubber area, 
 with a total planted area of 10 000 ha in 1989 (Thiet, 1991). According to 
 the money-based reform policies and the Vietnam Rubber Project for the year 
 2000 (VNRC, 1991), private owners will be encouraged to increase this 
 area of plantings by 90 000 ha, and occupy 20% of the total potential 
 rubber area. 
 VNRC owns 87.5% of the total rubber area. It contains 18 state-owned 
 rubber companies of which fourteen have been created since 1985, and are 
 still in the establishment stage with no area of old trees. Eleven are local 
 rubber companies (at the area of control/area of land or district level) created since 1987 and 
 hence also still in the establishment stage. 
 These companies are in six areas: Dong-Nai (1), Song-Be (6), 
 Tay-Ninh (2), Dak-Lak (2), Gialai-Kontum (6), and Thua-Thien (1). Each 
 
 186 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 company has some farms according to its land size. The largest is 
 the Dong-Nai Rubber Company, which has fifteen farms, while the TayNinh Rubber Company has only three farms. Besides owning farms which 
 are responsible for planting rubber trees and collecting latex, these companies also own one or two factories which process latex into dried rubber. 
 The company pays (moneys paid for working) and wages to managers and workers and 
 calculates total money/money income, total costs and (money made/good thing received) of the company as a whole. 
 Meanwhile, the farms only calculate their costs got/caused in collecting latex 
 and planting, and try to save input costs while producing maximum output. 
 The company has a strong degree of control over its farms. It gives awards 
 to them and provides technical guidance on tree planting and latex collection. 
 The farms are permitted to change these instructions (only a little bit) to suit 
 their local conditions. 
 There are also some other industrial rubber firms, located in the city, 
 which produce rubber products such as gloves and (shoes held on with straps). These firms are 
 either privately owned, run by local government or under VNRC ownership. 
 Institutions within VNRC serve all rubber companies in the development of their production. They include a (made to do one thing very well) bank for rubber, a 
 rubber import-export company (Rubximco) and a rubber research institute 
 (RRIV). Only a small proportion (10%) of rubber production is now 
 ate/destroyed domestically. 
 Production 
 
 Rubber latex is a milk liquid that comes out of the rubber tree. It is 
 unstable and must be processed soon after collection. In the field, a 
 amount of strong-smelling chemical liquor is added to the tanks containing latex to 
 prevent coagulation. These tanks are then driven to the factory by trucks or 
 tractors. A sample of latex in each tank is taken out to weigh, and it is then 
 put into a small span under fire. This latex becomes a piece of dried rubber 
 which is weighed again. A (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) factor is drawn from this job. All 
 latex collected from the field is converted into dried rubber which is 
 recorded as the standard output of the farm. This is the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) 
 used in our analysis. 
 Overall, the amount of dried rubber output has increased steadily. 
 However, yield per hectare has not followed a consistent (popular thing/general way things are going). It decreased continuously from 1986 to 1990, then increased (a) little in 1990. 
 The decrease is most probably due to the large areas of new trees coming 
 into production during this period. The yield in new tapping areas is low 
 because trees coming to tap are very young; it shouid increase as trees 
 become more mature. Tapping areas also should continue to increase. 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 187 
 
 MODEL FORMULATION 
 
 Survey description 
 
 A survey was managed and did/done by the senior author during August and September 1991 in three areas: Dong-Nai, Song-Be, and Tay-Ninh. Of the 34 
 farms surveyed, fifteen belonged to Dong-Nai Rubber Company, four to 
 Dong-Phu Rubber Company, eleven to Dau-Tieng Rubber Company, and 
 three to Tay-Ninh Rubber Company. All are in three neighbouring 
 areas in the south-east area. They are big companies which produced 
 60% of total rubber production in 1990. Farms of other companies are 
 smaller and mostly in the establishment stage. With little output, they were 
 thought about/believed no good for guessing technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Details of the survey method and individual company and farm (features/ qualities/ traits) are given by Tran (1992, pp. 40-45). A brief coverage of some 
 important attributes of the companies and their farms follows. 
 Dong-Nai Rubber Company farms are located 70 km east of Hochiminh 
 City. Its farm sizes are usually larger than those of other companies. This 
 company was created and developed by a French company whose owner 
 left Vietnam in 1975. After the nationalisation of this (large farm with crops), all its 
 previous managers, staff members and workers were kept/held. Because of this, the 
 French management style has been continuously applied. During the war, 
 this company suffered less damage than others. 
 This company is carefully thought about/believed the leading rubber producer in Vietnam. It 
 has a high proportion of skilled workers and experienced managers and 
 tapping workers, and has used computerised accounting and record 
 keeping since the early 1970s. Also, it is the major producer of rubber for 
 export, supplying almost one-half of total exports in 1990 (Dong-Nai 
 Rubber Company, 1991). In fact, in the past, farms from other companies 
 have usually sent their staff members and workers to Dong-Nai Rubber 
 Company to learn technology and production management. 
 Dong-Phu Rubber Company (five farms) and Dau-Tieng Rubber Company (eleven farms) are in Song-Be area of control/area of land which is located 70 km 
 north-west of Hochiminh City. They were established after 1975 with new 
 staff and new workers. Within their areas, there are three farms with old 
 trees which were left alone due to lack of security before 1975. Tay-Ninh 
 Rubber Company contains three farms located in the Tay-Ninh area of control/area of land 
 which is 70 km south-west of Hochiminh City. 
 All farms of these three companies are in the grey soil area. Because 
 they are new companies, with new farms created after the (re-joining as one) of 
 Vietnam, the state farm model has been adopted by the managers, most of 
 whom have come from the north. This model is seen as a lack of 
 
 188 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 experience of staff members in rubber production. More than that, staff are 
 comfortable with exactly following (orders) completely orders from above. Therefore, they 
 generally lack flexibility in business management. Another feature is a 
 awkward organisational structure with a high proportion of (related to managing and running a company or organization) staff members (indirect labour) compared with the total labour of the 
 farm andjor the company. This proportion is more than 10% compared 
 with about 3-4% in Dong-Nai Rubber Company. 
 Selection of (numbers that change/things that change) 
 In guessing a rubber production function for the 34 farms, panel data 
 were collected for five years in a row from 1986 to 1990. Data were 
 received/got on rubber latex produced in each farm every year (converted to 
 tonnes of dried rubber). Inputs in the production function tested for 
 including in something were area of rubber trees, by number and age; labour, measured 
 as number of tapping days; chemical (material that makes plants grow better)s (urea and potassium); 
 stimulants; and transportation (measured as litres of gasoline used in latex 
 collection). 
 (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production functions 
 The (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function was independently proposed 
 by Aigner, Lovell and Schmidt (1977) and Meeusen and Van den Broeck 
 (1977). This function is different from the usual (average) production 
 function in that its disturbance term has two parts/pieces: one to account 
 for technical inefficiency and the other to permit random events to affect 
 production. 
 This model was viewed as a big improvement over two different 
 models existing at that time. The first of these other choices was the 
 traditional function, which is guessed using least squares and so only 
 thinks about/believes the influence of random errors. Second, pre-decided functions, 
 such as that proposed by Aigner and Chu (1968), use mathematical programming to construct production edges of something/unexplored areas. They permit technical inefficiency to affect production but take no account of random effects. The 
 (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area allows (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of both sources of (quality of changing over time or at different places) in its 
 disturbance. 
 Many authors have changed and generalised the original (detailed description of exactly what is required) of 
 the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function. Schmidt (1986), Bauer (1990) 
 and Battese (1992) provide thorough reviews of this books, with Battese 
 (1992) making particular reference to the applications of (random/including random data points) edges of something/unexplored areas in farming-based money flow/money-based studies. 
 
 189 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 In this paper, we use the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function proposed by Battese and Coelli (1992), who followed a model developed by 
 Aigner et al. (1977). This model is defined for panel data (which need not 
 be complete) and has an error term which is assumed to be the sum of a 
 (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) random (number or thing that changes) and a cut short (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) random (number or thing that changes). The 
 cut short (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) random (number or thing that changes), which is assumed to reflect technical 
 inefficiency, is permitted to have a non-zero mode and be an huge 
 function of time. It is defined as follows: 
 i = 1, ... ,N 
 t = 
 
 (1) 
 
 1, ... , T 
 
 where ¥; 1 is the production of the ith firm in the tth time period; f( ·) is a 
 good function (in this study, the Cobb-Douglas function); Xu is the 
 k X 1 vector of input amounts of the ith firm in the tth time period; and 
 f3 is a vector of unknown limits/guidelines. The ll; are assumed to account for 
 random factors such as luck, weather and measurement error, while the &#126; 
 are due to technical inefficiency. A logarithmic change provides a 
 function which is linear in limits/guidelines with a (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) error term which 
 immediately lends itself to OLS guess. 
 For a Cobb-Douglas function, the equation can be written in logarithmic form as: 
 
 i=1,2, ... ,N 
 t=1,2, ... ,T 
 T=5 
 N=34 
 
 (2) 
 
 where 
 
 Eit = ll;l - &#126;I 
 The only difference between this edge of something/unexplored area production function and the 
 traditional OLS production function is the presence of the term llr· The 
 ll;/s are random (numbers that change/things that change) not under the control of the farm and are 
 assumed to be independent and identically distributed as (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) random 
 (numbers that change/things that change) with mean zero and variance s&#126;. The &#126;'s are random (numbers that change/things that change) 
 which are under the control of the ith farm. They are assumed to be 
 independent and identically distributed non-negative random (numbers that change/things that change) 
 which are received/got by the cutting off at zero of the N(m, s 2 ) distribution. 
 For the time-different model, &#126;&#126; = &#126; exp[ -h(t- T)]_), where h is an unknown limit/guideline. 
 Maximum chance guesses of the limits/guidelines of this (random/including random data points) 
 edge of something/unexplored area model may be gotten using the computer program 'FRONTIER' 
 (Coelli, 1992). This program uses a grid search followed by an repeating/repetitive 
 (biggest increase/best possible extent) process to get maximum chance guesses. It uses the 
 
 190 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 limit/guidelineisation of the model suggested by Battese and Carra (1977) to 
 simplify the grid search. The limits/guidelines s&#126; and s 2 are replaced with: 
 s2s = s2v + s2 
 and 
 G=s 2 /(s&#126;+s 2 ) 
 
 The limit/guideline G must lie between 0 and 1 and, because of this, this range can be 
 searched to provide a good starting value for an repeating/repetitive procedure. The 
 model proposed by Battese and Coelli (1992), which is guessed in this 
 paper, is a very general model which includes many of the (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) used by past authors as special cases. Chance ratio tests can be 
 used to decide/figure out whether a less general creation of this model is 
 appropriate for these data. Some restricted forms of the model can 
 be carefully thought about/believed. For example, setting h to be zero provides the time-invariant model set out by Battese, Coelli and Colby (1989). Restricting the 
 creation to a full (balanced) panel of data gives the model of Battese 
 and Coelli (1988). The added/more restriction of m equal to zero reduces the 
 model to model I in Pitt and Lee (1981). A fourth restriction of T = 1 
 returns the model to the original creation of Aigner, Lovell and 
 Schmidt (1977). If all these restrictions except m = 0 are (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation), the 
 model suggested by Stevenson (1980) results. 
 MODEL ESTIMATION 
 
 Guess of the stock of rubber trees 
 One of the hardest parts of modelling the production technology 
 of a repeating crop, such as rubber, is the treatment of the capital input of 
 tree stock. As talked about/said above, the amount of latex produced from a tree 
 will change/differ  with the age of the tree. Sepien (1978) included a changeable 'age of 
 trees' along with the number of trees in his production function model of 
 the rubber production of smallholders in Malaysia to account for this 
 effect. He was able to use this method because most smallholders had trees 
 of a single age. His approach does not appear practical in our study as each 
 farm has trees of different ages, and so the definitions of a tree age 
 (number or thing that changes) for a particular farm would be hard. 
 Instead, we defined a (number or thing that changes) 'total weighted trees' which would reflect 
 the higher production ability (to hold or do something) of mature trees relative to the young and 
 very old trees. To this end, each farm manager was asked to specify the 
 number of trees being tapped in the following age classes: T 2 = 6 to 12 
 
 191 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 years old, T 3 = 13 to 20 years old, T4 = 21 to 30 years old, and T5 = greater 
 than 30 years old. The total weight of trees (number or thing that changes) was then defined as: 
 
 for the ith farm in the tth year, where the g's are unknown limits/guidelines (or 
 weights). 
 Three other choice methods of setting the values of the weights (g 2 , g 3 
 and g 5 ) were carefully thought about/believed, assuming g 4 = 1: 
 (a) Assume all trees are equally productive, and set g 2 = g 3 = g 5 = 1. 
 (b) Use experimental guesses of the yield profiles of the two most 
 popular copies, GT 1 and RRIM 600, as reported by Smit (1984), to 
 get values for the weights. The values were calculated as g 2 = 0.45, 
 g 3 = 0.99 and g 5 = 0.40. 
 (c) Allow the sample data to decide/figure out the weights by guessing a model 
 in which both the f3's and g's appear as unknown limits/guidelines. 
 The Cobb-Douglas functional form with Dummies-neutral technical change 
 is assumed in this study. The model in equation (2) may this way expressed as 
 follows: 
 ln &#126;t = f3o 
 
 + /31 ln(gzTzu + g3T3it + T4it + gsTsit) 
 + 3{ 2 ln Lu + 3{ 3 ln UR it 
 + 3{ 4 ln TRit + f3 5 t + Eu 
 
 i = 1, ... '33 
 t 
 
 = 1, ... ,5 
 
 (3) 
 
 where Lit is labour, measured in days; uRit is kilograms of urea; TRu is 
 transport, measured in litres of fuel; and all other symbols are as (before that/before now) 
 defined. The potassium and stimulant (numbers that change/things that change) were left out because of 
 their (related to studying numbers) unimportance in this model. 
 The model in equation (3) will be linear in limits/guidelines under options (a) 
 and (b), listed above, as they involve fixed values of the g's. Option (c), 
 however, needs/demands the (having no limits, rules, or barriers) guess of equation (3), which is not 
 linear in limits/guidelines. The FRONTIER program cannot change something (to help someone)/take care of someone a 
 model which is non-linear in limits/guidelines. We therefore used least squares 
 to guess this model under options (a) and (b) and used the non-linear 
 least squares (usually done) in SHAZAM (see White, 1990) to guess the model 
 under option (c). As least squares guess of a (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area model 
 provides fair guesses of all f3 limits/guidelines with the exception of the 
 intercept term, these guesses should provide a reasonable avenue for 
 testing between the three other choices. 
 The models using the TW T (number or thing that changes) defined by options (a) and (b) are 
 restricted forms of option (c), where the restrictions are upon the values 
 that the g's may take. These restrictions were tested using an asymptotic 
 chi-square test. 
 
 192 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 Guess of a (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function 
 The (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function defined in equation (3) 
 contains six ,8-limits/guidelines and the four added/more limits/guidelines connected 
 with the distributions of the v; 1 and [1; 1 random (numbers that change/things that change). The model is 
 based on unbalanced panel data with time-changing/different technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and 
 a cut short (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) distribution with a non-zero mode. 
 Guesses of mean and individual technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) were calculated 
 according to the expressions presented by Battese and Coelli (1992). An 
 guess of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) was to be calculated for each farm for each 
 year, and a mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of all farms for each year. 
 If h is restricted to be zero, technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is assumed time-invariant. Because of this, single guesses of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) can be calculated for 
 each firm as well as a single guess of mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 The edge of something/unexplored area function guesses were used to test five different ideas (you think are true) about the disturbance terms: 
 - Model 1.0 assumes all limits/guidelines are guessed. 
 - Model 1.1 assumes that m = 0. 
 - Model 1.2 assumes that h = 0. 
 - Model 1.3 assumes that m = h = 0. 
 - Model 1.4 assumes that G = m = h = 0. 
 RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION 
 
 Results of the guessed model based on equation (3) are presented in 
 Table 1. A comparison of other choice (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of the total weighted 
 trees (numbers that change/things that change) pointed to/showed that the (free to move around/without rules or restrictions) model, in which this 
 
 TABLE 1 
 Non-linear least square guesses 
 Limit/guideline 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 Standard error 
 
 -5.39 
 0.60 
 0.26 
 0.08 
 0.09 
 0.02 
 0.18 
 0.66 
 1.14 
 (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R 2 = 0.936 
 Log chance function= -49.25 
 
 0.41 
 0.08 
 0.07 
 0.01 
 0.05 
 0.03 
 0.06 
 0.37 
 0.31 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 193 
 
 (number or thing that changes) was came/coming from non-linear least squares, is preferred to the two 
 held back models. This choice is further supported by the (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) 
 that the (free to move around/without rules or restrictions) model has the highest (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R 2 and log chance values of all three models (see Tran, 1992). 
 Rejection of the restriction g 2 = g 3 = g 5 = 1 was not unexpected given 
 that mature trees are more productive than young and very old trees. 
 Rejection of the second set of weights came/coming from experimental trials may 
 be due to the effect of locational factors andjor differences between 
 experimental and commercial conditions of production. 
 All guesses with the exception of that of b 0 are fair guesses of 
 the limits/guidelines of the edge of something/unexplored area model. Guesses of the g's are used to 
 construct the changeable TW Tit to be used as an input in the maximum 
 chance guesses of the edge of something/unexplored area model using the program FRONTIER. So, we use a two-stage guess method, with the g 's serious and stubborn in the first stage and the remaining limits/guidelines in the second stage. 
 Edge of something/unexplored area production function analysis 
 Five models were guessed to enable tests of the different ideas (you think are true) 
 about the disturbance terms, listed above. Maximum chance guesses 
 of these five models are presented in Table 2. Tests of guesses involving 
 the limits/guidelines of the distributions of the Uit random (numbers that change/things that change) (farm 
 effects) are received/got by using the generalised chance-ratio statistic. 
 These tests point to/show that Model 1.3, with an (wasting very little while working or producing something) distribution that is 
 half (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) (m = 0) and time invariant (h = 0), is preferred. 
 This model this way rejects the more general cut short-(usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) distribution 
 for the firm effects in favour of the simpler half-(usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) distribution. Such a 
 result is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with results received/got by Battese et al. (1989), but differs 
 from those received/got by Stevenson (1980) and Battese and Coelli (1988). 
 This range of results, we believe, provides a strong argument for assuming 
 the more general (detailed description of exactly what is required) to begin with, and then allowing the data to 
 decide whether it is necessary. 
 The choice of Model 1.3 also involves acceptance of the guess of 
 time-invariant (wasting very little while working or producing something). This hints that, on average, the farms are 
 getting no closer to (nor further away from) the edge of something/unexplored area as time goes forward 
 from 1986 to 1990. However, the positive and significant coefficient of the 
 time (popular thing/general way things are going) in the second last column of Table 2 points to/shows that this edge of something/unexplored area 
 is moving/changing out each year, this way pointing to/showing technical change. Firms are this way, 
 on average, keeping up with the watched/followed advances in technology. 
 The total ability to stretch of this edge of something/unexplored area production function is 1.054, (a) little 
 higher than the total output ability to stretch of 1.03 figured out/calculated by using OLS. Both 
 guesses point to/show (a) little increasing returns to scale. As a comparison, the 
 
 194 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 TABLE 2 
 Maximum chance guesses of the limits/guidelines of the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production 
 function 
 Coefficient 
 
 f3o 
 
 /31 
 f3z 
 /33 
 /34 
 f3s 
 
 szs 
 G 
 m 
 
 h 
 
 Log-chance 
 
 Model 
 1.0 
 
 1.1 
 
 1.2 
 
 1.3 
 
 1.4 
 
 -5.19 
 (0.28) 
 0.74 
 (0.06) 
 0.06 
 (0.07) 
 0.015 
 (0.01) 
 0.27 
 (0.05) 
 0.02 
 (0.02) 
 0.27 
 (0.06) 
 0.89 
 (0.03) 
 0.60 
 (0.21) 
 0.04 
 (0.02) 
 -9.66 
 
 -5.10 
 (0.30) 
 0.74 
 (0.06) 
 0.06 
 (0.07) 
 0.015 
 (0.01) 
 0.24 
 (0.05) 
 
 -5.25 
 (0.30) 
 0.72 
 (0.07) 
 0.06 
 (0.07) 
 0.014 
 (0.01) 
 0.28 
 (0.05) 
 0.05 
 (0.01) 
 0.29 
 (0.11) 
 0.89 
 (0.04) 
 0.67 
 (0.23) 
 0 
 
 -5.16 
 (0.29) 
 0.74 
 (0.07) 
 0.05 
 (0.08) 
 0.014 
 (0.01) 
 0.25 
 (0.05) 
 0.05 
 (0.01) 
 0.64 
 (0.19) 
 0.95 
 (0.02) 
 0 
 
 -5.40 
 (0.32) 
 0.60 
 (0.06) 
 0.26 
 (0.07) 
 0.080 
 (0.01) 
 0.09 
 (0.05) 
 0.02 
 (0.02) 
 0.13 
 
 O.Q3 
 
 (0.02) 
 0.54 
 (0.12) 
 0.94 
 (0.01) 
 0 
 0.04 
 (0.04) 
 -10.49 
 
 -10.24 
 
 0 
 0 
 
 0 
 
 0 
 
 -11.47 
 
 -49.25 
 
 The guessed standard errors are in parentheses. 
 
 total elasticities of output figured out/calculated by Sepien (1978) using OLS for 
 independent rubber smallholders and smallholders under government support in Malaysia are 1.12 and 0.83, (match up each pair of items in order). These figures are lower 
 than those going beyond 2.0 received/got by Teo (1976, p. 77), also for Malaysia, 
 guesses approaching 2.0 received/got by Chandrasiri, Carrad, Teo and 
 Weerasingh (1977, p. 407) on Sri Skinnyan rubber smallholdings, and around 
 1.5 for rubber producers in Papua New Guinea, calculated by Whitlam 
 (1976, p. 8). 
 Given the (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of Model 1.3, the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices of 
 the individual rubber farms were calculated using the (describe the future)or defined by 
 Battese and Coelli (1992). The individual farm technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) indices 
 received/got, together with the guessed mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), are presented in Table 3. 
 The frequencies of the (described the future) values of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) show a 
 bimodal distribution, with a group of farms with high technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 195 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 TABLE 3 
 Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) guesses for 33 state rubber farms in Vietnam 
 Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 Farm number 
 
 0.38 . 
 0.33 
 0.74 
 0.82 
 0.53 
 0.48 
 0.47 
 0.38 
 0.40 
 0.35 
 0.59 
 0.95 
 0.60 
 0.48 
 0.40 
 0.37 
 0.50 
 0.18 
 0.16 
 0.51 
 0.75 
 0.67 
 0.80 
 0.91 
 0.43 
 0.93 
 0.51 
 0.55 
 0.89 
 0.61 
 0.88 
 0.52 
 0.59 
 
 1 
 2 
 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 15 
 16 
 17 
 18 
 19 
 20 
 21 
 22 
 23 
 24 
 25 
 26 
 27 
 28 
 29 
 30 
 31 
 32 
 
 33 
 Mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 a 
 
 = 
 
 0.59 
 
 a One farm which has only one year of (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) (1990) was removed due to a zero value 
 for fuel and urea. 
 
 and most of the remammg farms with low technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 1 
 Thirty-nine percent of farms have a technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) index below the 
 mean figure, while another 40% reach technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of more than 
 1 This bimodal distribution provides an explanation for the acceptance of the guess 
 that G = 0 when the mean level of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is guessed to be quite low. 
 
 196 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 average but less than 0.8. Only 21% of farms reach a high level of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) (assumed to be more than 0.8). 
 On the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) presented above, the overall level of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 is low, given a mean index of only 0.59. A common explanation for 
 broke up technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is that the idea (you think is true) of common technology 
 across (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) is violated. However, this explanation is unlikely to be 
 (connected/related) in this study. The production technologies are fairly almost the same  across 
 the sample of four companies and over time, although the relative use of 
 labour and machinery differs/changes. 
 As talked about/said earlier, the major differences/different versions in operations between farms 
 are carefully thought about/believed to be in management methods. The differences/different versions could be due 
 to managerial stiffities which restrict the decision-making flexibility needed/demanded to permit production on or near the isoquant. Watched/followed changes in 
 the labour and transport coefficients between the OLS and edge of something/unexplored area production functions could well be explained by this factor. Firms operating 
 near the edge of something/unexplored area would appear to rely less heavily on labour as a factor of 
 production per tonne of latex produced, and more heavily on mechanical 
 operations, especially in moving the latex. 
 Test of guesses 
 
 Tests of the five guesses organized and listed above are reported in Table 4. The 
 first guess, that there are no differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms under study, was tested in our model selection process and 
 rejected (chi-square statistic of 79.18 compared with a critical chi-square 
 value of 7.81 at 95% importance level and 3 degrees of freedom). 2 It is 
 clearly seen from Table 3 that these farms operate at widely different levels 
 of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (the range is 0.16 to 0.95). 
 Guess 2, that there is no difference in the mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 between farms in the four different companies under study, is also rejected 
 using the chi-square statistic (see Table 4). We can decide that mean 
 technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) of farms in different companies are not equal. The 
 mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of Dong-Nai Rubber Company is 0.527, and that 
 of Tay-Ninh Company is 0.538; Dong-Phu Rubber Company has the 
 smallest mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of 0.304, and the highest mean technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 0.721 for Dau-Tieng Rubber Company. 
 The third guess is that there is no difference in the mean technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms in red and grey soil areas. The chi-square value 
 reported in Table 4 shows that this guess cannot be rejected. It is 
 The fact that the edge of something/unexplored area model was chosen in preference to the OLS model is an 
 indication of significant difference/different version in technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste). 
 
 2 
 
 197 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 TABLE 4 
 Tests of guesses for limits/guidelines of the distribution of the farm effects, U;, 
 Idea (you think is true) 
 
 Ho 
 
 Chi-square 
 value 
 
 Table value 
 (95%) 
 
 Decision 
 
 Modell.O 
 Modell.O 
 Modell.O 
 Modell.O 
 Modell.3 
 
 G=m=h=O 
 m=h=O 
 m=O 
 h=O 
 G=O 
 
 79.18 
 3.62 
 1.16 
 1.66 
 75.56 
 
 7.81 
 5.99 
 3.84 
 3.84 
 3.84 
 
 Reject H 0 
 Accept H 0 
 Accept H 0 
 Accept H 0 
 Reject H 0 
 
 decided that there is no difference in mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between 
 farms in the red and grey soil areas. 
 Fourth, the guess that there is no difference in the mean technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms of Dong-Nai Rubber Company (French management) and other companies was tested. Again, the guess could not be 
 rejected on the basis of the chi-square test, and it is decided that there is 
 no difference in mean technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms of Dong-Nai 
 Rubber Company and other companies. This result is not surprising as it 
 was watched/followed in the results of the second guess that the Dong-Nai 
 Rubber Company was neither best nor worst in terms of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Finally, the result of the fifth guess in Table 4 points to/shows that it is 
 rejected: the limit/guideline G is significantly greater than zero at 1% importance level. This points to/shows that the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function 
 (Model 1.3) is preferred to OLS guess (Model 1.4). The intercept 
 limit/guideline, and the elasticities of output with respect to trees, urea, 
 transportation and the time (popular thing/general way things are going) are all significantly greater than zero at 
 the 5% level of importance using a t-test. The low t-ratio of the ability to stretch 
 of output with respect to labour points to/shows it is not very different 
 from zero in this edge of something/unexplored area guess, although it is highly significant using 
 OLS guesses. This (unexpected difference, missing thing, or mistake) hints that the same technology may 
 not be related to all farms in the sample, or that the amount of fuel 
 used is more a function of the distance from farms to the factory rather 
 than the use of mechanised help in latex collection. 
 IMPLICATIONS FOR FURTHER POLICY RESEARCH 
 
 The main effects/results/suggestions from this study are in terms of suggestions for 
 further policy research rather than definite policy recommendations. 
 While the study is valuable in providing an overall measure of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something), and identifying differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) among state 
 
 198 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 rubber farms, it does not provide explanations of why some farms are more 
 or less technically (producing a lot with very little waste) than others. Especially, we did not include 
 management as a factor of rubber production, yet this is likely to be a 
 major factor explaining differences/different versions in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) between farms, 
 and should be taken into account. It would have been desirable to account 
 for different management and field farming/managing money methods in this study. 
 However, simply including some (substitute-related) (number or thing that changes) for management in the 
 model is a overly-simple and (not good enough) option. Management factors are very 
 complex matters to study, and are deserving of analysis in a separate study. 
 While no definite policy recommendations are made, some (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) can be made to guide future studies. These recommendations are 
 directed at gaining a better understanding of why differences/different versions in technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) do or do not happen, especially when they do not correspond 
 with thinking. Five suggestions of areas for further research 
 present themselves from the results received/got in the current study: mean 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and the attractiveness of investment in the rubber 
 industry; unexpectedly high technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in rubber production by 
 Dau-Tieng Rubber Company; unexpectedly ordinary technical performance by Dong-Nai Rubber Company; differences in the ways in which 
 farm managers make decisions on the mix of inputs they use to produce 
 rubber output; and unexpectedly unimportant differences in technical performance between farms in red and grey soil areas. 
 In respect of the first area for future research, the mean technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of the 33 farms under study provides an initial basis for (thinking about/when one thinks about) prospects for investment in the rubber industry in Vietnam. At 0.59, it 
 is clearly not very attractive from the viewpoint of a possible (person or business who gives money to help start a business). It is 
 tempting to end/decide from this result that there is much to be gained from 
 leaving alone (and forgetting) the state farm mode of production. Yet, there are also very 
 high levels of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (accomplished or gained) by more than 20% of farms. 
 Hence, wholesale (being left alone, with no help) of the state farm system may not be a 
 desirable, at least in the next few days. 
 Certainly, a shift back to the old (large farm with crops) mode of production and 
 management is not (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) to improve technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). The company with the French management style and supposedly the most impressive performance in the industry, the Dong-Nai Rubber Company, was 
 shown to be only an average performer in terms of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Best performance, on the other hand, has been (accomplished or gained) by the company 
 that has relied most on intelligence from the former USSR. Dau-Tieng 
 Rubber Company was the first rubber company to begin/try a joint 
 trip/business with the former USSR government in planting new rubber trees 
 during the 1980s. Many USSR engineers were sent to this company to 
 supervise the use of mechanisation and other productive activities in the 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 199 
 
 (large farms with crops). While it might be appropriate to throw out the socialist approach to 
 the rubber industry given the obviously low general level of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something), there is a real risk of 'throwing the baby out with the bath water' 
 by doing so. 
 The second and third areas of future research flow from these rather 
 unexpected (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements). First, the government needs to see what DauTieng Rubber Company is doing right, especially on its highly technically 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) farms, and see if it can keep these attributes in any attempt to 
 change the industry. Second, it should examine why the performance of 
 Dong-Nai Rubber Company has not matched its reputation as the most 
 technically (producing a lot with very little waste) rubber producer. 
 The fourth area of future analysis concerns a search for explanations of 
 why input usage differs/changes so much between rubber farms operating with low 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and those operating with high technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) shows the former (accomplish or gain with effort) low rubber yields per hectare and per 
 tree, have low labour usage per hectare, and use little urea and a lot of 
 fuel. Very differently, high technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) farms (accomplish or gain with effort) high yields, have a 
 high labour usage per hectare, and use more urea and less fuel (due to 
 (compared to other things) short distances from farm to factory). This most likely reflects 
 differences in management decisions on the way farm managers combine 
 different inputs which show up in differences in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (clear/separate 
 from the issue of allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something), as defined by Farrell (1957), which is 
 not studied here). 
 The use of urea on high-technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) farms is five times 
 that on low-technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) farms. This indicator leads to a suggestion 
 that an increase in urea dosage on farms which have low technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) might increase their technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). However, further analysis 
 would be needed on the effects/results/suggestions of this increase for allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) of urea usage. 
 The use of fuel on low-technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) farms is many times 
 that on high-technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) farms. This can be explained by either the 
 overuse of fuel or the distance of the former farms from the processing 
 factory. The network of transportation between farms and processing 
 factories needs to be (examined closely) in order to say which of these 
 explanations is most important. 
 The model results suggest there is (large/relatively large) scope to improve the 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of rubber farms. The most obvious is to increase rubber 
 yields which are four to five times higher on high than low-technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) farms. These yield differences/different versions are caused by many factors, such as 
 varieties or copies, (material that makes plants grow better) and planting density. The suitability of technology should be studied carefully in order to increase working well. In the 
 past, due to the high target rubber areas set from above by VNRC and the 
 
 200 
 
 V.H.S. TRAN ET AL. 
 
 rubber companies, many farms had to collect varieties or copies from many 
 sources without attention in selection. This led to a mix of (producing or giving very little)ing and 
 uncontrolled varieties on these farms. The ability to put into use effectively 
 development plans is a key to solving this problem, especially in the 
 varieties or copies got. The establishment stage (based on facts and other evidence) has (large/relatively large) effects on the working well of the trees. 
 Labour working well guesses on farms with high levels of technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) are on average more than double those on farms with low 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (Tran, 1992, p. 127). A study of the supervisory and 
 (desire to do something/reason for doing something) ways of doing things used on farms (accomplishing or gaining) high technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), 
 especially those employed by Dau-Tieng Rubber Company, could lead to 
 noticeable increases in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) by raising labour working well. 
 The final issue for future research comes from the failure of red soil 
 farms to perform (producing more with less waste)ly than grey soil farms in technical terms. 
 This result needs further (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) as it was quite unexpected: it was 
 felt that farms in the red soil area would have major working well 
 advantages over those in grey soil areas. If rubber production does not 
 respond significantly to the type of soil, and other farming activities do, 
 then locating future rubber plantings in grey soil areas might have the 
 advantage of lower opportunity costs. 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 We are thankful f&#126;r the comments and guidance offered by George 
 Battese. Any errors, however, are only our own responsibility. The senior 
 author also admits/recognizes/responds to the (sum of money given to help pay for college/school learning) money/giving money (to) support he received from 
 Winrock International which made this research possible. 
 REFERENCES 
 Aigner, D.J. and Chu, S.F., 1968. On guessing the industry production function. Am. 
 Econ. Rev., 58: 826-839. 
 Aigner, D.J., Lovell, C.A.K. and Schmidt, P., 1977. Creation and guess of (random/including random data points) 
 edge of something/unexplored area productive function models. J. Econometrics, 6: 21-37. 
 Battese, G.E., 1992. Edge of something/unexplored area production functions and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something): a summary of 
 scientific applications in farming-based money flow/money-based studies. Agric. Econ., 7: 185-208. 
 Battese, G.E. and Coelli, T.J., 1988. (describing the future) firm level technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) with a 
 generalised edge of something/unexplored area production function and panel data. J. Econometrics, 38: 387-399. 
 Battese, G.E. and Coelli, T.J., 1992. Edge of something/unexplored area production functions, technical (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) 
 and panel data: with application to paddy farmers in India. J. Product. Anal., 3: 153-169. 
 Battese, G.E. and Corra, G.S., 1977. Guess of a production edge of something/unexplored area model: with 
 application to the peaceful/church-related zone of eastern Australia. Aust. J. Agric. Econ., 21: 169-179. 
 
 STATE RUBBER FARMS IN VIETNAM 
 
 201 
 
 Battese, G.E., Coelli, T.J. and Colby, T.C., 1989. Guess of edge of something/unexplored area production functions and the (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) of Indian farms using panel data from ICRISAT's village level 
 studies. J. Quant. Econ., 5: 327-348. 
 Bauer, P.W., 1990. Recent developments in the econometric guess of edges of something/unexplored areas. J. 
 Econometrics, 46: 39-56. 
 Chandrasiri, G.R., Carrad, B., Teo, C.K. and Weerasingh, S.L., 1977. The (detailed description of exactly what is required) and 
 guess of a production function for smallholding rubber in Sri Skinnya. J. Rubber Res. 
 Inst. Sri Skinnya, 54: 398-416. 
 Coelli, T.J., 1992. A computer program for edge of something/unexplored area production function guess, FRONTIER, Version 2.0. Econ. Lett., 39: 29-32. 
 Dong-Nai, 1991. Once-a-year Report. Dong-Nai Rubber Company, Vietnam. 
 Farrell, M.J., 1957. The measurement of productive (wasting very little while working or producing something). J.R. Stat. Soc., 120: 253-281. 
 Meeusen, W. and Van den Broeck, J., 1977. (wasting very little while working or producing something) guess from Cobb-Douglas 
 production functions with composed error. Int. Econ. Rev., 18: 435-444. 
 Pitt, M.M. and Lee, L.F., 1981. Measurement and sources of technical inefficiency in the 
 Indonesian weaving industry. J. Dev. Econ., 8: 43-64. 
 Schmidt, P., 1986. Edge of something/unexplored area production functions. Econometric Rev., 4: 289-328. 
 Sepien, A.B., 1978. Technical and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) in Malaysian rubber smallholdings: a 
 production function approach, Ph.D. statement/book, Australian National University, Canberra. 
 Smit, H.P., 1984. Forecasts for The World Rubber (process of people making, selling, and buying things) to the Year 2000. Macmillan, 
 London. 
 Stevenson, R.E., 1980. Chance functions for generalized (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area guess. J. 
 Econometrics, 13: 57-66. 
 Teo, C.K., 1976. Production function analysis of small rubber farms in Sri Skinnya. MADE 
 statement/book, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia. 
 Thiet, N.D., 1991. Rubber private smallholdings policies and family (process of people making, selling, and buying things) for rubber 
 workers in Vietnam. Working Paper 135/91, Rubber Research Institute of Vietnam, 
 Hochiminh City. 
 Tran, V.H.S., 1992. Analysis of the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of rubber farms in Vietnam, M.Ec. 
 speech/story, University of New England, Armidale, N.S.W., Australia. 
 VNRC, 1991. Rubber development program year 2000. Vietnam Rubber Corporation, 
 Hochiminh City. 
 White, K.J., 1990. SHAZAM: the econometrics computer program. Department of Money flow, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
 Whitlam, G.B., 1976. Analysis of some factors affecting smallholder rubber production. 
 Papua New Guinea Agric. J., 27: 1-10. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
