 Money-based Development and the Role of Farming-based Technology 
 JEL Codes: O13, Q10, Q16 
 Sharmistha Self 
 Department of Money flow 
 Missouri State University 
 Springfield, Missouri 65897 
 E-mail: sself@missouristate.edu 
 Richard Grabowski 
 Department of Money flow 
 Southern Illinois University 
 Carbondale, Illinois 62901 
 E-mail: ricardo@siu.edu 
 618-453-5082 
 Abstract: In earlier debates on money-based development, the farming-based part/area's role was 
 somewhat argument-causing. While (related to the existence of two things) models highlighted the importance of 
 farming, the mainstream books placed a greater focus on the creation of a 
 modern industrial part/area. Soon farming disappeared from the mainstream development 
 books to come out again (not very long ago) with a variety of multiple-part/area growth models 
 focusing on the key role of farming and specifically technology in farming. This 
 paper is an scientific cross-country analysis of farming-based technology's role in money-based 
 development. Specifically, the guess being tested is whether improvements in 
 farming-based technology affects long-run money-based growth. The 
 results point to/show that farming-based modernization has a positive effect on both measures of 
 money-based growth and human development. 
 Keywords: farm-related, technology, growth, well-being 
 
 Economic Development and the Role of Farming-based Technology 
 Introduction 
 At first development money flow/money-based studies (focused mental and physical effort) on questions about the 
 (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) process. The main questions had to do with how to improve through 
 overcoming the restrictions of traditional (community of people/all good people in the world). The last thing just mentioned was often linked with 
 farming and (away from cities) people, commonly called poor (person) farming. This part/area was 
 generally thought to act as a drag on the development process. This way traditional and 
 poor (person) farming were (blocking or stopping things), systems which had to be reduced and eventually 
 eliminated if modernization was to succeed. 
 However, money-based history experts often saw farming as playing a very important role in 
 the (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) of England. (related to the existence of two things) models also directly modeled traditional 
 farming in the long-run growth process. In these models the end of/final opinion often suggested 
 that the long-run growth process must be a balanced one with farming-based working well a 
 necessary condition for (happening sometime in the future)  industrial/manufacturing growth. In other words, if 
 working well in farming remained spoiled, the development of a modern 
 manufacturing part/area would be limited. 
 Throughout much of the 1980s and 1990s much of the analysis of the 
 role/contribution of farming was carried out by farming-based money-flow experts. Much of this 
 work (focused one's effort/increased/mainly studied) on inventions in farming, the institutional structure 
 necessary to help develop technical invention of new things, etc. However, in terms of long-run growth 
 models, farming disappeared. This part/area and its role were, mostly, ignored 
 in models of long-run growth focusing on (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) and manufacturing. 
 
 1 
 
 Recently, however, one finds a reappearance of interest in farming. Papers by 
 Gollin, et. al. (2002) and Olsson and Hibbs (2005) argue that farming and the 
 working well of farming is the key to understanding the timing of the move/change from an 
 land-related based to an industrially based (community of people/all good people in the world). The importance of farming-based 
 technology in reducing poorness is found in Lipton (1977), Kerr and Kolavalli (1999), 
 Datt and Ravallion (1998), Ravallion and Datt (1999), Mellor (2001), and Thirtle et al. 
 (2003) to name a few. Also, some (not appearing or happening in the usual way) roles have also been attributed to 
 agriculture in the development process. 
 Given the books referred to above on the importance of farming and 
 farming-based technology in the development process, the guess in this paper 
 concerning farming is that improvements in farming-based technology are a (something that must exist before something else can happen) to, and have a significant good effect on, long-run growth. The hint/result/effect 
 of such a guess would be that countries which did not have the necessary (something that must exist before something else can happen), that is they did not improve farming-based technology, did not grow as fast as 
 those that did. The paper is an scientific exercise in testing the above guess. 
 The paper is organized as follows. The first section will review the books, 
 both traditional and (not appearing or happening in the usual way), on agriculture's role in the growth and development 
 process. Section two will discuss the data used as well as the scientific way(s) of doing things 
 that is applied. Sections three and four will summarize the scientific results with respect 
 to growth and different measures of farming-based technology. Section five will present the 
 results related to human development. Finally, section six summarizes the paper and 
 presents the important ends/end results. 
 
 2 
 
 Review of the Books 
 Much of the early thinking on money-based development ignored agriculture 
 completely. For example, Rosenstein-Rodan's (1943) early work (focused one's effort/increased/mainly studied) on 
 manufacturing and industry. He argued that the bit by bit establishment of 
 manufacturing in poor areas not having enoughfrastructure would not likely be successful. 
 Instead, investment in industry and manufacturing had to be on a broad front such that 
 different businesses could create markets for each other's products. 
 There were a set of explanations which, however, did see a role in the development 
 process for farming. These were (related to the existence of two things) explanations of development built by 
 Lewis (1954), Fei and Ranis (1961), and Jorgenson (1961). These explanations divided the 
 less developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) into the usual and modern part/area. The modern part/area was 
 driven by profit (biggest increase/best possible extent) and the collection of physical capital. The usual 
 part/area was survival/income oriented and usually thought to be ruled by poor (person) 
 farming-based production. This part/area was seen as output sharing (machines/methods/ways) 
 rather than profit (biggest increase/best possible extent). 
 In many of these models it was assumed that the usual part/area was 
 seen as extra labor. That is, there was so much labor in this part/area that it 
 could be withdrawn and put to productive work in the modern part/area without any fall in 
 output in the usual part/area (not important product of labor in the usual part/area is zero). 
 In effect, "free growth" was possible through getting (something) ready for action of labor for modern 
 production. However, once extra labor was exhausted, the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the modern 
 part/area might very well be strangled. Continued withdrawal of labor would lead to falling 
 output in the usual part/area leading to a rise in the relative price of the usual 
 
 3 
 
 sector output relative to that in the modern part/area. Johnston and Mellor (1961) built upon 
 these ideas in their analysis of the role of farming in overall money-based development. 
 They argued that farming supplied the labor necessary to man the modern part/area firms 
 as well as the food necessary to feed that labor. Also, the farming-based part/area was 
 seen as serving as a market for the produce of the modern part/area, a stimulus from the 
 demand side. Finally, maybe most importantly, farming was likely to serve as the 
 main source of savings necessary to finance the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the modern part/area. 
 After these developments, farming disappeared from general models aimed at 
 carefully studying money-based growth and development. Instead, much of the books concerned 
 with farming (focused mental and physical effort) on carefully studying working well growth in the usual, 
 farming-based part/area. Maybe the most interesting and new and interesting work in this area has 
 been done/tried by Hayami and Ruttan (1985) in developing a explanation of caused 
 technical and institutional invention of new things. 
 (not very long ago), multiple part/area growth models have begun to be built with 
 farming-based parts/areas. Matsuyama (1991) developed an endogenous, two part/area growth 
 model. In this model the engine of growth, the driving force, was learning by doing in 
 the manufacturing part/area. He compared and contrasted the effects/results/suggestions of a closed and 
 open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) model. In the closed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) case, an increase in farming-based 
 working well (as measured by total factor working well) spurs overall money-based growth 
 since this (reduces/ slows/ slowly moves) the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of learning by doing via manufacturing. However, in the 
 open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) case there is a negative link between farming-based working well and overall 
 growth. This happens because the more productive the farming-based part/area is, the more 
 
 4 
 
 resources that will be loyal to/be dedicated to farming based on (serving to compare two or more things) advantage. This, of 
 course, hints less manufacturing, less learning by doing, and less growth. 
 The results from Matsuyama's model are, of course, based on assuming that all 
 learning by doing happens in manufacturing, none in farming. However, learning by 
 doing in manufacturing could improve working well in farming and maybe the other way around, too. 
 More generally, the model's results stem from the idea (you think is true) that farming is, by 
 nature, (unable to do something) of sustaining fast working well growth. This way it is unavoidable that higher 
 initial working well in farming ((coming from the outside of something)ly decided/figured out) would lower long-run 
 growth. 
 This idea that working well growth is slow in farming is actually argued 
 by scientific analysis. Martin and Mitra (2001) use a panel data set for about 
 50 countries over the period 1967-1992 to carefully study this issue. They found that at all 
 levels of development technical progress appears to have been faster in farming than 
 in manufacturing. Also, "there is strong (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of coming together in levels and 
 growth rates of TFP in farming, suggesting (compared to other things) fast international spreading around 
 of invention of new things" (p.417). These results suggest that a large farming-based part/area need not be a 
 disadvantage in the overall growth process. It may likely be an advantage if working well 
 growth is fast. 
 There is also a huge books on the role of the farming-based part/area and farming-based 
 technology in reducing poorness. Thirtle, et al. (2003) shows that research-led 
 (related to computers and science) change in the farming-based part/area creates enough working well growth to 
 create high rates of return in Africa and Asia and (in a big way) reduces poorness in these 
 areas. Also, Lipton (1977) showed that farming-based growth based on improved 
 
 5 
 
 technology was effective in reducing poorness in developing countries. Kerr and Kolavalli 
 (1999) argued that it was research-led (related to computers and science) change in farming that led Asian 
 countries from hungers to food good amount. Mellor (2001) argued that farming-based 
 working well reduces both (away from cities) as well as very poor cities, an idea echoed in Datt and 
 Ravallion (1998) and Ravallion and Datt (1999). Part/areaal studies done for 
 individual countries or selected areas by Datt and Ravallion (1996), Warr (2001), and 
 Woden (1999), managing and doing research on India, Southeast Asia, and Bangladesh 
 (match up each pair of items in order), show that growth in the first (or most important) or farming-based part/area helps to reduce both 
 (away from cities) as well as very poor cities more effectively than city-based  growth. 
 People (who try to explain things) have now begun to clearly model the farming-based part/area in multiple 
 part/area growth models. A recent example of this is given by the work of Gollin, 
 Parente, and Rogerson (2002). They extend the neoclassical model to includes an 
 farming-based part/area. They attempt to model the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change that comes with 
 development (farming shrinking, manufacturing expanding). The gut feeling of the 
 model can be summarized as follows. Farming-based output per person must reach a certain 
 level before modern technology will be applied to farming-based production and labor can 
 flow out of farming and into industry. The rate at which labor can then flow out is 
 figured out by/decided by the rate of (related to computers and science) change in farming. Low farming-based 
 working well (labor working well) can this way (in a big way) delay the beginning of 
 (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things). 
 Other research has examined new links between farming and the growth of the 
 rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). One can think of these new links as representing (not appearing or happening in the usual way) 
 roles for farming. Timmer (1995) argues that farming plays a a big role in 
 
 6 
 
 reducing poorness by stimulating the development of farming activities as well as 
 stimulating the demand for manufactured inputs. Stringer (2001) argues that the 
 farming-based part/area (does/completes) important social welfare functions in developing nations. 
 For example, during an money-based downturn or an external income shock or (money-related) 
 problem, farming can act "as a buffer, safety net, and as an money-based (make steady/make firm and strong)r" (p.7). 
 The flexibility of the production process allows for work hard to be substituted for capital this way 
 cushioning money-based blows. This way people often return to the farm during bad times. 
 One can summarize much of this discussion in the following way. Agriculture's 
 role in the development process can be seen as a supplier of useful things/valuable supplies, most importantly 
 labor, for the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of modern manufacturing. If unbalance exists such that the 
 not important product of labor in manufacturing goes beyond that in farming (the not important 
 product of labor in farm-related need not be zero as Lewis (at first/before other things happened) argued), then 
 moving (from one place to another) labor from the farming-based part/area to the manufacturing part/area will improve 
 overall growth. Scientifically, there seems to be support for the suggestion/possible plan that factor 
 market unbalance creates an opportunity to improve growth by reallocating useful things/valuable supplies 
 from farming to manufacturing (see Humphries and Knowles (1998), Dowrick and 
 Gemmell (1991), and Feder (1986)). A second thin piece/string of thought argues that before the 
 (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) process can happen an increase in farming-based working well must happen. 
 Related to this, improvements in working well in farming may in fact be easier for less 
 developed nations to bring about, that is the (possibility of/possible happening of)  raising farming-based working well 
 may be very great, providing the foundation for fast overall growth. Finally, improved 
 farming-based working well may be the most effective (machine/method/way) for improving well being 
 in areas away from cities and this in turn may (help increase/show in a good way) more fast overall growth. 
 
 7 
 
 This paper focuses on the role of farming-based working well (as measured by 
 farming-based technology) in the process of overall growth and its hit/effect on well being. 
 A few questions suggest themselves. Is the modernization of farming an important 
 (thing that decides something) of overall growth? Is this effect strong to including other (numbers that change/things that change)? 
 Given the (not appearing or happening in the usual way) roles for farming, does farming-based modernization have a 
 significant hit/effect on human development? Is this hit/effect strong to including other 
 (numbers that change/things that change)? The key (thing that's given/work that's done) of this paper is to use a few measures of farming-based 
 technology in an scientific guess process which tries to answer these questions. 
 The way(s) of doing things and data that will be used to deal with these/to speak to these questions is discussed in 
 the following section. 
 
 Way(s) of doing things and Data 
 In this paper, it is guessed that better farming-based technology which leads to 
 improvements in farming-based working well is a pre-condition for and has a significant 
 hit/effect on long-run growth, where growth is defined as the average rate of change of real 
 money made per person from 1960 to 1995. This paper uses four different measures of 
 farming-based working well. The first two measures of farming-based working well are a 
 measure of (material that makes plants grow better) strength and an interaction term of (material that makes plants grow better) and tractor strength. 
 Often farming-based technology is divided into two categories: body-chemical related and 
 mechanical. Body-chemical related technologies generally require an (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 usage while mechanical inventions of new things require increased usage of tools such as 
 tractors, often combined with increased (material that makes plants grow better) use. The third measure is an interaction 
 term incorporating (material that makes plants grow better) strength, tractor strength, and education of the labor force. 
 
 8 
 
 This incorporates a workers element under the idea (you think is true) that body-chemical related and 
 mechanical technologies can only be effectively used if the people using them 
 have (good) enough knowledge. 
 The first three measures of working well discussed above are indirect in nature in 
 that the idea (you think is true) is that the more intensive the use of tractors, (material that makes plants grow better), and education, 
 the more productive the farming-based part/area. The fourth measure of farming-based 
 working well is total factor working well in farming as measured by the Malmquist 
 index. The index uses a non-parametric approach for building production edges of something/unexplored areas 
 for a group of countries and measuring each country's output relative to that edge of something/unexplored area. 
 Working well growth measures the extent to which a country moves towards this edge of something/unexplored area 
 even as this edge of something/unexplored area itself moves out (via (related to computers and science) change) through time. It is a 
 general measure of working well (incorporating the effect of all inputs) rather than a 
 partial measure (such as the average product of labor or capital). 
 The first three measures of farming-based technology are used in the analysis of 
 this section of the paper. In order to get some gut feeling in terms of the relation between 
 money-based growth and the first three measures of farming-based technology, the analysis 
 begins by checking the relationship between money-based growth (growth in real GDP per 
 capita) over the time period 1960 to 1995 and each of the three measures of farming-based 
 working well at the beginning of the period. 
 
 Table 1 goes here 
 
 9 
 
 The lnFert61 (number or thing that changes) is the natural log of (material that makes plants grow better) strength for the year 1961. It 
 is measured as kilograms (nitrogen, potash, phosphates) per hectare of land in 1961. The 
 second measure of farming-based technology is lnModern61. It is an interaction term 
 formed by multiplying (material that makes plants grow better) strength (1961) by tractor strength (tractors per hectare 
 of land in 1961). The third measure is lnAgModern61 which is an interaction term 
 formed by multiplying (material that makes plants grow better) strength in 1961 by tractor strength in 1961 by average 
 years of education (1965). This is a wider measure of farming-based technology since it 
 includes the hit/effect of tractors and workers. Average years of education in 
 1965 represents the earliest availability of this data. The relationship-related table shows that all 
 three measures of initial farming-based working well are highly related to money-based 
 growth. 
 In order to test the guess of the paper, we begin by building a simple 
 model given by: 
 (1a) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnFert61) + d(Asia) + e(LatA) + f(SSA) + ε, 
 (1b) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c (lnModern61) + d(Asia) + e(LatA) + f(SSA) + ε, 
 (1c) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c (lnAgModern61) + d(Asia) + e(LatA) + f(SSA) + ε. 
 The (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) is given by GR6095 which is the growth rate of real GDP 
 per person from 1960 to 1995. In addition to the measures of farming-based technology, the 
 two equations also include the natural log of GDP per person in 1960 (lnGDP60) in order 
 to take by force/take control of any sort of coming together effect which might happen. Also, (related to a large area) 
 dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for Asia (Asia) Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), and Latin America (LatA) 
 are also included. Equations (1a), (1b) and (1c) try to take by force/take control of the hit/effect of farming-based 
 technology on money made per person growth for the given period after we control for the 
 
 10 
 
 influences of money made per person at the beginning of this time period, to account for any 
 coming together or leftover/extra effect, as well as (related to a large area) hit/effect from the three areas 
 talked about/said above. 
 It should be pointed out that the type of analysis illustrated above is subject to an 
 endogeneity issue or problem. There are two related issues that explain the endogeneity 
 problem. First, endogenous (numbers that change/things that change) are those (numbers that change/things that change) which are figured out by/decided by other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) in the system instead of (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) which can be thought about/believed 
 external shocks to the system. The other most important source of endogeneity is reverse 
 (things causing other things to happen) that is when two (numbers that change/things that change) (or more) may be causing each other (at the same time). 
 So, to be able to make an real (proof that one thing definitely causes another) claim one needs a truly (coming from the outside of something) (number or thing that changes), 
 that is, a (number or thing that changes) which is not related to any of the other (numbers that change/things that change) in the system, 
 unseen or watched/followed. The hint/result/effect of such endogeneity issues for the purpose of 
 this paper is that our main (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)) (a measure of farming-based technology) 
 and the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) could be influenced by some other unseen factor and/or 
 the (numbers that change/things that change) could be (going in both directions)ly (proof that one thing definitely causes another). This way making arguments concerning 
 (things causing other things to happen) from independent to (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)) becomes filled with problems. Although we 
 have chosen measures of technology at the start of the time period under analysis, this 
 does not completely solve the problem. The ideal solution to the problem would be to 
 use instrumental (numbers that change/things that change) guesses. However, useful and appropriate (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) are 
 not immediately obvious and using the wrong (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) would lead to unreliable 
 results. With this in mind, we have decided not to chase after instrumental (numbers that change/things that change) analysis. 
 However, given the discussion above we would like to admit/recognize/respond to the imitations in our 
 present analysis given the possible endogeneity issues. 
 
 11 
 
 After guessing the above equation(s) the model is broadened to identify and 
 control for other (numbers that change/things that change) that may also have affected the growth of money made per person 
 during that period. This will also serve as a test of strength of the results to model 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required). The more general model is given by the following equations: 
 (2a) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnFert61) + d(lnSchool65) + e(lnInv6095) 
 + f(LogFrankRom) + g(ICRGE80) + h(Asia) + i(LatA) + j(SSA) + ε, 
 (2b) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnFERT61) + d(lnSchool65) + e(Inv6095) 
 + f(LogFrankRom) + g(Statehist) + h(Asia) + i(LatA) + j(SSA) + ε, 
 (3a) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnModern61) + d(lnSchool65) + e(lnInv6095) 
 + f(LogFrankRom) + g(ICRGE80) + h(Asia)+ i(LatA) + j(SSA) + ε, 
 (3b) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnModern61) + d(lnSchool65) + e(lnInv6095) 
 + f(LogFrankRom) + g(Statehist) + h(Asia) + i(LatA) + j(SSA) + ε, 
 (4a) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnAgModern61) + d(lnInv6095) + e(LogFrankRom) 
 + f(ICRGE80) + g(Asia) + h(LatA) + i(SSA) + ε, 
 (4b) GR6095 = a + b(lnGDP60) + c(lnAgModern61) + d(lnInv6095) + e(LogFrankRom) 
 + f(Statehist) + g(Asia) + h(LatA) + i(SSA) + ε. 
 One of the added/more (numbers that change/things that change) added is a measure for educational accomplishment 
 given by lnSchool65 which is the natural log of the years of total education of the 
 population in 1965. Since lnAgModern61 includes a measure of workers, the 
 lnSchool65 (number or thing that changes) was left out/kept out from the guess of equations (4a) and (4b) to avoid 
 multicollinearity issues. Added/more (numbers that change/things that change) include a measure of investment given by 
 lnInv6095 which is the natural log of average investment from 1960 to 1995 (this is gross 
 (transfer of money from individuals to businesses) which consists of additions to the fixed valuable things of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) plus the 
 
 12 
 
 net change in inventories), a measure of institutional quality given by ICRGE80 which is 
 an average of five different measures of institutional quality, a (number or thing that changes) for state a long time ago 
 given by Statehist , and a series of dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for Asia (Asia), Latin America 
 (LatA), and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Finally, most previous scientific work generally 
 include some measure of the degree of openness of a nation. To measure this, the 
 instrumental (number or thing that changes) built by Frankel and Roemer (1996) is used. It is the log 
 of the (described the future) trade share of an (process of people making, selling, and buying things), based on a gravity model of international 
 trade that only uses a country's population and (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) features (LogFrankRom). 
 Frankel and Roemer (1996) point to/show that this (number or thing that changes) is strongly related to actual trade 
 shares.1 
 A few of these (numbers that change/things that change) need further explanation. The Statehist (number or thing that changes) is an 
 index measuring the type of state that exists (tribal level or above, foreign or locally 
 based, the land-based extent of the state) and how long it has existed for different areas of 
 the world. The time period covered is from 1 to 1950 C.E. The higher the index number, 
 the longer a state has been in existence. The guess is that the longer the state has 
 been in existence, the more likely it will have resolved issues of internal conflict and the 
 more legal/real the state is likely to be viewed by its people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.). This way growth is likely to be 
 higher. The ICRGE80 (number or thing that changes) is an average of measures of dishonesty, rejection of 
 contracts, stealing risk, rule of law, and slow-working quality for the year 1980. The 
 higher this average, the better the quality of institutions and better quality institutions are 
 thought to improve growth. As it turns out, the Statehist and ICRGE80 (numbers that change/things that change) are 
 strongly related to each other. As a result, in order to avoid multicollinearity issues these 
 (numbers that change/things that change) were not included together in any guess. This accounts for two versions, 
 
 13 
 
 (a) and (b), for each of the equations given above. Version (a) includes the institutional 
 quality (number or thing that changes) ICRGE80 and version (b) includes the state a long time ago (number or thing that changes) Statehist. 
 There have been some papers that have used ICRGE for different years as 
 a measure of institutional quality (Skill and Keefer, 1995), in an attempt to explain 
 growth. Easterly and Levine (2003) have used a almost the same  set of (numbers that change/things that change) to try to make a 
 difference between the effects of gifts and the effects of institutions on per person 
 GDP. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi 
 (2004) use (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) for measures of institutional quality and attempt to distinguish 
 between the effects of (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.), institutions, and policy on GDP per person. 
 Much of the data used to guess this and the previous equation are taken from 
 Bockstette, Chanda, and Putterman (2002). Specifically, GR6095, lnGDP60, lnInv6095, 
 ICRGE80, Statehist, and the (related to a large area) dummies all come from this paper. The lnSchool65 
 (number or thing that changes) comes from Barro and Lee (1993). The (material that makes plants grow better) strength and tractor strength 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are taken from the World Useful things/valuable supplies Institute (www.wri.org/) who in turn 
 received/made from the data from the FAO. 
 The discussion of the previous section pointed to/showed that farming is likely to play 
 an important role in terms of providing a safety net for a (community of people/all good people in the world) missing formal programs 
 aimed at social welfare. Under such an idea (you think is true) one would expect that the level of 
 human development would also be influenced by farming-based modernization. In order to 
 test this proposition, money made per person growth is replaced with the average level of the 
 human development index (HDI) from 1975 to 1995 as the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)). The HDI 
 is a summary measure of human development which is calculated as 
 HDI = 1/3 (life expectancy index) + 1/3 (education index) + 1/3 (GDP index). 
 
 14 
 
 The (how long a person is expected to live) index measures (how long a person is expected to live) at birth (relative measure), the 
 education index is a weighted index of the adult reading and writing ability rate and the gross enrollment 
 index, and the GDP index is calculated using (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) GDP per person (PPP US$_$). 
 The data used to calculate the average is taken from different issues of the Human 
 Development Report. This way the following equation is guessed to test the guess. 
 (5a) HDI7595 = α + β(lnFert61) + γ(lnInv6095) + δ(ICRGE80) + ζ(LogFrankRom) + 
 θ(Asia) + λ(LatA) + ν(SSA) + ε. 
 (5b) HDI7595 = α + β(lnModern61) + γ(lnInv6095) + δ(ICRGE80) + ζ(LogFrankRom) 
 + θ(Asia) + λ(LatA) + ν(SSA) + ε. 
 (see/hear/become aware of) that lnAgModern61 is not used as an (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)). This is due 
 to the fact that it incorporates a measure of educational levels and education, as discussed 
 above, is also incorporated in HDI7595. Also, the lnGDP60 is also left out/kept out since 
 coming together in GDP is not being tested. The above equations are also guessed using 
 the Statehist (number or thing that changes) as a substitute for ICRGE80. These are both measures of the 
 quality of institutions and the argument here is that improved institutional quality is likely 
 to result in improved well being. Including lnInv6095 in the guessing equation is 
 linked to the guess that the more investment that happens in a country, the greater 
 money-based opportunities are likely to be and so the more likely that people will be 
 able to find jobs and so experience improvements in well being. The greater the 
 openness to trade is also included since it is guessed that the resulting increases in 
 income will improve welfare. Finally, as organized and listed in Section One of the paper, 
 farming-based working well has been included in the guessed equation because it is thought 
 by some smart people  to directly affects poorness and so well being. That is, a 
 
 15 
 
 highly productive and rich farming-based part/area is likely to have farmers that are in 
 good health and have greater access to education in addition to higher incomes. 
 The data set covers 89 countries (27 African, 22 Latin American, 14 Asian, 5 
 Middle Eastern, 16 (related to Europe), 5 others). For different (moving backwards) some countries have 
 missing values, this way the size of the sample in the same way/in that way shrinks. The next section of the 
 paper will discuss and understand/explain the results. 
 
 Results: First Three Measures of Technology 
 The results of the guesses of equations (1a), (1b), and (1c) are presented in 
 Table 2. All guesses are OLS guesses and all the results are based on White 
 heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors and covariances. As can be seen, all three 
 measures of farming-based technology have positive, significant effects on long-term 
 money-based growth. Also, it appears that when we control for initial farming-based 
 technology, ignoring how it is measured, (may or may not happen, depending on something) coming together is also happening 
 among the countries in the sample, given the negative, (meaningful numbers) coefficient 
 for GDP per person in 1960. Finally, the dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for Latin America and 
 Subsaharan Africa were negative and (meaningful numbers). 
 
 Table 2 goes here 
 
 The results point to/show that farming-based technology, measured three ways, had a 
 significant hit/effect on long-run growth. In order to test the strength of the result, 
 
 16 
 
 equations (2a), (2b), (3a), (3b), (4a), and (4b) are guessed and the results are presented 
 in Table 3. All guesses show that there is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of (may or may not happen, depending on something) coming together. 
 More than that the results also say in court/give proof to the strength of the (meaningful numbers) and 
 good effect that farming-based technology has on money made per person growth from the mid1960's to the mid 1990's. 
 Table 3 goes here 
 
 Examining the results for equations (2a) and (2b), one can see that the Statehist 
 and ICRGE80 (numbers that change/things that change) are positive and (meaningful numbers) when included 
 separately. The (numbers that change/things that change) lnSchool65 and lnInv6095 are positive, but are only (related to numbers) 
 significant for (2b) and (2a) (match up each pair of items in order). The LogFrankRom (number or thing that changes) has a positive sign 
 in (2a) and a negative sign in (2b) and is (meaningful numbers) in neither. The dummy 
 (numbers that change/things that change) for Latin America, Asia, and Subsaharan Africa are negative but only 
 (meaningful numbers) in (2b). 
 Examining the results for equations (3a) and (3b), one can see that both 
 lnSchool65 and lnInv6095 are both positive in sign in both guesses, but only 
 education is (meaningful numbers). Both Statehist and ICRGE80 are positive and 
 (meaningful numbers) when entered separately. LogFrankRom is negative in sign, but is 
 not (meaningful numbers). The Latin American dummy (number or thing that changes) is negative and 
 (meaningful numbers) in both creations. Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia are negative 
 and (related to numbers) negative only in (3b). 
 Examining the results for equations (4a) and (4b), one finds that lnInv6095 is 
 positive, but it is (meaningful numbers) only in (4a). LogFrankRom is negative, but is 
 
 17 
 
 not (meaningful numbers) in either guess. The Statehist and ICRGE80 (numbers that change/things that change) are 
 both positive and (meaningful numbers) when entered separately. The Latin America 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) is negative and (meaningful numbers) in both creations, while SubSaharan Africa is negative and (meaningful numbers) in (4b). 
 At this point one might wonder if the results discussed above are influenced by 
 the poor data quality for the measures of technology in farming for the 1960s. In order 
 to explore this possibility, equations (1a), (1b), (2a), (2b), (3a), and (3b) were all reestimated using values for (material that makes plants grow better) strength and (material that makes plants grow better) strength times tractor strength 
 for 1975. The results with respect to these (numbers that change/things that change) remain unchanged. Farming-based 
 technology has a positive, (meaningful numbers) effect on growth from 1960 to 1995. 
 In summary, two sets of (numbers that change/things that change) seem to have had significantly positive effects 
 on long-term growth: all three versions of the farming-based technology (number or thing that changes) and 
 Statehist/ICRGE80 (numbers that change/things that change). This hints that improvements in farming-based technology 
 along with good quality institutions within stable states leads to more fast money-based 
 growth. In all but one of the creations LogFrankRom had a negative sign, but it was 
 never (meaningful numbers). This result is somewhat surprising since there is a large 
 books that seems to suggest that trade openness not only allows for gains from 
 (serving to compare two or more things) advantage (level effects on GDP), but also helps the spillover of 
 technical knowledge (Keller, 2004) from developed to developing countries (raising the 
 growth rate of GDP). The lack of importance of the trade or openness (number or thing that changes) may very 
 well be because trade may allow for the spillover of farming-based knowledge 
 from country to country (Alston, 2002). This way trade may lead to increases in GDP growth 
 
 18 
 
 via improvements in technology used. This effect would not be (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by the above 
 guesses. 
 
 Results: Malmquist Working well 
 In the previous section three substitute measures for farming-based working well were 
 used. The understood guessing was that higher values for these (numbers that change/things that change) represented better 
 technologies and so more productive farming-based parts/areas. A more direct measure is 
 given by Trueblood and Coggins (2003). Their paper examines working well growth 
 in farming for a large sample of nations for the time period 1961 to 1991. Malmquist 
 working well indexes, discussed earlier in the paper, are built using the nonparametric approach for building edges of something/unexplored areas. Using these measures equation (1a), 
 (2a), and (2b) are re-guessed by substituting the Malmquist working well growth 
 measures, AgTFP, for the (number or thing that changes) lnFert61. The results are presented in Table 4. 
 
 Table 4 goes here 
 
 As can be seen, in all three guesses the AgTFP is positive, although it is 
 (meaningful numbers) for just two. Money-based coming together is supported in all three 
 creations. The lnSchool65 (number or thing that changes) is positive and (meaningful numbers), whereas 
 the lnInv6095 while positive is only significant for one guess. Both Statehist and 
 ICRGE80 are positive and (meaningful numbers). The trade (number or thing that changes) is not significant in 
 any creation. 
 
 19 
 
 An other choice set of data on farming-based working well is given in Ludena, et al. 
 (2005).2 Their paper examines working well growth in farming for a large sample of 
 nations for the time period 1961 to 2000. It too constructs Malmquist working well 
 indexes which are multifactor measures of working well change. Using these 
 measures, equations (1a), (2a), and (2b) are re-guessed by substituting the Malmquist 
 working well measures from Ludena, et al. (2005) for the (number or thing that changes) lnFert61. The growth 
 rate of GDP per person now represents the average growth rate from 1960 to 2000 
 (GR6000) while the investment (number or thing that changes) now represents average investment also for the 
 period 1960 to 2000 (lnInv6000). The results of these guesses are presented in Table 
 5. 
 
 Table 5 goes here 
 
 As can be seen, in all three guesses the AgTFP (number or thing that changes) is both positive and 
 (meaningful numbers). Again farming-based working well is important for growth. It 
 appears that money-based coming together is supported in all three creations. Both the 
 lnSchool65 and the lnInv6000 are also positive and (meaningful numbers). This way 
 improved education and increased investment improve growth in the long-run. In 
 addition, both Statehist and ICGRE80 have positive signs and are (meaningful numbers), 
 which hints that good institutions and states improve growth. However, the 
 LogFrankRom remains unimportant, which points to/shows that maybe trade's effect on 
 growth may not be direct, but may operate through its hit/effect on working well. 
 
 20 
 
 Results: Human Development Index 
 The next step in the analysis is to shift focus to a wider definition of 
 development and to see how farming-based modernization has affected the general wellbeing of a country. So far the focus had been on factors that affect money-based 
 growth. Now the analysis moves on to test how much hit/effect farming-based technology and 
 working well might have had on human development itself. As talked about/said in the previous 
 section, the recent books has found significant connections between the farming-based 
 part/area and poorness reduction, increases in social welfare or reduction in deadliness, etc. 
 These measures of well-being are maybe best (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by human development as 
 measured by the Human Development Index (HDI) built by the UNDP. In order to 
 carefully study this relationship between human welfare or development and farming-based 
 modernization, the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) used in Tables 2, 3, and 4 is replaced with the 
 average of the HDI index from 1975 to 1995. In the same way/in that way, the next set of results is based 
 on guesses of Equations (5a) and (5b) and are presented in Table 6.3 Also, 
 AgTFP, as developed by Trueblood and Coggins (2003), is used as a measure of 
 farming-based working well (the last column in Table 6). Finally, the lnGDP60 is no longer 
 included since the HDI index also includes a measure of money made per person. 
 
 Table 6 goes here 
 
 In some ways the above results echo the results for money-based growth 
 presented in Tables 3, 4, and 5, especially with respect to farming-based technology and 
 working well. These show that farming-based technology/productivity is a (proof that one thing definitely causes another) factor for 
 
 21 
 
 improved well-being as well as for money-based growth. The investment (number or thing that changes) is also 
 positive and (meaningful numbers) across all guesses. Institutional quality also 
 seems to have a strong, positive, and (meaningful numbers) effect on well being. 
 Openness (LogFrankRom) does not seem to have an influence on the Human 
 Development index. The (related to a large area) dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for Asia and Subsaharan Africa are 
 negative and, mostly, (meaningful numbers). The Latin American dummy is 
 positive and (meaningful numbers). The above equations were also guessed using 
 Statehist as a substitute for ICRGE80. The results for the farming-based 
 technology/productivity (numbers that change/things that change) remain unchanged. 
 One might argue that including the AgTFP measure of working well might 
 introduce multicollinearity between the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)), the average value of HDI for 
 1975 to 1995, and the (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)) (AgTFP). That is, workers is a 
 part of the HDI measure and improved workers is also likely to increase 
 AgTFP. However, the important thing to note is that the results do not change 
 very much when AgTFP is introduced as a substitute for lnFert61 and lnModern61. 
 One would have expected that if multicollinearity existed, there would be a dramatic 
 change in the results. Also, a few tests of multicollinearity showed/told about no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 of multicollinearuty between the two (numbers that change/things that change).4 
 The results presented in the tables point to the importance of farming-based 
 technology or farming-based modernization as a (proof that one thing definitely causes another) factor for money-based growth and the 
 well-being of people/of the group. The paper began by asking the following questions. Is the 
 modernization of farming an important (thing that decides something) of overall growth? Is this effect 
 strong to including other (numbers that change/things that change)? Given the (not appearing or happening in the usual way) roles for farming, 
 
 22 
 
 does farming-based modernization affects human development? Is this 
 hit/effect strong to including other (numbers that change/things that change)? Now these can be answered. 
 Modernization of farming is an important (thing that decides something) of overall growth and it is 
 strong to including other (numbers that change/things that change). Also, farming-based modernization does 
 affects the level of human development and this relationship, like 
 the previous one, is strong to including other (numbers that change/things that change). 
 
 Summary and Ends/end results 
 In (coming up with explanations about the way things work) about long-run growth and development, farming seemed to 
 disappear from the books and stopped to play an important role after the development 
 of (related to the existence of two things) models in the 1950s and 1960s. However, (not very long ago) there has been a reappearance of interest and a reconsideration of the importance of farming in the 
 development process with some models being built which includes 
 farming. These models and the explanations they propose find farming in general and 
 farming-based technology in particular to play a very important role in long-run growth and 
 development. 
 An scientific analysis of agriculture's role in money-based growth and development 
 was done/tried in this paper. Especially, this paper carefully studies the importance of a 
 improved farming-based part/area for money-based growth and development. Farming-based 
 technology, as applied in this paper, is defined four different ways. Three of these 
 represent substitute measures for farming-based working well with the first measuring (material that makes plants grow better) 
 strength, the second (material that makes plants grow better) and tractor strength, and the third including workers 
 as well as measures of (material that makes plants grow better) and tractor strength. Using these (substitute-related) measures of 
 
 23 
 
 agricultural working well in the early 1960s the scientific results point to/show that improved 
 farming-based technology in the 1960s had a significant, positive influence on growth from 
 1960 to 1995. The fourth is a more direct measure of working well. It is a Malmquist 
 index measure of total factor working well measured for two time periods, 1961 to 1991 
 and 1961 to 2000. It too is found to have a (meaningful numbers) positive influence on 
 long-term growth. 
 The results promised again the ends/end results drawn from previous analysis concerning 
 investment spending, education, and measures of institutional quality. That is, the work 
 of Skill and Keefer (1995) and Bockstette, et al. (2002) pointed to/showed that institutional 
 quality and state a long time ago were both important factors in long-run growth. The results of 
 this paper promise again these results. Also, investment and workers also seem to 
 be important factors in long-run growth, this way promising again previous scientific work on 
 growth explanation (Jones, 2002). In addition to these (numbers that change/things that change), it seems that farming-based 
 technology, also played an important role in money-based growth. 
 The above analysis was repeated using the human development index as the 
 (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)). The guess was that improved technology or modernization of 
 the farming-based part/area improves well being. In fact, the measures of farming-based 
 modernization seem to have (meaningful numbers) positive effects on human 
 development. 
 The results of this paper complement the recent possible work including the 
 farming-based part/area into multi-part/area growth models. These explanations point to/show that 
 historical, long-run growth was dependent on the growth of farming-based working well via 
 
 24 
 
 agricultural modernization. These possible ends/end results are supported by the scientific 
 work presented here. 
 
 25 
 
 References 
 Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J.A. Robinson, 2001. The Colonial Origins of 
 Comparataive Development. American Money-based Review 91 (5), 1369-1401. 
 Alston, J., 2002. Spillovers. Australian Journal of Farming-based and Useful thing/valuable supply 
 Money flow 46 (3), 315-346. 
 Barro, R.J. and J. Lee, 1993. International Comparisons of Educational 
 Accomplishment. NBER Working Paper No. 4349. 
 Bockstette, V., A. Chanda, and L. Putterman, 2002. States and Markets: The 
 Advantage of an Early Start. Journal of Money-based Growth 7 (4), 347-369. 
 Datt, G., and M. Ravallion, 1998. Farm Working well and (away from cities) Poorness in India. Journal 
 of Development Studies 34(4), 62-85. 
 Datt, G., and M. Ravallion, 1996. How Important to India's Poor is the Part/areaal 
 Composition of Money-based Growth? The World Bank Money-based Review 10(1), 125. 
 Dowrick, S. and N. Gemmell, 1991. Industrial Catching Up and Money-based Growth: A 
 (serving to compare two or more things) Study Across the World's (person who uses money to make more money) Money flow. Money-based Journal 
 101 (405), 263-276. 
 Easterly, W. and R. Levine, 2003. Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Gifts 
 Influence Money-based Development. Journal of Money-based Money flow 50 (1), 3-39. 
 Feder, G., 1986. Growth in Semi-Improved Countries: A (related to studying numbers) Analysis. In 
 Chenery, H., S. Robinson, and M. Syrquin (eds.), (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) and Growth: A 
 (serving to compare two or more things) Study. Oxford University Press. 
 Fei, J. and G. Ranis, 1961. A Explanation of Money-based Development. American Money-based 
 Review 51 (4), 533-565. 
 26 
 
 Frankel, J. and D. Romer, 1999. Does Trade Cause Growth? American Money-based 
 Review 89 (3), 379-399. 
 Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson, 2002. The Role of Farming in 
 Development. American Money-based Review 92 (1), 160-164. 
 Hayami, Y. and V. Ruttan, 1985. Farming-based Development: An International 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, U.S.A., 506. 
 Humphries, H. and S. Knowles, 1998. Does Farming Add/give to Money-based 
 Growth? Some Scientific (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). Applied Money flow 30 (6), 775-781. 
 Johnston, B. and J. Mellor, 1961. The Role of Farming in Money-based Development. 
 American Money-based Review 51 (4), 566-593. 
 Jones, C., 2002. Introduction to Money-based Growth. W.W. Norton, London, England, 237. 
 Jorgenson, D., 1961. The Development of a Dual (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Money-based Journal (282), 
 209-334. 
 Keller, W., 2004. International Technology Diffusion. Journal of Money-based Books 
 42 (3), 752-782. 
 Kerr, J., and S. Kolavalli, 1999. Hit/effect of Farming-based Research on Poorness Help: 
 Idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) with Drawings/pictures from the Books. EPTD Discussion 
 Paper #56, Hit/effect Test and Test Group, IFPRI, Washington, D. C. 
 Skill, S. and P. Keefer, 1995. Institutions and Money-based Performance: Cross-Country 
 Tests Using Different Institutional Measures. Money flow and Politics 7 (3), 
 207-228. 
 Lewis, W. A., 1954. Money-based Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour. The 
 Manchester School 22 (1), 139-191. 
 
 27 
 
 Lipton, M., 1977. Why Do Poor People Stay Poor? City-based  Bias in World Development. 
 Temple Smith, London, 467.. 
 Ludena, C.E., T.W. Hertel, P.V. Preckel, K. Foster, and A. Nin, 2005. Working well 
 Growth and Coming together in Crop, (buffalo, deer, antelope, etc.) and Non-(buffalo, deer, antelope, etc.) Production: 
 Measurement and Forecasts. Prepared for Experts' Meeting on Long Term 
 Pictures/situations of Asia's Growth and Trade, ADB, Manila, November 10-11. 
 Martin, W. and D. Mitra, 2001. Working well Growth and Coming together in Farming 
 And Manufacturing. Money-based Development and Cultural Change 49 (2), 403422. 
 Matsuyama, K., 1991. Increasing Returns, (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things), and Indeterminancy of 
 Balance. Quarterly Journal of Money flow 106 (2), 617-650. 
 Mellor, J., 2001. Faster More Fair Growth - Farming, Employment Multipliers, 
 and Poorness Reduction. Paper prepared for USADD/G/EGAD. 
 Olsson, O. and D.A. Hibbs, 2005. Biogeography and Long-Run Money-based Development. 
 (related to Europe) Money-based Review, 49 (4), 909-938. 
 Ravallion, M. and G. Datt, 1999. When is Growth Pro-Poor? (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the (many different kinds of people or things) 
 Experience of India's States. World Bank policy research working paper series, 
 2263, World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
 Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian and F. Trebbi, 2004. Institutions Rule: The Importance of 
 Institutions Over (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) and (Combination of different things together that work as one unit) in Money-based Development. Journal 
 of Money-based Growth 9 (2), 131-165. 
 Rosenstein-Rodan, P., 1943. Problems of (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) of Eastern and Southeastern 
 Europe. Money-based Journal 53 (2), 202-211. 
 
 28 
 
 Stringer, R., 2001. How Important are the 'Nontraditional' Money-based Roles of 
 Farming in Development? Discussion Paper No. 0118, Adelaide University, 
 May. 
 Thirtle, C., L. Lin, and J. Piesse, 2003. The Hit/effect of Research-led Farming-based 
 Working well Growth on Poorness Reduction in Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
 World Development 31 (12), 1959-1975. 
 Timmer, C.P., 1995. Getting Farming Moving: Do Markets provide the Right 
 Signals? Food Policy 20 (5), 455-472. 
 Trueblood, M.A. and J. Coggins, 2003. Intercountry Farming-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) and 
 Working well: A Malmquist Index Approach. World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
 Warr, P. G., 2001. Poorness Reduction and Part/areaal Growth: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Southeast 
 Asia. Paper presented at the WIDER Development Conference on Growth and Poorness, 
 Helsinki. 
 Woden, Q., 1999. Growth, Poorness, and (state where two things are not the same): A (related to a large area) Panel for Bangladesh. 
 Policy Research Working Paper, 2072, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
 
 29 
 
 Footnotes 
 1. 
 
 (at first/before other things happened) these equations were guessed using as a measure of openness the 
 changeable exports plus imports divided by GDP. The results, for the other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) of the model, were almost the same as those reported here using the 
 measure developed by Frankel and Romer (1999). The last thing just mentioned is thought to be 
 a more appropriate measure given the endogeneity issues connected with the 
 trade share measure. In a perfect world, as noted (before that/before now) in the paper, an instrumental 
 (numbers that change/things that change) analysis would be carried out. However, finding good instruments 
 for the other (numbers that change/things that change) in the analysis would be very hard. 
 
 2. 
 
 The authors would like to thank Ludena, et al. (2005) for making their data 
 available. 
 
 3. 
 
 The reader will note that lnAgModern61 is not used as a measure of 
 farming-based technology. This is because this (number or thing that changes) includes a 
 measure of education. See the earlier discussion of equation (5b). 
 
 4. 
 
 There was no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of pair-wise relationship. The R squar<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
