AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 Further (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on bug-killers, working well and farmer health: 
 Potato production in Ecuador 
 John M. Antle 
 b 
 
 a,*, 1, 
 
 Donald C. Cole 
 
 b' 
 
 Charles C. Crissman 
 
 c 
 
 a Department of Farming-based Money flow and Money flow, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT, USA 
 Departments of (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.) and Medical Disease-study and Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
 c International Potato Center, Quito, Ecuador 
 
 Accepted 31 July 1997 
 
 Keywords: Patato production; Bug-killers; Farmer health 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 A recent paper by Antle and Pingali (1994) 
 showed that farmers' health had a significant hit/effect 
 on the working well of Philippine rice farms, and that 
 bug-killer use in rice production had a significant 
 hit/effect on farmers' health. A (testing out) analysis 
 showed that restricting the use of insecticides that 
 presented/caused the greatest health risk was a 'win-win' policy, as it would increase both the health and working well or Philippine rice farmers. Two features of 
 Philippine rice production that could affect the result of that analysis are, first, the low working well 
 of insecticides in rice production, and second, the 
 humid (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rice paddy (surrounding conditions) where farmers' use of (serving or acting to prevent harm) clothing is (almost nothing/very little). The Antle 
 and Pingali study left open the question of whether 
 this 'win-win' result would hold in a situation where 
 the not important working well of insecticides or other 
 bug-killers is higher, and where the climate is more 
 
 Corresponding author. 
 Director of the Trade Research Center and a University 
 Fellow at Useful things/valuable supplies for the Future. 
 * 
 
 1 
 
 compatible with the use of self-(serving or acting to prevent harm) clothing or 
 other equipment. 
 This study copies and extends the Antle and 
 Pingali study using data from a potato producing 
 area of Ecuador. Potato production in Ecuador is 
 able to be hurt by two major pests, the soil-house/living larvae of the Andean weevil (Premnotrypes vorax) and 
 the late disease fungus (Phytophthora (fill with lots of something harmful or disgusting)ans). The 
 use of insecticides and fungus-killers is carefully thought about/believed by 
 both farmers and farming-based scientists as important 
 in the control of these pests, and as many as 12 
 applications of both insecticides and fungus-killers are 
 used in their control. Potato production happens in a 
 mild/not extreme highland climate compatible with the use 
 of (serving or acting to prevent harm) clothing such as rubber boots and 
 gloves. The Ecuador study also provides larger samples of production and health data, and these data 
 allow the crop production technology and the health 
 production function to be guessed both/together, increasing (related to studying numbers) reliability. Also, in the Ecuador 
 study, a measure of neurobehavioral function is used 
 as an indicator of farmer health, an indicator that has 
 been validated in the (related to working on the job) health books 
 and that should be closely related to farmers' managerial and decision-making ability (to hold or do something). The Philippine 
 
 0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII SO 169-5150(97)00036-4 
 
 200 
 
 J.M. Antle et al.j Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 study used an on-the-spot index of health that has not 
 been validated independently. 
 The findings of this Ecuadorian study are almost always the same as those of the Philippine study, (even though there is the existence of) 
 big differences in the types and amounts of 
 bug-killers that are used, in their working well, and in 
 the physical (surrounding conditions) in which they are used. 
 Analysis of the Ecuador data shows that health has a 
 (meaningful numbers) effect on working well, with an 
 ability to stretch of cost with respect to health in the same 
 range as in the Philippine study. Also, like the 
 Philippine study, the Ecuador study shows that bug-killer use has a significant effect on health. A (testing out) analysis almost the same as  the one done in the 
 Philippine rice study is used to explore the effects 
 that reductions in bug-killer use would have on health 
 and working well. 
 The results of this study show that (even though there is the existence of) the 
 important role that insecticides play in controlling 
 the Andean weevil insect pest, a reduction in the use 
 of the principal insecticide used to control this pest, 
 carbofuran, could raise working well and also improve farmers' health. One important difference in 
 the two studies does come out, however. In the Philippine analysis, a policy reducing the use of all bug-killers (herbicides and insecticides) was less (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 than a reduction in insecticides alone, but both policies would result in the win-win result. In the 
 Ecuador case, where the working well of bug-killers is 
 higher, however, the win-win result can be gotten only when the policy targets the insecticides 
 that present/cause the greatest health risk. When the (like the real thing) 
 policy reduces the use of all bug-killers, both fungus-killers and insecticides, a tradeoff between health and 
 working well comes out. So, this study demonstrates 
 the importance of (producing a lot with very little waste) policy design in cases 
 where the working well of bug-killers is (compared to other things) 
 high. 
 
 2. The Carchi study 
 The potato production and farmer health data 
 used in this analysis were collected as part of a 
 study of the money-based, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and human 
 health effects of bug-killers paid for and supported by the International Potato Center. The study was based in the 
 
 Carchi Area of control/area of land in northern Ecuador in a highland 
 zone 30 km south of the Colombian border. Production happens between the heights of 2800 and 3400 
 m on steeply sloped, deep volcano-related soils. Just half a 
 degree north of the equator, there are almost no 
 changes in day length, little (change depending on the season) in 
 temperature, and limited difference/different version in rainfall. A described/explained description of the complete study and the 
 Carchi area can be found in the book by Crissman 
 et al. (1997). 
 The cropping system is ruled by potatoes 
 and (area of grassy land) for dairy (cows, bulls, etc.), with these two crops 
 rotated in a potato-potato-(area of grassy land) cycle that takes 
 about 2 years. Because of the (areas close to the Equator) Andean 
 climate, there are no clear/separate planting or collecting 
 seasons, and potato production happens continuously. 
 Production data were collected in a farm-level survey on 40 farms during 1990-1992 by trained enumerators who lived in the area and made (every two months) visits to the farms. Data were collected for 
 individual parcels, where a parcel is defined as a 
 single crop cycle on a farmer's field. The bug-killer 
 use data are believed to be correct, because they 
 were collected within two weeks after a farmer made 
 an application, so that the usual problem of data 
 mistake because of farmer recall was avoided. In 
 addition, an (happening now) quality-control process was 
 maintained during data collection which made it 
 possible for the enumerators to re-interview farmers 
 to validate or correct outlying (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements). Table 1 
 presents summary statistics for the data used in the 
 econometric analysis of the potato production process that follows. A almost the same  quality-control process 
 was followed for the health data that were collected. 
 This physical (surrounding conditions) is highly good for 
 the soil-house/living larvae of the Andean weevil (P. 
 vorax) and the late disease fungus (P. (fill with lots of something harmful or disgusting)ans). 
 Using backpack sprayers, farmers make an average 
 of more than seven applications of bug-killers to each 
 parcel. Though a wide organized row of products are used by 
 farmers in the sample, three types are most in control/most common. The 
 dithiocarbamate, mancozeb accounted for over 80% 
 of total active ingredient of fungus-killers used to control late disease. The carbamate, carbofuran, and the 
 organophosphate, methamidophos, accounted for 
 47% and 43% of all insecticide active ingredients 
 applied. Carbofuran is used to control the Andean 
 weevil and the organophosphates are used on foliar 
 
 J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 Table I 
 Summary statistics for Carchi potato production data 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Mean 
 
 Standard 
 moving away 
 
 Total changeable cost (sucres jha) 
 Expected yield (kgjha) 
 Area (ha) 
 Mean neurobehavioral score 
 (material that makes plants grow better) amount (kgjha) 
 Land preparation labor (days jha) 
 Crop management labor (daysjha) 
 Fungus-killer amount 
 Carbofuran amount (kgjha) 
 Plants pest insecticide 
 (material that makes plants grow better) price (kgjha) 
 Land preparation wage 
 Crop management wage 
 Fungus-killer price 
 Carbofuran price 
 Plants pest insecticide price 
 
 14.157 
 9.868 
 -0.959 
 -1.525 
 6.309 
 2.374 
 3.897 
 11.905 
 -0.044 
 10.415 
 6.448 
 7.656 
 7.796 
 -0.970 
 9.710 
 -1.222 
 
 0.347 
 0.136 
 0.854 
 0.941 
 0.401 
 0.895 
 0.373 
 1.426 
 1.120 
 2.237 
 0.181 
 0.306 
 0.275 
 0.666 
 0.303 
 1.225 
 
 Sample size is 219. All (numbers that change/things that change) in natural logarithms except 
 mean neurobehavioral score. (material that makes plants grow better) is total N, P and K applied. 
 Fungus-killer and plants pest insecticide amounts and prices were 
 quality-(changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) using the (related to feeling pleasure) procedures as in the paper of 
 Antle et al. (1994). 
 
 insect pests. Most farmers manage a few fields, so 
 that potato production and bug-killer use are continuous throughout the year. An important result 
 of continuous production is a year-round potential 
 for (related to working on the job) and (unplanned/minor event) exposure to bug-killers. Bug-killers are not used in the (area of grassy land) cycle and 
 are almost never used in other crops that may be included 
 in the rotation, such as (peas, beans, lentils, etc.). So, a farmer's 
 exposure to bug-killers comes almost completely from 
 potato production. The insecticides used are nerve poisons-they kill the pest by interfering with the 
 functioning of the nervous system. Bug-killers are 
 applied using a backpack sprayer and, in that process, the applicator's clothes often become wet with 
 spray mix. As a result, the major exposure route 
 for the applicator is skin-related, especially through his 
 hands and back. Applicators appear to be aware of at 
 least some of the risks connected with bug-killer use, 
 yet they do not use (serving or acting to prevent harm) clothing that effectively prevent exposure, nor do they show other 
 exposure-avoiding behavior. So, the use of (serving or acting to prevent harm) clothing in this mild/not extreme (surrounding conditions) is almost the same 
 to the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the Philippines study. 
 
 201 
 
 To examine the health hits/effects of bug-killer use, 
 the health research team managed and did/done a survey of the 
 farm population (n = 174) and an age- and education-matched referent group (n = 72) not exposed to 
 bug-killers. All people (who were part of a study, etc.) answered questions on 
 bug-killer use and medical problems, received a medical examination by a field doctor, completed a 
 series of tests of nervous system function and went through blood tests. These tests were oriented towards 
 those effects most likely to be connected with the 
 insecticide and fungus-killer exposures that the farming-based team had written down and that farm members 
 reported over periods of days to years. Crissman et 
 al. (1994) and Cole et al. (1998a) report in other places 
 on the complex exposure pattern and the higher rates 
 of skin problems (skin swelling), reduced vibration feeling/excited feeling, lower cholinesterase levels and generally 
 poorer neurobehavioral test results among the farm 
 population compared to the referent group. 
 Early/incomplete analyses showed that the neurobehavioral tests (showed/shown or proved) the most consistent relationship with recent use of bug-killers within the farm 
 population. Neurobehavioral tests were chosen because psychiatric books pointed to/showed problems among 
 those with long-lasting exposure to organophosphate 
 compounds (Gerchon and Shaw, 1961), disease-related work has written about central nervous system 
 effects of sudden poisoning episodes (Rosenstock et 
 al., 1991) and tests of neurobehavioral function are sensitive measures of such problems in 
 non-medical (groups of people/animals/things) (Anger et al., 1983). We 
 said more about the Neurobehavioral Core Test Battery 
 that was tested cross-culturally and recommended 
 by the World Health Organization (Cassito et al., 
 1990). Individual tests were grouped into functional 
 sub-scales by a neuropsychologist. Many tests 
 was used to test a set of neurobehavioral skills 
 that include attention, visual and (related to space or existing in space) abilities, 
 visual and sound-related reaction times, and motor and 
 psychomotor skills. The test results were (done or made to look the same way every time) so that neurobehavioral status is positively related to the test score. 
 This neurobehavioral measure of bug-killer hits/effects represents a big improvement as compared to the health disabilities index used by 
 Antle and Pingali. The health weakness index is an 
 on-the-spot measure of a few factors guessed to be 
 affected by bug-killer exposure, whereas the neurobe- 
 
 202 
 
 J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 behavioral index used here is taken from a standard&#126;zed t&#126;st which measures only the part of the organIsm directly affected by the nerve poisons. Also, 
 the sample size used in this study is nearly four 
 times the size of the Philippine study. This direct 
 measure eliminates most of the doubt of measuring health effects not starting from bug-killer 
 use. 
 Because of skewed distributions in test scores, we 
 restricted the referent population by age (16-65 inc_1usive) and education ( &amp;gt; 3 years) and developed 
 hnear moving backward (statement about the future) equations based on age 
 and education. These restrictions removed about 20% 
 of people/of the group (see Cole et al. (1997b) for details). 
 A (done or made to look the same way every time) score was then calculated for each 
 test for each farm member who met the age and 
 education restrictions by subtracting the people (who were part of a study, etc.)' 
 (described the future) value for the test from the measured value 
 and dividing the difference by the standard error of 
 t&#126;e estimate came/coming from the referent group regresSIOn. The scores were then averaged across tests in 
 the subscale to get a sub-scale (done or made to look the same way every time) score 
 for each function. Finally, the math mean of the 
 sub-scale (done or made to look the same way every time) scores gave/given an overall 
 neurobehavioral score for modelling purposes. 
 The neurobehavioral scores for the farm population were much lower than those of the referent non-farming population even taking account of 
 differences in age, education and verbal intelligence 
 level. The mean (done or made to look the same way every time) score was almost one 
 standard moving away less than the population not directly exposed to bug-killers and (in a big way) lower 
 than that now (capable of being seen and known) in other working (groups of people/animals/things) exposed to poisonous substances in other places 
 in the world. The mean minimums for the different 
 functions were over three standard mistakes lower 
 pointing to/showing big, medically important shortages i&#126; 
 the basic thinking-related tasks. Such levels of bad behaviors 
 :vould relate with (large/relatively large) (problems, delays, etc.) carrymg out the daily tasks of running a household and 
 making clear decisions in farm management and 
 would be just like the levels found in the 
 neuro-in a thinking-related way weakened on disability (moneys paid regularly after retirement) in 
 countries such as Canada and the United States. The 
 quality of home and working life and the working well of these farm members would this way be expected to 
 be (in a big way) reduced. 
 
 3. Joint guess of the cost function and the 
 health production function 
 Following the logic of the Antle and Pingali 
 model, we suggest/say  a cost function to represent the 
 production process. This cost function is received/made from 
 from a household production model in which farmers' effective management and field labor is a function of their health. From a standard cost-minimization problem, we get the per-hectare changeable cost 
 function C(y, w, z, h), where y is crop yield, w is a 
 vector of factor prices, z represents fixed factors 
 (size of the farmer's field in the model presented 
 here), and his a measure ofthe farmer's health. This 
 cost function shows the usual curviness properties 
 with respect to y and w, and is decreasing in z and 
 h. 
 
 Following Antle and Capalbo (1994), health is 
 assumed to be a function h(e(x, b), c), where e(x, 
 b) is exposure to bug-killers, x, b is a measure of 
 avoiding behavior by the farmer (such as use of 
 (serving or acting to prevent harm) equipment and safe handling practices), 
 and c is a vector of personal (features/ qualities/ traits). There is 
 little difference/different version in avoiding behavior among farmers in 
 the study presented here, so we simplify the presentation to a health production function h( x, c), 
 where h is assumed increasing and curved in x. 
 We use the log-linear guess to the cost 
 function, 
 
 (1) 
 where E 1 is an error term. Applying Shepard's 
 lemma, it follows that dC/dw. = x .* where x .* is 
 the cost-(making small) amount of the ith input. For the 
 log-linear cost function Shephard's lemma can be 
 written as: 
 l 
 
 ln( xt) 
 
 = 
 
 ln( f3·) 
 l 
 
 l 
 
 ' 
 
 l 
 
 + ln C- ln w + E 2Z'. I 
 l 
 
 (2) 
 
 where the E 2 i are error terms. 
 We specify the health production function as: 
 
 (3) 
 
 J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 where c 1 and c 2 are measures of the farmer's intelligence not directly affected by bug-killer exposure (c 1 
 is a measure of the ability to connect almost the same  objects, c 2 is a measure of the person's general 
 knowledge, and both are subtests of the Ecuadorian 
 helpful change of the Weschler adult intelligence score), 
 x 5 is the amount of carbofuran applied during the 
 season on a particular field, and E3 is an error term. 
 Recall that the (related to the scientific study of poisons) books hints that 
 carbofuran is the insecticide that is expected to have 
 a significant neurobehavioral effect. 
 The system of Eqs. (1)-(3) is identified and can 
 be guessed using (not going in a straight line) ways of doing things that account 
 for the endogeneity of cost, input amounts and 
 health. Note that the ordinary way to guess a 
 log-linear model with first-order conditions is to 
 guess the factor cost share equation with an (serving to add something) error term as w;x;/C = /3; + E2 ;. Eq. (2) is 
 equal to guessing the cost share equations in 
 InC= 
 
 + 
 
 -2.294 
 
 ( -1.13) 
 
 h= 
 
 1.397ln y 
 
 0.066ln z 
 
 (6.81) 
 
 ( -2.93) 
 
 + 0.040ln w4 + 
 
 0.011ln w5 
 
 (15.45) 
 
 (13.52) 
 
 -3.074 
 ( -9.87) 
 
 + 
 
 0.046 c 1 
 (2.04) 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 203 
 
 the (related to multiplying numbers) error form w;x;/C = /3; exp(E 2 ). 
 This (related to multiplying numbers) error model is attractive because 
 it is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the log-linear, constant-ability to stretch 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) of factor demand equations with (serving to add something) errors, and because it fits the data well in this 
 case. 
 The system (Eqs. (1)-(3)) is (not going in a straight line) in the 
 limits/guidelines because of the ln( f3) terms in Eq. (2). 
 The (not going in a straight line) three-stage least squares guess 
 method in the SAS 6.10 Model Procedure was used 
 to guess both/together the system of Eqs. (1)-(3). This is 
 a system of eight equations: the cost function (Eq. 
 (1)); the six first-order conditions going along with/matching up to 
 (material that makes plants grow better) (input 1), land preparation labor (input 2), 
 crop management labor (input 3), fungus-killers (input 
 4), carbofuran (input 5), and plants pest insecticides 
 (input 6); and the health production function (Eq. 
 (3)). The limit/guideline guesses with t-statistics in 
 parentheses are: 
 
 + 
 
 0.247ln w 1 
 
 + 
 
 (59.30) 
 
 0.007ln w6 
 
 0.103 h 
 
 (9.27) 
 
 (-3.45) 
 
 0.016ln w 2 
 (16.76) 
 
 + 
 
 0.085ln w 3 
 ( 45.30) 
 
 0.177 c2 
 
 0.247ln x 5 
 
 (3.46) 
 
 ( -3.25) 
 returns to scale and increasing returns to field size, 
 as expected. The very important role that bug-killers play in 
 crop production is pointed to/showed by the positive and 
 significant coefficients on the fungus-killer, carbofuran 
 and foliar insecticide (numbers that change/things that change). Output-constant 
 own-price elasticities of demand (equal to /3; - 1) 
 range from about -0.75 for (material that makes plants grow better) to about - 1.0 
 for plants pest insecticides. The coefficient on the 
 neurobehavioral health (number or thing that changes) is (meaningful numbers) at all ordinary levels, and its negative sign 
 points to/shows that farmers with higher neurobehavioral 
 function get lower cost of production per hectare, 
 and so, higher working well, as guessed. The 
 importance of the coefficient points to/shows that the ability to stretch of cost with respect to health is about - 0.15. 
 In comparison, the guesses of the ability to stretch of cost 
 with respect to health received/got by Antle and Pingali 
 in their study of two rice producing areas of the 
 Philippines ranged from -0.13 to -0.36. 
 
 As explained by Antle et al. (1994), it is important in 
 guessing production models with bug-killers to account for the large number of different chemicals 
 that are used by farmers that show changing/different degress 
 of effectiveness in controlling pests. To control for different bug-killer quality, the fungus-killer amount and price 
 and the plants pest insecticide amount and price 
 were quality (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) using the (related to feeling pleasure) procedure 
 described by Antle et al. (1994). Expected yield y 
 was guessed as the (described the future) value of a moving backward 
 of actual yield on the amount of seed potato spread around, a 
 set of dummy (numbers that change/things that change) pointing to/showing soil types and 
 (rain, snow, etc.), the height of the field, and its area. 
 
 4. Effects/results/suggestions 
 The limit/guideline guesses of the cost function are 
 all (meaningful numbers) and point to/show decreasing 
 
 204 
 
 J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 The health production function limits/guidelines are 
 highly significant and point to/show, as expected, that 
 farmers with higher verbal intelligence scores (c 1 
 and c2 ) also have higher neurobehavioral function. 
 The total amount of carbofuran applied during the 
 season has the guessed negative effect on neurobehavioral function. 
 Combining the cost function and the health equation, we see that higher neurobehavioral function of 
 farm managers lowers average production cost, while 
 
 increased use of the insecticide carbofuran increases 
 crop production but lowers neurobehavioral function. 
 To test the net effects of a change in carbofuran 
 use, we tested out the model over a range of carbofuran prices (from 50% below the watched/followed mean price 
 to 200% above it). To (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the effects of the 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of other choice restrictions on bug-killers, the 
 (testing out) was performed with the tax charged on 
 carbofuran alone and with it (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) on all bug-killers. To (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the importance of the health 
 
 -200. 
 
 o-300 
 
 ·f········································ 
 
 ····lc····················································································&#126;&#126;&#126; 
 
 0 
 
 ;::: 
 &#126; 
 
 e-350 
 
 ·t··············································'··························································:·&#126;&#126; 
 
 8 
 CZI 
 
 ]_) -400 
 
 ·;;: 
 
 ·t·········································· 
 
 r·································:::Jl!Jr 
 
 j 
 
 &#126; 
 
 -450 . 
 
 z 
 
 &#126; -500 
 
 ·t···························· 
 
 -550 
 -600. 
 -650-L&mdash;&#126;&#126;&mdash;-&#126;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;-&#126; 
 
 -0.75 -0.50 -0.25 
 
 0.00 
 
 Tax on All 
 -D- Bug-killers 
 
 -e- 
 
 Tax on Carbofuran 
 
 0.25 
 
 0.50 
 
 0.75 1.00 
 Tax Rate 
 
 1.25 
 
 1.50 
 
 1.75 
 
 2.00 
 
 2.25 
 
 &mdash;_: Tax on All Bug-killers w/o 
 Health in Cost Function 
 Tax on Carbofuran w/o 
 
 -e-- Health in Cost Function 
 
 Fig. 1. The (like the real thing) effects of the bug-killer tax on farmer health as measured by the mean neurobehavioral score. 
 
 J.M. Antle et al.j Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 effect in the cost function, we also tested out the 
 system (Eqs. (1)-(3)) that was guessed without the 
 health (number or thing that changes) in the cost function (i.e., with y = 0). 
 The results of the tests are presented in Figs. 
 1 and 2. 
 Fig. 1 shows the (like the real thing) effects of the bug-killer 
 tax on farmer health as measured by the mean 
 neurobehavioral score. As expected, health is monotonically increasing in the tax rate because bug-killer 
 use is negatively related to the tax rate, but the slope 
 
 205 
 
 of the relationship is higher when the effect of health 
 on working well is taken into account. This figure 
 also shows that there is little difference between a 
 tax on carbofuran only and a tax on all bug-killers in 
 terms of the health results. This is because there is 
 little substitution between carbofuran and other bug-killer inputs. 
 Fig. 2 shows the effect of the bug-killer tax on 
 average changeable cost of production. Here, we see 
 a few interesting results come out. First, when a con- 
 
 79000 -r&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;--&#126;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;-. 
 
 77000 - 
 
 &#126; 
 876000&#126; 
 175000&#126; 
 
 8 
 
 &#126; 
 
 .g 74000 
 't:: 
 
 - 
 
 &#126; 
 &amp;73000 
 0 
 
 &amp;lt; 
 72000 
 
 71000 - ·&mdash; 
 
 70000&#126;--&#126;&mdash;&mdash;&#126;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&#126; 
 
 -0.75 -0.50 -0.25 0.00 
 
 0.25 
 
 0.50 
 
 0.75 
 
 1.00 
 
 1.25 
 
 1.50 
 
 1.75 
 
 2.00 
 
 Tax. Rate 
 
 Tax on All 
 Bug-killers 
 
 -a- 
 
 Tax on Carbofuran 
 
 --+- 
 
 Tax on All Bug-killers w/o 
 Health in.Cost Function 
 Tax on Carbofuran w/o 
 Health in Cost Function 
 
 Fig. 2. The effect of the bug-killer tax on average changeable cost of production. 
 
 2.25 
 
 206 
 
 J.M. Antle et al. /Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 ventional (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the cost function is used 
 with health left out/kept out from the cost function, a tax on 
 carbofuran or a tax on all bug-killers increases the 
 average changeable cost of production, as money-based 
 explanation (describes the future). Second, when health is included in 
 the cost function, a tax charged and collected on carbofuran alone 
 results in a negative relationship between the tax 
 rate and average cost. This result happens because the 
 positive effect of a higher bug-killer price is more 
 than offset by the cost-reducing effect of improved 
 health. This result is just like the Antle and Pingali 
 finding that a bug-killer tax targeted at insecticides in 
 rice production would increase working well. However, when a tax on all bug-killers is used, a positive 
 relationship comes out because the effect of the tax on 
 cost now goes beyond the effect of health in the cost 
 function. 
 The clear policy hint/result/effect of these findings is 
 that reducing carbofuran use is a win-win suggestion/possible plan: farmers would be both healthier and more 
 productive if carbofuran use were reduced, because 
 the working well gains from improved health outweigh the negative working well effects of reduced 
 bug-killer use. However, a policy to reduce all bug-killer use would be less (producing a lot with very little waste) and would result in a 
 tradeoff between health and working well. 
 In ending/deciding, we note that a bug-killer tax is used 
 in the tests to illustrate the effects of changing 
 bug-killer use. Taxes are representative (reward or reason for doing something)-type 
 policies. Also, available to policy makers are a few 
 types of legal/law-based and other policies. For example, 
 in the United States, high-risk bug-killers can only be 
 applied by trained bug-killer applicators. Many countries also restrict the availability of certain (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damaging or dangerous bug-killers, or include rules (related to/looking at/thinking about) on-farm use of risky 
 bug-killers on the product label. There are also important technology and education policy options, including (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) pest management, the development of 
 late-disease resistant varieties, and programs to (help increase/show in a good way) the safe use of bug-killers and the use of 
 (serving or acting to prevent harm) clothing. These policies could improve 
 working well and the health of the farm population 
 without (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) the working well losses that could 
 be connected with reduced bug-killer use. 
 Trade and related exchange rate policies also 
 could affects bug-killer use, 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) quality, working well and health (Antle 
 
 et al., 1996). Ecuador's exchange rate policies have 
 effectively paid for the importation of bug-killers 
 such as carbofuran by about 30% (Lee and Espinosa, 
 1998). Because this policy change would be equal to a uniform tax on all types of bug-killers, the 
 analysis presented here hints that the elimination 
 of this helping payment would reduce all types of bug-killers 
 and improve health, but could negatively/badly affect working well. 
 
 Responses 
 The authors wish to admit/recognize/respond to the (money-related) 
 support of the Montana Farming-based Experiment Station, the International Potato Center, and the Rockefeller Foundation. 
 
 References 
 Anger, W.K., Cassitto, M.G., Liang, Y.X., Amador, R., Hooisma, 
 J., Chrislip, D.W., Mergler, D., Kiefer, M., Hortnagl, J., 
 Fournier, L., Dudek, B., Zsogon, E., 1983. Comparison of 
 performance from three continents on the WHO-recommended 
 neurobehavioral core test (group of tests). Environ. Res. 62, 125-147. 
 Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M., 1994. Bug-killers, working well, and 
 farmer health: Effects/results/suggestions for legal/law-based policy and farming-based research. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 76, 598-602. 
 Antle, J.M., Pingali, P., 1994. Bug-killers, working well, and farmer 
 health: A Philippine case study. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 76, 
 418-430. 
 Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M., Crissman, C.C., 1994. Econometric 
 production models with endogenous input timing: An application to Ecuadorian potato production. J. Agric. Res. Econ. 19, 
 1-18. 
 Antle, J.M., Crissman, C.C., Wagenet, R.J., Hutson, J.L., 1996. 
 Scientific foundations of (surrounding conditions)-trade linkages: Effects/results/suggestions of an Andean study. In: Bredahl, M.E., Ballenger, N., 
 Dunmore, J.C., Roe, T.L. (Eds.), Farming and the (surrounding conditions): Discovering and Measuring the Critical Linkages, Chap. 
 12. Westview Press, Big rock. 
 Cassito, M.G., Camerino, D., Hiinninen, H., Anger, W.K., 1990. 
 International cooperation to test the WHO neurobehavioral core test (group of tests). In: Johnson, B.L., Anger, W.K., Durao, 
 A., Xintaras, C. (Eds.), Advances in Neurobehavioural (the scientific study of poisons): Applications in (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and (related to working on the job) 
 Health. Lewis, Chelsea, MI, pp. 203-223. 
 Cole, D.C., Leon, N., Carpio, F., 1998a. Health hits/affects of 
 bug-killer use in Carchi farm (groups of people/animals/things). In: Crissman, C.C., 
 Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M. (Eds.), Money-based, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), 
 and Health Tradeoffs in Farming: Bug-killers and the Sus- 
 
 J.M. Antle et al./ Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 199-207 
 
 tainability of Andean Potato Production, Chap. 9, Kluwer 
 School-related Publishers, Boston, in press. 
 Cole, D.C., Carpio, F., Julian, J., Leon, N., Carbotte, R., de 
 Almeida, H., 1997b. Nerve-based results among farm and 
 non-farm mral Ecuadorians. Poisonousol. Terata!., 1997b (in 
 press). 
 Crissman, C.C., Cole, D.C., Carpio, F., 1994. Bug-killer use and 
 farm worker health in Ecuadorian potato production. Am. J. 
 Agric. Econ. 76, 593-597. 
 Crissman, C.C., Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M. (Eds.), 1997. Money-based, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), and Health Tradeoffs in Farming: 
 Bug-killers and the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of Andean Potato Production. 
 Kluwer School-related Publishers, Boston, in press. 
 
 207 
 
 Gerchon, S., Shaw, F.H., 1961. Psychiatric next storyae of long-lasting 
 exposure to organophosphoms insecticides. Surgical knife, pp. 137174. 
 Lee, D.R., Espinosa, P., 1998. Money-based changes and changing 
 bug-killer policies in Ecuador and colombia. In: Crissman, 
 C.C., Antle, J.M., Capalbo, S.M. (Eds.), Money-based, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), and Health Tradeoffs in Farming: Bug-killers and 
 the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of Andean Potato Production, Chap. 6. 
 Kluwer School-related Publishers, Boston, in press. 
 The Bug-killer Health Effects Study Group, Rosenstock, L., Keifer, 
 M., Daniell, W., McConnell, R., Claypoole, K., 1991. Long-lasting 
 central nervous system effects of sudden organophosphate bug-killer drunkenness. Surgical knife 338, 223-227. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
