 Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 Time-related and (related to space or existing in space) modelling of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees): a survival 
 analysis linking satellite and household survey data 
 Colin Vance a,aˆ-- , Jacqueline Geoghegan b 
 a 
 
 US EPA National Centre for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Money flow, Washington, DC 20460, USA 
 b Department of Money flow, Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 We guess a (related to space or existing in space)ly clear model of the forest clearance process among smallholder farmers in an farming-based edge of something/unexplored area 
 of southern Mexico. Our analysis takes as its point of departure a simple utility-making the most of model that suggests many possible 
 (things that decide other things) of (chopping down trees) in an money-based (surrounding conditions) seen as missing or thin markets. Guesses from the model are tested on a data set that combines a time series of pictures from planes with data collected from a survey of farm 
 families whose farming-based plots were geo-referenced using a worldwide  positioning system (GPS). We put into use a survival 
 analysis to identify the effect of household level explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) on the chance of (chopping down trees). This approach allows 
 us to introduce a measure of the time until clearance as a covariate, by that/in that way affording a control for the effect of possibly 
 important explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) that change/differ  through time but are not directly (capable of being seen and known). In addition to identifying a few 
 (numbers that change/things that change) (connected/related) for policy analysis, including household (information about people/combinations of different kinds of people), closeness to roads, and government provision of 
 farming-based support, model results suggest that the (chopping down trees) process is seen as non-linear length of time dependence, 
 with the chance of forest clearance first decreasing and then increasing with the passage of time. 
 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. 
 JEL classification: Q15; R14; C41 
 Keywords: (chopping down trees); Survival analysis; Farming-based families 
 
 1. Introduction 
 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees) plays a central role in many 
 of the most acute (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) threats of our time, 
 including worldwide  climate change, home worsening, and never-before-seen species destruction. Scientific 
 and public concerns about these and other possibly huge (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) disruptions have started a 
 growing number of studies that aim to number the 
 social and biophysical (things that decide other things) of (chopping down trees) 
 processes, as well as their interactions over time 
 and space. An newly appearing methodological approach to 
 aˆ-- 
 
 Corresponding author. 
 
 0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter. Published by Elsevier Science B.V. 
 PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 0 7 4 - 9 
 
 these issues combines sharp pictures from planes, (land-area-based/location) information systems (GIS), and 
 (related to how much money and power people have) and geophysical data to model the 
 human-(surrounding conditions) interactions that drive land-use 
 change (e.g. Liverman et al., 1998). In the money-related 
 books, the first (or most important) focus of this research has been 
 on identifying the (related to how much money and power people have) forces that explain 
 the (related to space or existing in space) patterns of (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) development, but less 
 attention has been given to (taking by force)/(taking control of) the time-related 
 patterns from which these patterns come out. To the 
 extent that both the location and timing of forest clearance matter for testing (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) results, 
 this de-coupling of (related to space or existing in space) and time-related dimensions compromises the (putting into) use of appropriate 
 
 318 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 policy responses to (chopping down trees). In the same way/in that way, the 
 purpose of the present paper is to advance an scientific way(s) of doing things that supports analysis of how, over 
 time and space, individual land managers respond to 
 changing money-based and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) conditions. 
 Our study focuses on land-use change in an farming-based edge of something/unexplored area spanning the southern Mexican states 
 of Campeche and Quintana Roo, a area that contains one of the largest and oldest wide areas of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) 
 forests in the America outside of Amazonia. Over the 
 past 30 years, these forests have been under sustained 
 pressure following the construction of a highway in 
 1972 that opened the edge of something/unexplored area to settlement. The road 
 was part of a larger development effort to (help increase/show in a good way) 
 farming-based colonisation and has added/has given to a lengthy period of land change that has been 
 captured by (related to underlying messages and morals in a story) Mapper (TM) pictures from planes. 
 We model these (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) patterns by putting together/grouping together 
 a (related to space or existing in space) information file that links the pixels from three TM 
 images spanning the years 1986-1997 with a random sample of farm families whose farming-based 
 plots were geo-referenced using a worldwide  positioning 
 system (GPS).1 
 Following a brief summary of the study area, 
 our analysis takes as its point of departure a simple 
 utility-making the most of model that suggests many possible 
 (things that decide other things) of forest clearance in an money-based (surrounding conditions) seen as missing or thin markets, as 
 shows edge of something/unexplored area areas in the undeveloped stages of money-based development. We (after that) test the importance of these (things that decide other things) using survival analysis, 
 also known as length of time analysis or danger/risk modelling, 
 a (related to studying numbers) way of doing things that guesses the immediate 
 chance of a change between two states--in this 
 case land-use states--(may or may not happen, depending on something) on the time went by 
 until the event of the change. The final two 
 sections of the paper discuss policy effects/results/suggestions and 
 suggest extensions to the current analysis for future 
 research. 
 2. The area 
 The southern YucatÃ¡n peninsular area occupies roughly 22,000 km2 of southwestern Quintana 
 1 A pixel refers to the unit of (related to space or existing in space) (ability to display or measure very small things), or area on the 
 ground, in a remotely sensed image. For TM data, pixel size is a 
 square with length of 28.5 m. 
 
 Roo and southeastern Campeche, north of the 
 Mexican-Guatemala border (Fig. 1). A rolling karstic 
 land of semi-(dropping leaves every autumn) (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forests covers the 
 (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land), with elevations in the centre reaching a 
 peak of about 250-300 m. The zone goes along with 
 what was once a part of/amount of the Maya lowlands, and 
 was nearly completely deforested 1000 years ago during the Classic Period of Lowland Maya rule 
 (100-900 (years after the year 1); Turner, 1983). Following the collapse 
 of Maya civilisation in 800-1000 (years after the year 1), the area experienced a period mostly free of settlement that, continuing past the birth of the Mexican nation state in 1821, 
 allowed the return of the forests. By the first half of 
 the 20th century, human helping action here came out again 
 but was mostly limited to the selective logging 
 of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) woods, especially (wood/dark brown) (Swietenia 
 macrophyla) and cedar (Cedrela odorata), as well as 
 the extraction of chicle, a tree (sticky, plastic-like substance that usually comes from trees) (from Manilkara 
 zapota) used in the production of chewing gum. 
 More long/big (chopping down trees) followed with the construction of a two-lane highway across the centre of the 
 area in 1972, which opened the edge of something/unexplored area to farming-based colonisation mostly via the extension of ejido 
 land grants from the federal government. The ejido 
 part/area was created following the Mexican Revolution 
 (1910-1917), a political and social big change/big changes with roots 
 in unfair land distribution. Within ejido communities, land is (in a shared way) controlled by an elected 
 (group that decides or promotes something), but in this area of southern Mexico, ejido 
 members (ejidatarios) usually enjoy usufruct access 
 to a single parcel that is permanently gave out to their 
 use.2 The size of these parcels differs/changes much, 
 ranging from 10 to 350 ha, with an average size in the 
 sample of roughly 110 ha.3 Our study focuses specifically on the ejido part/area as it (in the past) has been the 
 rule form of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) in the study area. 
 Most farming within ejidos is based on a traditional slash-and-burn or swidden system of (lasting for a short time) 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) and continuous rotation through forest 
 2 Roughly 7% of families had access to multiple, 
 non-touching plots. In most of these cases, (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 happened on only one of these plots for the year of questioning. 
 3 By the time most ejidos were established in the 
 1970s, commercial logging interests had left alone most areas 
 following the removal of valuable tree species. The resulting relative (oversupply/large quantity) of land made the area especially attractive to 
 colonists who moved from areas of the country where there 
 was land (not enough of something), especially Veracruz, Tabasco, and Chiapas. 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 319 
 
 Fig. 1. The Southern YucatÂ´an Peninsular area study area. Note: The thick gray line represents the edges of the general area 
 of study, making up about 22,000 km2 . Roman numbers point to/show a close guess of the locations of the TM satellite zones listed in Table 2. 
 Reprinted from Land Use Policy, Vol. 18, P. Klepeis and B.L. Turner II, (Combined different things together so they worked as one unit) Land History and Worldwide  Change Science: The Example 
 of the Southern YucatÂ´an Peninsular Area Project, pp. 27-39, Copyright 2001, by permission of Elsevier Science. 
 
 unplanted (Ewell and Merrill-Sands, 1987). The system, 
 referred to locally by the Maya word milpa, is ruled by maize but is often inter-cropped with squash 
 and beans. Over the last few years, more and more farmers have also/and introduced commercial crops, 
 especially chili, and (area of grassy land) into their land-use 
 (mixes of stocks, bonds, etc./document collections). While including such uses has increased the complex difficulty and difference/different version of swidden practices, earlier research in the area by Turner (1983) 
 hints that farmers employ a plot-unplanted rotation 
 converting to about a 1:3-4 ratio, cycles usually 
 based on 3 years of (producing crops/helping something grow) and 9-12 years of 
 unplanted (Klepeis et al., 2003). Although the field survey 
 conducted for the present study was unable to confirm 
 whether such a rotation wins today, analysis of the 
 pictures from planes hints that a big part of/amount of 
 clearance between the mid 1980s and late 1990s was 
 
 of forest not yet included into the unplanted cycle.4 As 
 the figures in Table 1 point to/show, farmers in the sample 
 cleared an average of 1.42 ha of forest older than 15 
 years for farming-based production per year by the mid 
 1990s, in addition to clearing an average of 0.97 ha 
 per year of successional growth 7-15 years of age. 
 In the area as a whole, (chopping down trees) continued unstopped through the 20 years of the 1980s and 
 1990s, with available pictures from planes showing/telling about a 
 total of 617 km2 of mature forest cut between 1987 
 and 1997. In 1989, the Calakmul (living part of the Earth) Reserve 
 4 People who responded were asked about crop rotation, with most reporting that they could come close to a 1:1 crop-unplanted cycle. Discussions with key informants, however, suggested that these numbers 
 be thought of suspect, especially given that most people who responded relied 
 only (only a little bit) on chemical inputs. 
 
 320 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 Table 1 
 Average once-a-year (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) of mature and secondary forest to agriculture among sampled families 
 
 Hectares of mature forest older than 15 years cleared for farming 
 Hectares of secondary forest between 7 and 15 years cleared for farming 
 
 (723,185 ha) was established in the middle of the 
 area, partly in response to long/big (chopping down trees) 
 along the highway and connected international pressures to stop further clearance. Different land uses 
 surround the reserve, mostly: ejidos, on which 
 slash-and-burn survival/income production has won 
 but more and more is giving way to valuable thing production; ejidos joined with NGO-sponsored farming-based 
 and forest projects; and a small number of private 
 lands mostly gave/reserved to animals production. (in total, over time), these activities have earned the area a 
 name/label as a "hot-spot" of forest and bio-(many different kinds of people or things) 
 loss by different sources (Achard et al., 1998). Whether 
 this outlook is supported by future (popular things/general ways things are going) will depend in large part on current plans surrounding the 
 Mundo Maya, an international development big plan/layout/dishonest plan to 
 create an ecotourism-(related to studying people) tourist (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 stretching across parts of/amounts of southern Mexico, Belize, 
 Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras. This plan has 
 led to recent hotel and road (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in the area. 
 Tourist part/area development not prevented by/not part of the issue, the area keeps/holds many of the features of an farming-based 
 edge of something/unexplored area. Population density is low, (set of machines) is 
 poorly developed, ties to outside markets remain few, 
 and the social relations of production are, by and 
 large, organised around the family farm. These features (give a reason to do something) the possible and scientific approach 
 taken in this paper, which focuse the importance 
 of household-clearly stated/particular (features/ qualities/ traits), especially (related to information about people) (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) and farm capital, in explaining land-use decision making. 
 
 3. The possible model 
 As a mostly land-related (process of people making, selling, and buying things), land is an 
 input in almost all of the money-based activities within 
 the ejido part/area of the southern YucatÃ¡n peninsular area. Some of these activities, such as bee keeping, 
 agro-forestry, and hunting, depend on land under forest, 
 
 1984-1994 
 
 1993-1997 
 
 0.47 
 0.32 
 
 1.42 
 0.97 
 
 while others, such as farming-based production and animal farming/managing money, require that the land be cleared of trees 
 for use. Whether or not a farmer decides to clear a 
 given area  of land depends on a complex variety of factors, including the market value of output 
 from the land in other choice uses, the availability of 
 labour, the household's consumption needed thing, and 
 the farmer's perception of the possible future benefits 
 derivable from the land. 
 The existing, although small, (related to space or existing in space)ly clear money-based books on land-use change has divided into two into 
 two separate modelling approaches. The current books that has focused only on the location of 
 land-use change has analysed (chopping down trees) in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) 
 countries: Belize (Chomitz and Gray, 1996); northern 
 Mexico (Nelson and Hellerstein, 1997); Brazil (Pfaff, 
 1999); Thailand (Cropper et al., 1999; Cropper et al., 
 2001); and Panama (Nelson et al., 2001). Models that 
 include the time-related dimension as well as location of 
 land-use change have focused on city-based  fringe development in the United States (Geoghegan and Bockstael, 
 2000; Irwin and Bockstael, 2002). While this latter approach has been applied to an mostly permanent 
 land (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) type, that of strong surface (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), it can be changed to analyse (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees) given the high costs of forest clearance and 
 the elimination of different forestry based land-use 
 options that may go with home worsening.5 
 Adapting the model found in Irwin and Bockstael 
 (2002), we model the decision of the farmer to clear 
 land for farming-based use. Let A(i, t) be the net benefits 
 to farming-based use for each time period after each pixel 
 of land i, is cleared in time period T. Let F(i, t) be 
 the net benefits to the farmer for leaving pixel i in 
 forestry use in each time period, and let C(i, T) be the 
 one-time clearing costs connected with clearing the 
 5 The idea (you think is true) of irreversibility seems reasonable in the case 
 of our data given that only 1.4% of the pixels returned to forest 
 older than 15 year over the period under study; 7.1% of pixels 
 returned to secondary forest. 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 pixel in time period T and Î´ is the discount rate. Then 
 the benefits to the farmer of clearing pixel i in period 
 T are: 
 aˆž 
 
 A(i, T + t)Î´ T +t aˆ' 
 
 t=0 
 
 aˆž 
 
 F (i, T + t)Î´ T +t aˆ' C(i, T ) 
 
 t=0 
 
 (1) 
 For T to be the best time period for clearing, the 
 following two conditions must hold: 
 aˆž 
 
 A(i, T + t)Î´ T +t aˆ' 
 
 t=0 
 aˆž 
 
 aˆž 
 
 F (i, T + t)Î´ T +t 
 
 A(i, T + t)Î´ T +t aˆ' 
 
 t=0 
 
 aˆž 
 
 (2a) 
 
 F (i, T + t)Î´ T +t aˆ' C(i, T ) 
 
 t=0 
 aˆž 
 
 &amp;gt; 
 
 A(i, T + 1)Î´ T +t aˆ' 
 
 t=1 
 
 aˆ'Î´C(i, T + 1) 
 
 aˆž 
 
 F (i, T + 1)Î´ T +t 
 
 t=1 
 
 (2b) 
 
 The first condition is that net benefits to clearing 
 are positive. The second condition thinks about/believes that although clearing may produce net positive benefits at time 
 T, there may still be benefits to waiting because of the 
 (possibility of/possible happening of)  even higher benefits at some future date. 
 Such a situation could arise, for example, in excitement/preparation of improved technologies that reduce clearing costs. This very simple model ignores unplanted-cycle 
 patterns, clearly a limitation of the current possible (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). 
 Let the (features/ qualities/ traits) of pixel i be X(i). The best 
 time for clearing this pixel then is the first time period 
 in which the following holds: 
 A(X(i), T ) aˆ' F (X(i), T ) aˆ' Î´C(X(i), T + 1) a‰¥ 0(3) 
 Given this possible (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), our scientific model 
 aims to explain why certain pixels, in certain locations, 
 and under certain land managers, become deforested. 
 4. The scientific model 
 We add an error term to Eq. (3) to account for unobservable (features/ qualities/ traits): 
 A(X(i), T ) aˆ'F (X(i), T ) aˆ' Î´C(X(i), T + 1) 
 aˆ'Îµ(i) a‰¥ 0 
 
 The danger-related rate--or chance that pixel i will be 
 deforested in period T--can then be expressed as: 
 h(i, T ) = 
 
 G [W (i, T + 1)]_) aˆ' G [W (i, T )]_) 
 1 aˆ' G [W (i, T )]_) 
 
 (5) 
 
 where G is the total amount of distribution function for the 
 error term, and 
 W (i, T ) = A(X(i), T ) aˆ' F (X(i), T ) 
 aˆ'Î´C(X(i), T + 1) 
 
 (6a) 
 
 W (i, T + 1) = A(X(i), T + 1) aˆ' F (X(i), T + 1) 
 
 t=0 
 
 aˆ'C(i, T ) &amp;gt; 0 
 
 321 
 
 (4) 
 
 aˆ'Î´C(X(i), T + 2) 
 
 (6b) 
 
 We use a survival model to test guesses about the effect of explanatory (numbers that change/things that change), X(i), on the 
 danger/risk, h(i,T), of (chopping down trees). Survival models are a 
 class of (related to studying numbers) methods that focus on the timing of 
 an event (Allison, 1995), which in this paper is selected/named as the change from forest cover to farming-based 
 land use. These models guess the (may or may not happen, depending on something) chance of exiting a state given that the state has been 
 occupied for some length t. The (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)), 
 the length of time, is the length of time that goes by from the 
 beginning of the state until its end or until measurement is taken and therefore cuts off the (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement). 
 Survival models have a long history of application 
 within the engineering and bio-medical sciences. They 
 have been used to model such processes as the length 
 of time until part-related failure or the survival times of 
 patients (identified a disease or its cause) with certain sicknesses. Over the past 
 twenty years, these models have been recognised by 
 social scientists to be a powerful tool for (asking lots of questions about/trying to find the truth about) 
 a wide range of social things, including the length 
 of unemployment spells, the spacing of births, and the 
 length of time of strikes. By and large, however, they have 
 not received application to the issue of (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) patterns. Two recent exceptions are a study by Coomes 
 et al. (2000) and one by Irwin and Bockstael (2002), 
 referred to earlier, both of which specify versions of Cox's 
 (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) dangers/risks model to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) unplanted-cycle 
 length among Amazonian farmers in Peru and city-based 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in Maryland, respectfully. 
 For this paper, the length of time of interest is the length 
 of time that an individual pixel remains in forest before being converted to cropland or (area of grassy land). We guess the effect of static and time period of time (or space)-varying 
 
 322 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 covariates on this length of time by specifying a fully parametric model, the (completing/matching) log-log model. This 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) assumes that the hidden (under) process that 
 creates the data is continuous, but that the data are 
 grouped into separate time periods of time (or space), an idea (you think is true) 
 that is well suited for the particular case of our data. 
 (chopping down trees) is a continuous process over time and 
 space, but we only watch/notice the event at select separate times as commanded (or spoke so someone copied down what was said) by the limited availability of 
 cloud-free TM data for the tropics. Therefore, we do 
 not know the exact timing of the (chopping down trees) event, 
 only that it happened during some time period of time (or space) defined by the dates of the (making mental pictures). The (completing/matching) 
 log-log model changes something (to helps someone)/takes care of someone this feature of the data 
 and also/and allows for different (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of 
 the role of time as a covariate, making it possible to test 
 other choice functional forms of the danger-related function.6 
 For example, by including the logarithm of time as a 
 covariate, the model goes along with the Weibull (see 
 Allison, 1995 for further discussion). 
 For the n pixels that are watched/followed to be deforested, 
 the chance function is: 
 n 
 
 Pi,tt (1 aˆ' Pi,ti aˆ'1 )(1 aˆ' Pi,ti aˆ'2 ) Â· Â· Â· 
 
 (7) 
 
 i=1 
 
 where Pi ,t is the chance that (chopping down trees) happens 
 to pixel i in period of time (or space) t, given that the pixel was not 
 deforested in any earlier periods, and ti the time period in which pixel i is deforested. The (completing/matching) log-log model (detailed description of exactly what is required) resulting from this 
 chance function is: 
 log[aˆ'log(1 aˆ' Pit )]_) = Î² X(i, T ) 
 
 (8) 
 
 where 
 X(i, t)=A(X(i), T ) aˆ' F (X(i), T ) aˆ' Î´C(X(i), T +1) 
 (9) 
 That is, X are the (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) and is a Î² 
 vector of limits/guidelines to be guessed using maximum 
 6 The (completing/matching) log-log model is just like the logit and 
 probit models in securing/making sure of that (described the future) chances lie in the 
 [0, 1] period of time (or space). Unlike these models, however, whose functions are 
 matching around zero, the (completing/matching) log-log function is 
 skewed to the right. One practical hint/result/effect is that the logit model 
 is appropriate for guessing a danger-related rate when events can only 
 happen at separate points in time (e.g. elections, job promotions), 
 while the (completing/matching) log-log model should be used when 
 events happen on the continuous time-scale. 
 
 chance methods, with the idea (you think is true) that the hidden (under) survival models is distributed as type I extreme value (Irwin, 1998; Hosmer and Lemeshow, 
 1999). 
 A final guess issue rises from the possible 
 existence of unseen mixed-up nature that would result from an incomplete (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the scientific 
 model. Two different, but related issues concerning 
 unseen mixed-up nature may result from the dual 
 nature (i.e. time-related and (related to space or existing in space) dimensions) of the 
 data. In the big picture  of the time-related dimension, if this 
 incomplete (detailed description of exactly what is required) results in gone 
 (deep-down/basic) individual differences in length of time distributions, the results include a downward (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 guess of the effect of time--or length of time dependence in the danger-related words/word choices--and to sneaky and false 
 guesses about the effects of included explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change) (Kiefer, 1988). In the big picture  of the (related to space or existing in space) 
 dimension, the possibility exists that the features of 
 the (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) affecting the chance that a pixel will 
 be deforested are (related to space or existing in space)ly related. If any of these 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are not included in the guess and are 
 (related to space or existing in space)ly related to included explanatory (numbers that change/things that change), then the guessed coefficients will be (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 on these (numbers that change/things that change) (Irwin and Bockstael, 2001). 
 To control for these two types of unseen mixed-up nature, a fixed-effects (detailed description of exactly what is required) that includes 
 dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for the (related to space or existing in space) unit of each ejido is 
 used (Hite et al., 2001). An ejido dummy was chosen 
 as the unit for the fixed effect because of potential 
 unseen institutional differences between ejidos, 
 such as their establishment dates, that could affect 
 the (a measure of what occurs naturally/sports boundary line) danger-related rate. This approach allows (a measure of what occurs naturally/sports boundary line) danger/risk rates to change/differ  among individual ejidos but 
 holds back these rates to be the same within ejidos, 
 by that/in that way controlling for differences in length of time distributions at the ejido level. Also, to the extent 
 that there are unobservable (features/ qualities/ traits) that are 
 related across space within the ejido edges, 
 this (detailed description of exactly what is required) controls for the some of the potential 
 effects of (related to space or existing in space) autocorrelation. 
 
 5. The data 
 The econometric model presented in this paper is guessed using Landsat TM satellite data on land cover 
 as the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) and household survey data 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 Table 2 
 Dates of (related to underlying messages and morals in a story) Mapper Satellite (making mental pictures) 
 Zone I 
 
 Zones II and III 
 
 Zone IV 
 
 11 November 1984 
 21 February 1993 
 31 January 1997 
 
 1 April 1987 
 29 October 1994 
 5 February 1996 
 
 14 January 1985 
 7 November 1994 
 31 January 1997 
 
 and other biophysical (related to space or existing in space) data for the independent 
 (numbers that change/things that change). The data sources for each (number or thing that changes) are discussed briefly. The unit of (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) for the model 
 is the TM pixel, an (in a true way) random unit of analysis but one that anyway is likely an small step forward/upward 
 of the area over which land is cleared for farming as 
 suggested by the figures on forest clearance presented 
 in Table 1.7 The satellite images were gotten across 
 four touching zones spanning the study area, the 
 dates for each of which are given in Table 2. The 
 process of (making mental pictures) classification included the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) 
 preparatory steps of geo-referencing, haze removal, 
 adding NDVI information, and principal part-related 
 analysis. These steps were followed by texture analysis, which lead to the creation of a seven-band image for signature development and classification. Signature development was helped by a combination 
 of ground truth data came/coming from GPS-helped field 
 visits and topographic, green plants and land-use maps. 
 Maximum chance supervised classification methods produced six land cover classes. Leaving out/keeping out clouds, 
 shadows and water, these include: mature lowland and 
 upland forest older than 15 years of age; one stage 
 of upland successional growth--mostly secondary forest--between 7 and 15 years of age; farming (including (area of grassy land)); an harmful fern; and flooded grasslands.8 For further detail on these methods 
 see Geoghegan et al. (2001) and Turner et al. (2001). 
 From the above classes, we create two binary 
 (numbers that change/things that change) to register the forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) process. 
 The first assumes a value of one if upland, lowland, 
 or secondary growth is converted to farming-based land 
 over an watched/followed period of time (or space) and zero otherwise. The 
 second applies a stricter definition of (chopping down trees), 
 7 
 
 Note that a pixel is roughly 0.076 the size of a hectare. 
 The first (or most important) difference across lowland and upland forest is 
 not in species (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) but in soil quality. Bajo soils, which 
 support lowland forests, are deep vertisols of thick clay found in 
 low-lying depressions. Upland forests are supported by rendzina 
 soils, which are shallow but (related to farming) life-giving mollisols. 
 8 
 
 323 
 
 assuming a value of one only with the (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 of upland or lowland forest to agriculture and zero 
 otherwise. Assuming that the length of unplanted in the 
 area about ranges between 9 and 12 years, 
 we are unable to fully secure/make sure of that the former of these 
 (chopping down trees) (numbers that change/things that change) leaves out/keeps out land clearance that 
 happens as part of a unplanted cycle. In fact, it is highly 
 probable that those pixels under secondary growth are 
 in fact in unplanted as most logging and related forest 
 extraction activities in the area had ended/fired by 
 1960. As a result, we guess the model on both 
 the (chopping down trees) (numbers that change/things that change) defined above, recognising 
 that the stricter definition of (chopping down trees) is likely to 
 be mostly cleared/cleaned of unplanted-cycle patterns given its 
 (when something is kept out or not included) of green plants &amp;lt;15 years old. 
 Data for the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) are from a household survey that was carried out in the area during 
 two separate field seasons during 1997-1998 and 
 were linked to the satellite data, as will be further explained below. Selection of families in the sample 
 went ahead according to a stratified, two-stage group-related 
 sample (Warwick and Luinger, 1975; Deaton, 1997), 
 with ejidos as the first stage unit and ejidatarios as 
 the second stage unit. This resulted in the random selection of 11 ejidos followed by the random selection 
 of 188 ejidatario families. A standardised list of questions, given to the household head, was 
 used to bring out the (related to how much money and power people have) and land-use data. 
 The list of questions was organised into two sections. 
 The first section covered traveling history, farm production and inputs, (family and cultural characteristics), educational accomplishment, 
 access to credit and the (related to information about people) composition 
 of the household. By collecting information on the 
 births, deaths, and permanent out traveling of children of the head, it was possible to reconstruct the 
 (related to the body function of living things) household's age (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) through time. 
 Also, (divided into two) data was collected on ownership of farm capital (e.g. vehicle, chain saw) for the 
 years 1986, 1990, 1993, 1996, and 1997. Using the 
 figures for each of these years, data for the (meantime/temporary time) 
 years were figured-out. In this way, the percent of 
 time for which the (connected/related) (divided into two) (number or thing that changes) was 
 in effect could be came close to for any given period of time (or space) 
 going along with/matching up to the dates of the pictures from planes. 
 Completion of the second section involved a guided 
 tour of the farming-based plot of the person who responded. Using a 
 GPS, the interviewer created a geo-referenced sketch 
 map explaining/describing the setup of land uses (Fig. 2). 
 
 324 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 Fig. 2. Sketch map and corresponding background from TM (making mental pictures). Note: the sketch map in the left panel shows a parcel of 100 ha. The 
 image background in the right panel is roughly 120 ha, with pixels of 28.5 m2 . Mistakes between the land use patterns showed in the 
 sketch map and those of the image may be partly attributed to the fact that the image is from February 1996 while the sketch map was 
 created in June 1998. From Fig. 6 in chapter 9 of (Combined different things together so they worked as one unit) Land-Change Science and (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees) in the Southern YucatÂ´an: 
 Final Edges of something/unexplored areas, edited by B.L. Turner II, J. Geoghegan and D.R. Foster (Oxford University Press, honest/appearing soon). Reprinted by permission 
 of Oxford University Press. 
 
 Having a few GPS points recorded within the borders of the plot made it possible to (put into a computer) the borders on a background of the latest date of satellite 
 (making mental pictures).9 The (put into a computer) borders were then (pulled out or taken from something else) 
 and placed (on top of) on available images from previous years, by that/in that way producing/giving up a (related to studying things over a long time) information file 
 of land-use change. So, only those pixels connected with families from which (related to how much money and power people have) data 
 were brought out are included in the sample. By overlaying 
 this information file with other GIS layers containing features 
 such as: the road network, (put into a computer) from a 1:50,000 
 9 The focus of the talk during the sketch mapping exercise was placed on correctly geo-referencing the plot edges, 
 seen as the (put into a computer) outer rectangle in the image background of 
 Fig. 2, rather than the land use patterns contained (in there/within that). While 
 the present studies depends on pictures from planes (understanding/ explanation) to describe those patterns, other work (see Klepeis and Vance, 2000) 
 draws data from the stories given by farmers to describe the 
 (related to space or existing in space)-time-related setups of their plots, as showed in the 
 left panel of Fig. 2. 
 
 map published by the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica 
 Geografica e Informatica (INEGI, 1985); soil quality measures, (put into a computer) from a 1:250,000 INEGI map 
 (1987); slope and elevation from a digital elevation 
 model; and rainfall predicted from rain gauge data; 
 it was possible to create (related to space or existing in space) explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) 
 to increase the data collected during the interview. 
 
 6. (numbers that change/things that change) used in the analysis 
 As suggested in the possible model presented 
 above, the land clearance decision is based on a 
 comparison of discounted utilities from forest and 
 non-forest land uses. There are a few testable 
 (related to how much money and power people have) and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) factors that could 
 influence this comparison, which we mentally 
 group into four categories came/coming from the data 
 brought out by the list of questions: household (related to information about people) 
 composition; physiographic (features/ qualities/ traits) of the 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 Table 3 
 Descriptive statistics of the (numbers that change/things that change) used in the model 
 Explanatory (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Mean 
 
 Standard 
 moving away 
 
 Household members &amp;gt;11 (members) 
 Household children &amp;lt;12 (members) 
 Mature forest (1, 0) 
 Upland soil (1, 0) 
 Elevation (m) 
 Slope (a--¦ ) 
 (rain, snow, etc.) (mm) 
 Plot size (numbers of pixels) 
 Percent of period of time (or space) owning chain 
 saw (%) 
 Percent of period of time (or space) owning vehicle (%) 
 Education of household head (years) 
 Number of household members w/&amp;gt;8 
 years education (members) 
 Native Spanish speaker (1, 0) 
 PROCAMPO (1000 s pesos) 
 Distance from household to plot (km) 
 Distance from ejido to nearest 
 market (km) 
 Length of time of occupancy (years) 
 
 3.048 
 1.618 
 0.799 
 0.754 
 164.040 
 1.252 
 56.281 
 1357.718 
 0.256 
 
 1.699 
 1.796 
 0.401 
 0.431 
 69.100 
 2.733 
 4.186 
 1053.586 
 0.372 
 
 0.133 
 3.377 
 1.039 
 
 0.306 
 3.905 
 1.537 
 
 0.848 
 2.472 
 9.156 
 21.273 
 
 0.359 
 3.196 
 7.735 
 19.143 
 
 20.447 
 
 12.729 
 
 Units are given in parenthesis. 
 
 plot; farm capital (human and physical); and the 
 political-money-based (surrounding conditions). Descriptive statistics 
 for these (numbers that change/things that change) are presented in Table 3. 
 The influence of (related to information about people) (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) is (taken by force/controlled) by two (numbers that change/things that change) that dividing wall/section the household according to age: family members over age 11 years, and 
 children under 12 years. As both indices are measured 
 as the average number of members in the (pertaining to each person or thing) 
 age categories over the similar time period of time (or space) of 
 the (making mental pictures), they change/differ  across families and time periods of time (or space). Following results identified in other places in the 
 books, it is expected that the information about people 
 (use/put into action) a positive effect on the danger/risk of (chopping down trees) 
 through both consumption and labour supply effects. 
 Six time-invariant (numbers that change/things that change) control for the effects 
 of physiographic (features/ qualities/ traits): a soil dummy which 
 serves to tell the difference between higher quality upland 
 soils and lowland soils; the elevation and slope of the 
 pixel; the 30 year average of rainfall; the size of the 
 plot to which the pixel belongs; and a dummy pointing to/showing whether the pixel was categorised as mature forest (forest older than 15 years of age) at the start of 
 the period of time (or space). We expect that slope has a negative effect on the danger/risk of (chopping down trees) due to the greater 
 
 325 
 
 difficulty of (producing crops/helping something grow) on hillsides, while superior 
 soils are expected to have a positive effect. Rainfall 
 and elevation are also expected to have positive effects given the (not being there; not being present) of crop-watering/rinsing with water in the area and 
 the presence of seasonally flooded lowlands where 
 farmers generally avoid (producing crops/helping something grow). The land gift is expected to have a negative effect as, all else 
 equal, a larger land gift reduces the danger/risk that 
 any given pixel is cleared. Finally, the dummy pointing to/showing mature forest is expected to have a positive effect 
 on the danger/risk as such green plants is generally supported 
 by more life-giving soils relative to secondary green plants. 
 Chain saw ownership, vehicle ownership, the education of the household head, the number of members 
 in the household having completed a high school education as of 1997, and a dummy pointing to/showing whether 
 the head is a native Spanish speaker control for the 
 effects of physical and workers. While the first 
 two measures change/differ  across families and time periods of time (or space), the last thing just mentioned three are time invariant. Ownership 
 of a chain saw and vehicle are both expected to increase the danger/risk of (chopping down trees) given their roles in 
 lowering the labour costs of forest clearance and in 
 (using/getting to) the plot. To the extent that more education 
 hints a higher opportunity cost of on-farm labour 
 due to increased wage-earning (possible greatness or power), the two (numbers that change/things that change) measuring educational accomplishment are expected 
 to have negative effects. No a prior expectation is 
 attached to the Spanish language dummy. 
 The influence of the political-money-based (surrounding conditions) is (taken prisoner by force) by four (numbers that change/things that change): the ejido dummies referred to above to control for fixed effects, an 
 period of time (or space)-different measure of the amount of farming-based 
 payments received by the household from a government program referred to as Programa de Apoyo 
 Directo al Campo/The Direct (away from cities) Support Program 
 (PROCAMPO), a measure of the distance separating 
 the household from the plot, and a measure of on-road 
 distance from the ejido centre to the nearest market. 
 We expect the last thing just mentioned two (numbers that change/things that change) to negatively affect 
 the danger/risk of (chopping down trees) given that they increase 
 access costs to both the plot and the market and effectively reduce the farm-gate price received by the 
 farmer for the plot's output. Agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the goals of the program, the effect of PROCAMPO is 
 expected to also decrease the danger/risk of (chopping down trees). 
 Started in 1994, the program extends farming-based 
 support via payments for the continued (producing crops/helping something grow) of a 
 
 326 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 fixed area of land over 15 years, a period going along with/matching up to the time in which land-related price supports are to 
 be phased out under the North American Free Trade 
 Agreement (NAFTA). The payments are extended on 
 a per hectare basis and in 1996 were set in real terms 
 at 484 N pesos (US$_$ 64) for the remaining life of the 
 program. While the farmer has large amounts of flexibility 
 in selecting the crops planted, the number of hectares 
 (able to be picked/able to participate) is based on the area that was (helped to grow) in 
 any of nine basic crops in 1994, these being maize, 
 beans, wheat, soybeans, (grass grown for food), rice, cotton, safflower, and grain. As the area and location covered is 
 fixed over the life of the program, one of its first (or most important) 
 intents, as stated by the (service business/government unit/power/functioning) (controlling or managing/giving medicine or something else) the helping payment SecretarÂ´Ä±a de Agricultura, GanaderÂ´Ä±a, Desarrollo 
 (away from cities), Pesca y Alimentacion/Secretariat of Farming-based, (cows, bulls, etc.)  Ranching, (away from cities) Development, Fishing, 
 and Food, 2002 (SAGARPA), is to strengthen production and in that way decrease pressure on remaining 
 forest (Klepeis and Vance, 2000). 
 To take by force/take control of the effect of time as a (thing that decides something) of 
 forest clearance, we include an period of time (or space)-different (number or thing that changes) that measures the length of time of the household's 
 occupancy as of the end of the time period of time (or space). The 
 square of this (number or thing that changes) is also included to allow for 
 non-linearities in length of time dependence. Including time as a covariate is a distinguishing feature 
 of the model, as it serves to control for a range 
 of inter-time-related factors that are important to the 
 land-use decision but that are usually not (capable of being seen and known) (Boscolo et al., 1998). The effect of learning 
 is one such factor. For example, we would expect 
 that continued (getting used to something) to the (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and money-based conditions of the edge of something/unexplored area (surrounding conditions) would 
 partly decide/figure out the path of land portion shifts 
 over time. Given that we have no direct measures of 
 learning effects, we depend on the (number or thing that changes) measuring 
 
 the household's length of time of occupancy as a substitute. 
 In addition to including this (number or thing that changes) and its 
 square, the (detailed description of exactly what is required) also includes dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for each period of time (or space) to control for the fact that they 
 are of different lengths (Allison, 1995). 
 
 7. Results 
 Tables 4 and 5 present measures of (describe the future)ive power 
 and the coefficient guesses, (match up each pair of items in order), from two 
 (completing/matching) log-log models that guess the effect of the above (things that decide other things) on the danger/risk of forest 
 clearance. Model I in the two tables is guessed on 
 the whole sample of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) while Model II is 
 limited to just those pixels classified as lowland or upland forest at the start of an period of time (or space). In both models, 
 the standard errors of the coefficient guesses are corrected for heteroskedasticity using Huber/White guesses of variance. As the coefficients from the (completing/matching) log-log danger-related model are hard to understand/explain directly, we get a more (intelligent/obvious) (understanding/ explanation) through calculation of the "risk ratio". Let Î² i be 
 the coefficient connected with explanatory (number or thing that changes), 
 Xi . Then the risk ratio connected with Î² i is exp(Î²i ). 
 For dummy (numbers that change/things that change) the risk ratio is the ratio of the 
 danger-related rate for a pixel with the dummy (number or thing that changes) equal 
 to one to the danger-related rate for a pixel with the dummy 
 (number or thing that changes) equal to zero, again holding other (numbers that change/things that change) 
 constant. For the continuous (numbers that change/things that change), we subtract one 
 from the risk ratio and multiply by 100 (Allison, 1995), 
 which gives the percent change in the danger-related rate with 
 a one unit change in Xi holding the other (numbers that change/things that change) 
 constant. 
 To examine the (describe the future)ive ability of the model we 
 employ two approaches, the results of which are presented in Table 4. The first, standard in the books, 
 
 Table 4 
 Indicators of (describe the future)ive performance 
 Model I: forest &amp;gt;6 years 
 
 Model II: forest &amp;gt;15 years 
 
 0 
 
 1 
 
 P (clearance) &amp;lt;0.2 
 P (clearance) a‰¥0.2 
 
 74,549 
 18,707 
 
 5,859 
 11,002 
 
 80,408 
 29,709 
 
 66,965 
 10,918 
 
 4,280 
 5,782 
 
 71,245 
 16,700 
 
 Total 
 
 93,256 
 
 16,861 
 
 110,117 
 
 77,883 
 
 10,062 
 
 87,945 
 
 Goodman and Kruskal's gamma 
 
 Total 
 
 0 
 
 1 
 
 0.611 
 
 Total 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 327 
 
 Table 5 
 (completing/matching) log-log models of forest clearance 
 Explanatory (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Model I: forest &amp;gt;6 years 
 Guessed coefficient 
 
 Household members &amp;gt;11 
 Household members &amp;lt;12 
 Upland soil 
 Elevation 
 Slope 
 (rain, snow, etc.) 
 Plot size 
 Percent of period of time (or space) owning chain saw 
 Percent of period of time (or space) owning vehicle 
 Education of household head 
 Number of members w/&amp;gt;8 years education 
 Native Spanish speaker 
 PROCAMPO helping payment 
 Distance from household to plot 
 Distance from ejido to nearest market 
 Length of time of occupancy 
 Length of time of occupancy squared 
 Mature forest 
 Constant 
 Ï‡ 2 -statistic for period of time (or space) dummies 
 Ï‡ 2 -statistic for ejido dummies 
 Number of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 Wald Ï‡ 2 
 Log chance 
 a 
 
 0.026a 
 
 (4.428) 
 0.023a (4.394) 
 0.270a (10.821) 
 aˆ'0.011a (aˆ'23.786) 
 aˆ'0.023a (aˆ'6.396) 
 0.159a (21.990) 
 aˆ'0.0002a (aˆ'16.124) 
 aˆ'0.001 (aˆ'0.039) 
 0.407a (11.856) 
 0.022a (8.176) 
 0.029a (4.366) 
 aˆ'0.045 (aˆ'1.702) 
 0.023a (16.492) 
 aˆ'0.045a (aˆ'28.266) 
 aˆ'0.048a (aˆ'24.882) 
 aˆ'0.041a (aˆ'11.751) 
 0.0005a (8.042) 
 aˆ'0.645a (aˆ'33.609) 
 aˆ'6.697a (aˆ'14.855) 
 2,240.61a 
 1,328.88a 
 110,117 
 15,809a 
 aˆ'38022 
 
 Model II: forest &amp;gt;15 years 
 Risk ratio 
 2.668 
 2.313 
 1.310 
 aˆ'1.055 
 aˆ'2.229 
 17.268 
 aˆ'0.023 
 0.999 
 1.502 
 2.233 
 2.944 
 0.956 
 2.339 
 aˆ'4.381 
 aˆ'4.715 
 aˆ'4.009 
 0.052 
 0.525 
 
 Guessed coefficient 
 0.074a 
 
 (8.846) 
 aˆ'0.006 (aˆ'0.876) 
 0.416a (12.387) 
 aˆ'0.010a (aˆ'19.071) 
 aˆ'0.024a (aˆ'6.330) 
 0.106a (11.375) 
 aˆ'0.0003a (aˆ'16.210) 
 aˆ'0.148a (aˆ'3.560) 
 0.720a (16.599) 
 0.023a (5.906) 
 0.008 (0.883) 
 aˆ'0.244a (aˆ'6.300) 
 0.030a (16.979) 
 aˆ'0.046a (aˆ'21.873) 
 aˆ'0.040a (aˆ'17.174) 
 aˆ'0.052a (aˆ'11.817) 
 0.001a (11.358) 
 
 Risk ratio 
 7.646 
 aˆ'0.598 
 1.515 
 aˆ'1.027 
 aˆ'2.393 
 11.191 
 aˆ'0.029 
 0.862 
 2.054 
 2.292 
 0.784 
 0.784 
 3.053 
 aˆ'4.495 
 aˆ'3.959 
 aˆ'5.028 
 0.091 
 
 aˆ'4.266a (aˆ'7.741) 
 1,595.68a 
 880.30a 
 8,7945 
 9,410a 
 aˆ'25610 
 
 Represents importance at 1% level. 
 
 references a matrix showing the number of (described the future) 
 against/compared to/or actual changes. Following Chomitz and Gray 
 (1996), who argue that even low (described the future) chances bring across information, we select 0.2 as the dividing line 
 chance for selecting/naming (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) as (stated or said earlier) 
 changes. Using this judging requirement, Model I correctly (describes the future) 65% of deforested pixels and 80% of forested 
 pixels, with corresponding figures of 57% and 86% for 
 Model II. As Chomitz and Gray and others have noted, 
 however, the choice of a dividing line chance value is 
 completely random, and results can change very much 
 simply by selecting a different value. An other choice, 
 though rarely used, measure of model fit for binary 
 choice models is given by Goodman and Kruskal's 
 gamma (Goodman and Kruskal, 1954, 1959, 1963). 
 This matching, non-parametric measure differs/changes from 
 aˆ'1 to +1 and is based on the difference between agreeing (C) and harsh (D) pairs of (described the future) and 
 actual values as a percentage of all pairs ignoring ties, 
 
 figured out/calculated as (C aˆ'D)/(C +D).10 The value of gamma 
 for Model I is 0.61 and is only (a) little higher for 
 Model II, pointing to/showing that the model reduces our error 
 in (describing the future) the result of the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) 
 by just over 60%. 
 Turning to Table 5, it is seen that the guessed 
 coefficients of Model I are usually of the expected 
 sign. Both of the (related to information about people) indices are positive and 
 (meaningful numbers) (things that decide other things) of the danger/risk of 
 10 Agreeing pairs are those for which the values are higher 
 (or lower) on all elements in one set compared with another. 
 Harsh pairs are those for which the value of one element 
 is higher in one set while the value of some other element is 
 higher in the second set. As an illustration, think about/believe the following 
 possible list of (described the future) and actual values: a. (0.9, 0); b. 
 (0.3, 0); c. (0.8, 1); d. (0.2, 1). From this list, ac, ad, and bd are 
 harsh pairs while bc is a agreeing pair. Pairs ab and cd 
 are ties and are therefore ignored in the calculation of gamma. 
 Gamma in this example equals aˆ'0.5. 
 
 328 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 (chopping down trees), an unsurprising result given that most families in the area are semi-surviving 
 producers, for whom which family members (at the same time) represent a source of labour as well as an 
 overhead cost. Specifically, each added/more member over 11 increases the danger/risk of (chopping down trees) by 
 2.67%, with a almost the same  importance for children. 
 All of the physiographic measures are (related to numbers) 
 significant, and, sometimes, confirm findings identified in other places in the books. For example, the 
 guessed coefficients for slope and elevation are both 
 negative, almost the same as  findings of Chomitz and Gray 
 (1996) and Nelson and Hellerstein (1997) in their 
 studies of (chopping down trees) in Belize and Mexico, (match up each pair of items in order). As expected, rainfall and superior soils both 
 have a positive effect on the danger/risk of (chopping down trees), 
 while a larger plot size has a negative effect. Finally, 
 the negative coefficient on the mature dummy hints that farmers prefer to clear secondary growth, 
 an interesting finding given that secondary growth is 
 generally supported by less life-giving soils. Specifically, 
 the estimate hints that the danger/risk of clearance for 
 mature forest in any period is about 53% of the danger/risk 
 for secondary green plants. One possible explanation is 
 a desire to avoid higher clearance costs connected with 
 mature forest even given higher weeding costs connected with inferior soils, a trade-off analysed at length 
 in the unplanted-cycle books (e.g. Dvorak, 1992). 
 Vehicle ownership increases the danger/risk of (chopping down trees), as expected, while the effect of chain saw 
 ownership is (related to numbers) unimportant. A somewhat 
 surprising result is the positive effect of the two education (numbers that change/things that change) on (chopping down trees). This may reflect 
 the effect of higher labour working well from increased 
 managerial talent (Tao Yang, 1997), which could result in a (compared to other things) lower not important working well of land 
 and because of this greater clearance. Being a Spanish speaker 
 decreases the danger/risk of (chopping down trees), though the coefficient guess is just out of the range of importance 
 at the 5% level. 
 Relating to/connected to the measures of the politicaleconomic (surrounding conditions), the guessed negative coefficients on the two distance (numbers that change/things that change) are consistent 
 with the gut feeling that higher travel costs decrease the 
 returns from farming-based land use through a reduced 
 farm-gate price of output. Maybe the most interesting finding, from a policy (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), is the positive 
 and (meaningful numbers) coefficient guess on 
 
 PROCAMPO, a result directly fighting with the 
 program's intent to decrease (chopping down trees). Specifically, the guess points to/shows that each 1000 pesos 
 extended by the program increases the danger/risk of 
 (chopping down trees) by 2.34%. 
 Different (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of the (number or thing that changes) measuring 
 length of time of occupancy were explored by means of 
 a nested chance ratio test, within which/by which the quadratic 
 functional form was decided to  be best in 
 terms of fit and cheapness.11 The guesses point to/show 
 non-linear length of time dependence of the (chopping down trees) 
 process; the (may or may not happen, depending on something) chance of forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) decreases with the passage of time at a decreasing 
 rate, with some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of a reversal after 41 years. 
 This result may reflect a coming-together of factors, including the rotation period of the unplanted cycle, family 
 life cycle patterns, and, as suggested above, learning 
 effects from helpful change to local market opportunities 
 and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) restrictions. 
 Turning to the results of Model II, guessed on 
 only those pixels with green plants older than 15 years, 
 some significant mistakes come out. The most 
 important of these is the surprising sign reversal on the coefficient guess for ownership of a chain 
 saw. A reasonable explanation for this finding is not 
 immediately honest/appearing soon, other than to guess that 
 it reflects a fault/problem of the model to do enough to 
 control for wealth effects. Related to this, (probably true) 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the field survey hints that those 
 farmers who owned chain saws were more (branched out/done different things) 
 in their income creating activities, relying less on 
 the valuable thing from nature base for their jobs. Other 
 differences across the two models are seen with respect to the information about people and workers 
 indicators. The number of children under age 12 years, 
 which is positive and significant in the model guessed on the whole sample of pixels, is now unimportant, while the importance of the guess on members 
 older than 11 increases over three-fold. This finding 
 may reflect the fact that the clearance of older green plants is more strongly figured out by/decided by the availability 
 11 The nested chance ratio test compares the log chances 
 of two nested models using the Ï‡ 2 -statistic. Specifically, if one 
 model is nested within another, the fit of the nested (or held back) 
 model can be tested by taking twice the total difference in 
 the log chances for the two models. This difference gives the 
 chance ratio Ï‡ 2 -statistic, which, if significant, points to/shows that the 
 nested model should be rejected. 
 
 C. Vance, J. Geoghegan / Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 317-332 
 
 of labour rather than by demand-side factors. Finally, 
 the (number or thing that changes) measuring the number of members in the 
 household having completed a high school education 
 as of 1997 and the Spanish language dummy, (match up each pair of items in order) lose and gain importance levels in Model 
 II. Relating to/connected to the last thing just mentioned, the negative sign of the 
 coefficient guess may be a strong sign of a greater 
 reliance of native (to) farmers on the useful thing/valuable supply base 
 instead of off-farm wage-earning opportunities. 
 While the remaining coefficient guesses for Models I and II are mostly almost the same  with respect to 
 sign and (meaningful numbers), those differences that 
 do come out  suggest that the age of green plants cleared 
 may have an important lessening effect on the (things that decide other things) of land-use decisions. The extent to which<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
