AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 16 (1997) 17-34 
 
 The hit/effect of prices and macroeconomic policies on farming-based 
 supply: a (creation/combination) of available results 
 Nlandu Mamingi 
 
 1 
 
 Department of Money flow, The University of the West Indies, Cave Hill Campus, P.O. Box 64, Bridgetown, Barbados 
 
 Accepted 23 October 1996 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper reviews the books dealing with the link of farming-based prices and macroeconomic policies to agiicultural supply with 
 particular focus on Sub-Saharan Africa. Although the study echoes the pretty/interesting facts on price elasticities underlined in previous books 
 reviews, the paper points out that our understanding of the (numbers-based) dimensions of farming-based supply response is weak given the 
 importance of this assumed response for growth, poorness help, and (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) In fact, issues such as (happening at the same time) of (numbers that change/things that change), 
 data combining, (something left out) of (numbers that change/things that change), and unevenness in supply responses to price changes have not been well enough talked about in many 
 events. © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 The goal of this paper is to test our 
 knowledge of the link of farming-based prices and 
 macroeconomic policies to farming-based supply. In 
 other words, the study focuses on how the book-related 
 deals with the following key question: Are farming-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) effective in boosting farming-based 
 supply? In that respect, this book-related review adds to/helpful additions the previous ones as it highlights questions 
 that were left out or not enoughly dealt with. The 
 paper (focuses mental and physical effort) on econometric studies and focuses on developing countries with special reference 
 to Sub-Saharan Africa. 
 The overall (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of the study can be laid 
 out as follows. Macroeconomic policies (money-based 
 policy, money-related policy, trade and exchange rate policies) affect farming-based prices through their effects 
 
 1 
 
 Tel.: (246) 425 1310, ext 256; fax: (246) 425 I 014. 
 
 on the real exchange rate. Farming-based prices, along 
 with non-price factors including (coming from the outside of something) shocks, 
 decide/figure out farming-based output or supply. 
 The issue of farming-based supply response is a very 
 important one as it affects growth, poorness, 
 and the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions. As expected this issue is 
 central in many (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programs in 
 less developed countries (LDCs). In fact, the size of 
 farming-based supply response is interesting about 
 whether ''a policy of taxing farming through lower 
 farm prices or through (with a too-high value assigned) exchange rates 
 and industrial policies will create useful things/valuable supplies for 
 investment in other parts/areas of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) ... or 
 whether 2 such policies will retard farming-based 
 growth and create food and input bottlenecks which 
 eventually bring down the rate of growth of the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a whole" (Chhibber, 1989, p. 55). 
 More than that, the farming-based supply response, mainly 
 
 2 
 
 Underlined and added by us. 
 
 0169-5150/97 j$17.00 Copyright© 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Pll SO 169-5150(96)0 1216-9 
 
 18 
 
 N. Mamingij Farming-based Money flow 16 (1997) 17-34 
 
 in the form of area (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), is also useful since it 
 could be interesting about the seriousness of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) problems. 
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deals with issues in the explanation and 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) of farming-based supply models. Section 3 
 reviews some scientific studies. Section 4 contains 
 ending/deciding statements and recommendations. 
 
 2.1.1. Microspecification 
 The most important model to take by force/take control of crop supply 
 is the Neriove model. Basically, the Nerlovian model 
 is a energetic model that states that output (amount 
 or area) is a function of expected price, output (area) 
 (change to make better/related to changing something), and some (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change). So, a 
 typical Nerlovian model can be written as follows 
 (see, for example, Askari and Cummings, 1977, pp. 
 257-258): 
 
 2. Issues in the explanation and (detailed description of exactly what is required) of farming-based supply models 
 
 A?= c + al pte+ a2Zt + ut 
 
 Farming-based supply response represents the farming-based output response to change in farming-based 
 prices or, more generally, to farming-based (rewards or reasons for doing something). 
 Farming-based supply response can be carefully studied from 
 the point of view of group output or supply, 
 subsectoral output (i.e. crop output and animals 
 output) and individual crop (i.e. cotton and tea). The 
 level of grouping depends on the goal of the 
 study as well as the availability of data. More than that, 
 farming-based output or supply 3 can be (recorded on a camera or computer) in 
 any of the following: (a) land or area under 
 (producing crops/helping something grow); (b) yield or product per land unit; and 
 (c) product of land and yield. 
 This section focuses on some issues in the explanation 
 and (detailed description of exactly what is required) of farming-based supply models that 
 are not (good or well enough) highlighted in the books. The 
 focus is, however, more on model (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 than on explanation. The first issue concerns hit/effect of 
 prices and exchange rates on farming-based supply. The 
 second issue deals with other (things that decide other things) of farming-based supply. The third issue is related to the 
 problem of (happening at the same time) of (numbers that change/things that change). The fourth 
 issue concerns the not mirror-images (or permanent) nature of supply responses to price changes, and the 
 fifth deals with 'to pool or not to pool' question. 
 2.1. On the effect of prices and exchange rates 
 
 Prices and exchanges rates are very important in 
 commanding (or speaking so someone copies down what's said) the pace of farming-based growth at the micro 
 level as well as at the macro level. 
 
 3 Farming-based supply and farming-based output are most often 
 (able to take the place of each other) here. 
 
 pte= pte-!+ 
 A 1 =A 1 _ 
 
 1 
 
 /3( pt-1- pte-!) 
 
 +y(A?-A 1_ 
 
 (I) 
 
 1) 
 
 where A 1 = actual area under (producing crops/helping something grow) at time t; 
 A?= area wanted to be under (producing crops/helping something grow) at time t; 
 P 1 = actual real producer price at time t; P 1e = 
 expected real producer price at time t; Z1 = other 
 (coming from the outside of something) factors affecting supply at time t; and 3{, 
 y = expectation and (change to make better/related to changing something) coefficients, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 A few questions can be raised at this stage. One 
 of them is how to measure real output price. The 
 issue here is the choice of the (connected/related) deflator. 
 Askari and Cummings (1977) describe very well on 
 that. The real output price can be either one of these 
 or none: ''(a) the price of the crop actually received 
 by farmers; (b) the ratio of the price of the crop 
 received by farmers to some personal price index; 
 (c) the ratio of the price of the crop received by 
 farmers to some price index of the farmers' inputs; 
 (d) the ratio of the price of the crop received by 
 farmers to some index of the price of competitive 
 crops (or the price of the most competitive crop)" 
 (Askari and Cummings, 1977, p. 258). 
 With good definition of price, the above equations lead to the following: 
 Qt =Co+ ct Qt_ 1 + c2( PctfPctt) + c3Zt + ut 
 
 (2) 
 
 where t = 1, 2, ... , n, is the time index, Q is 
 farming-based output in general (area or yield per 
 land or total yield), Pc is the price of the crop, Pd 
 is the price of the deflator and other (numbers that change/things that change) are 
 defined as above. A point not (good or well enough) underlined 
 in the books is that by guessing Eq. (2), one 
 orders/forces a restriction on the coefficients of (in name only/very small amount) 
 output price and the deflator price (they should be 
 equal to c2 in (value of a number, ignoring its sign)). This is rather the 
 
 N. Mamingi /Agricultural Money flow 16 ( 1997) 17-34 
 
 exception than the rule. In fact, Eq. (2) can be 
 guessed in an (having no limits, rules, or barriers) form with (in name only/very small amount) output price and possible deflators underlined above: 
 Qt =Co+ cl Qt-l + Cz Pet+ Czl Pit+ Czz Pat 
 
 (2') 
 where P; is the input price, Pa represents the price 
 of different crops, Pco stands for the price of 
 (products normally found in stores) usually (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by the personal 
 price index (CPI), Pu is the price of city-based  labor or 
 wages, and other (numbers that change/things that change) are defined as above. The 
 good deflator (if any) can be showed by testing 
 the (having no limits, rules, or barriers) form Eq. (2') against different restricted forms of type Eq. (2). Note that even if one 
 knows today's actual price, the last thing just mentioned may become 
 not related in the future. 
 The question concerning (creation and construction/ group of objects) of price expectation is also an important one. In general, many 
 authors use some distributed falls behind  to take by force/take control of price 
 expectation. The lag structure, however, may change/differ 
 from one type of crop to another. In general, one 
 would expect repeating crops to have longer falls behind 
 than once-a-year crops. This lag structure differential is 
 clearly an issue when one tries to explain group 
 output. Note also that price expectation itself can 
 change due to an external shock. Finally, it is hard to 
 sort out whether (change to make better/related to changing something) or expectation is taking 
 place if the expectation coefficient and the (change to make better/related to changing something) coefficient are both equal to one (see Mundlak, 
 1985). 
 The model is a little bit unclear about the parts/pieces of Z. Possibly Z includes (numbers that change/things that change) describing marketing, credit, mechanization, land reform, research, crop-watering/rinsing with water, weather, and soil quality. 
 Anyway, in the Nerlove model, weather measurement (i.e. rainfall) and time (popular thing/general way things are going) (capturing 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change or advance in technology) seem to 
 be the favorite candidates. Note that opposite to 
 many Nerlovian models, weather as rainfall should 
 not necessarily enter the model in a linear fashion as 
 too much rain can be a annoyance. More than that timing of 
 rain matters too. Including time (popular thing/general way things are going) instead 
 of clearly stated/particular (numbers that change/things that change) is generally gave a reason for on the 
 ground of lack of availability of data or multicollinearity among (numbers that change/things that change). Time (popular thing/general way things are going) as (number or thing that changes) 
 capturing the effect of left-out (numbers that change/things that change) should be a 
 (number or thing that changes) of last resort as we are really interested in 
 tracing the hit/effect of each specific (number or thing that changes). 
 
 19 
 
 Although the presence of Rough output in the 
 basic equation usually gives rise to a very high R 2 
 and possibly reduces or eliminates autocorrelation, 
 this (number or thing that changes) competes with capital stock if included. 
 Specially, the presence of capital stock makes the 
 output fell behind one period loose its explanatory power 
 (Mundlak, 1985). The question of including capital 
 stock and leaving out/keeping out fell behind output is an important 
 one. On the one hand, including capital stock 
 can help permit including other (numbers that change/things that change). On 
 the other hand, the (when something is kept out or not included) of fell behind output is 
 not agreeing with/not matching with the Nerlove model, which is based 
 on price expectation and output (change to make better/related to changing something). 
 The role of exchange rate is not explained at all at 
 this level of grouping. In fact, exchange rate 
 affects crop supply generally through its effect on 
 price (rewards or reasons for doing something). 
 To sum up, at the micro level area (land) or 
 output (total yield) for a given crop can be decided/figured out as follows: 
 
 (3) 
 where (numbers that change/things that change) are defined as above. 
 The sign in Eq. (3) points to/shows the nature of the 
 hit/effect of the (number or thing that changes) in matter in crop production. 
 An increase in the price of the crop is an (reward or reason for doing something) to 
 produce more. An increase in the iriput price increases the cost of production because of this becomes a 
 bad thing to produce more. An increase of the 
 price of the most different crop is a bad thing to 
 produce more of the main crop. An increase in the 
 price of (products normally found in stores) as well as wages negatively 
 affects crop production. The hit/effect of other factors 
 on the crop production is to be carefully studied on a case by 
 case basis. 
 2.1.2. Using macro and policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Farming-based price (rewards or reasons for doing something) are influenced by 
 macroeconomic policies (trade policies, exchange 
 rate policies, policies towards capital movements, 
 and money-related policies). The policies affect the farmer's 
 real income, and terms of trade between (away from cities) and 
 city-based  as well as the terms of trade between tradeables and non-tradeables (Jaeger and Humphreys, 
 1988). 
 Central to these policies is the real exchange rate 
 (RER), that is, the ratio of prices of tradeable to 
 
 20 
 
 N. Mamingi /Agricultural Money flow 16 ( 1997) 17-34 
 
 non-tradeable products (that are bought and sold) (or the other way around, too). In fact, macroeconomic policies generally result in the RER effect, 
 which (in the end) affect output price and because of this farming-based supply. The behavior of the real exchange 
 rate is, in many LDCs, rather harmful to farming-based 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) as exchange rates are (with a too-high value assigned). In fact, 
 (assigned too high a value to) exchange rates make local products, including farming-based products, less competitive with 
 imports and Jess money-making as exports. (Abt associates, Inc., 1989). 
 Exchange rate policies refer to policies aiming at 
 changing the (in name only/very small amount) exchange rate in view of changing the real exchange rate. In many LDCs, this 
 change usually takes the form of a (reduction of value) 
 which, in fact, is consistent "with smaller, greater, 
 or equal real (reductions of value), depending on the 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) in the price of non-tradeable or home 
 products (that are bought and sold)  that result from the (in name only/very small amount) (reduction of value)" 
 (Valdes and Pinckney, 1989, p. 44). Successful (reductions of value) bring about an increase in producer (reward or reason for doing something) as they increase the price of tradeable relative to 
 non-tradeable products (that are bought and sold). 
 An impossible to do/impossible to keep going money shortage (as a result of 
 expansion-related money-related policy) can affect farming-based 
 production through its effect on exchange rate. In fact, an impossible to do/impossible to keep going money shortage puts pressure 
 on money supply which in turns affects the price 
 level. If the domestic price inflation goes beyond the 
 trading partner's price inflation, then an appreciation 
 of exchange rate results (Knife, 1985). 4 The last thing just mentioned 
 appreciation generally results in a decrease of producer (reward or reason for doing something) as the price of tradeable products (that are bought and sold)  decreases with respect to non-tradeable products (that are bought and sold). Note 
 that an expansion-related money-related policy is also more likely 
 to affect investment; that is, it is more likely to lead 
 to investment cuts in some parts/areas. Given the (away from cities)urban bias that exists in most developing countries, 
 investment is usually cut in the farming-based part/area. 
 Capital movements can (in a big way) influence the 
 RER. A policy of heavy over-seas borrowing can 
 lower the RER as happened in Argentina and Chile 
 in the 1970s and early 1980s. (in the opposite way), a policy of 
 large across the ocean investment can raise the RER .... The 
 
 4 For a more detailedd relationship between government 
 spending and the RER, see Valdes and Pinckney ( 1989). 
 
 connection between capital flows and the RER can 
 be sketched as follows: for any given level of international reserves, balance in the balance of payments needs/demands a higher balance in the capital account which by that/in that way lowers the current account. In 
 other words, a larger net inflow of capital will cause 
 a lower RER, reducing the extra in the current 
 account. (Valdes and Pinckney, 1989, p. 47.) 
 Once more, the question of interest is how to 
 measure real output price. Generally, here it is the 
 ratio of (in name only/very small amount) output price to consumer price 
 index. 
 Another important issue is how to (take control of) real 
 exchange rate. Recall, it is the price ratio of tradeable to non-tradeable goods; that is, RER = PT/Pn 
 where PT is the price of tradeable products (that are bought and sold)  and Pn is 
 the price of non-tradeable products (that are bought and sold). The books underlines that there are serious (problems, delays, etc.) in making 
 operational this definition, as (good) enough data on the 
 two prices are hard to find. Instead, the following 
 substitute is used: RER = e · WPijCPI where CPI is the 
 domestic personal price index, WPI is the US (or 
 foreign) wholesale price index, and e is the official 
 (in name only/very small amount) exchange rate measured as the number of 
 local currency per unit of US dollar (or foreign 
 currency). An increase of the RER is a (lowering of value) 
 and the converse is an appreciation. In fact, what is 
 at risk here is the real exchange misalignment 
 which is the difference between actual real exchange 
 rate and balance real exchange rate, balance 
 real exchange rate (ERER) being defined as the real 
 exchange rate that wins in the long run when 
 there is no distortion. Misalignment due to overvaluation represents an (reward or reason for doing something) distortion since by raising the price of non-tradeable products (that are bought and sold)  with respect to 
 that of tradeable products (that are bought and sold), it brings about misallocation 
 of productive useful things/valuable supplies. 
 Note that since CPI on which the RER is generally based is not similar across countries for 
 reasons listed below, the RER is really a country index. This aspect has been often (ignored/didn't notice/looked at) in 
 the books. 
 The linkage between macroeconomic policies and 
 real producer prices can be expressed in terms of 
 direct and indirect effects (see the important study by 
 Krueger et al., 1988). The direct effect is (taken by force/controlled) by 
 the (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) difference between the producer 
 
 N. Mamingi j Farming-based Money flow 16 ( 1997) 17-34 
 
 price (farmgate price) and the border price ((changing to make better/changing to fit new conditions) 
 for distribution, storage, transport, and other marketing cost). A negative difference means a tax on 
 exportable products (that are bought and sold)  or on producers and a positive one 
 represents a helping payment on imports (Krueger et al., 
 1988). Taxes represent distortions that are harmful to 
 the farming-based part/area. It has been argued that in 
 many developing countries, especially Sub-Saharan 
 Africa, these distortions (taxes, mainly) have been 
 (in a carefully-planned way) set up by governments through price 
 constant thought or control. 
 The above direct effect is the same idea  as the 
 (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient (NPC) which is the 
 ratio of the farmgate price to the border price after 
 (changing to make better/changing to fit new conditions) for all the (connected/related) costs underlined above. 
 Clearly, the NPC compares the farmgate price to the 
 highest that could be offered to producers (border 
 price less than the costs (fought for/pleaded for) above). A ratio of 
 less than one points to/shows that farming is being taxed. 
 The NPC has been criticized on the ground that as a 
 measure of (reward or reason for doing something) distortion it ignores the exchange rate hit/effect on policy distortion, and it also 
 ignores the effect of exchange rate misalignment or 
 understood taxation. That is, the NPC will understate 
 the degree of farming-based taxation when exchange 
 rates are (with a too-high value assigned) at the same time it will be 
 unable to provide an clear answer as to the 
 relative importance of one source to the net effects 
 change over time in the sources of difference/different version-farmgate price, international price, and exchange rate 
 (Jaeger, 1992). The real protection coefficient (RPC) 
 is used to meet the above criticisms. It is an NPC 
 calculated at the balance exchange rate. 
 The indirect effect has two parts/pieces. The first is 
 the hit/effect of the impossible to do/impossible to keep going part of/amount of the current 
 shortage and industrial protection policies on the real 
 exchange rate and so on the price of farming-based 
 valuable things relative to nonagricultural nontradeables. The second is the hit/effect of industrial protection policies on the relative price of farming-based 
 valuable things relative to that of nonagricultural tradeable products (that are bought and sold). (Krueger et al., 1988, p. 255.) 
 Another approach showing the linkage between 
 macroeconomic policies (represented by real exchange rate) and real output price is that of the 
 World Bank. Following the World Bank (1994, p. 
 
 21 
 
 271), the real producer price is rotten as follows: 
 RPP = PpjCPI = PpfP 8 e eWPijCPI P 8 /WPI 
 = NPCRER p 8 
 
 ( 4) 
 
 where RPP is the real producer price for export 
 crops, PF is the farmgate producer price, P 8 is the 
 border price in dollars, e is the (in name only/very small amount) exchange 
 rate defined as above, NPC is the (in name only/very small amount) protection 
 coefficient, RER is the real exchange rate, and p 8 is 
 the real price of country's exports (at the border). 
 Eq. ( 4) shows/tells about that it is really dangerous to 
 include both RER and RPP in the same equation as 
 the real producer price already contains information 
 on the RER. 5 
 Note that Eq. (4) can be redefined in terms of 
 balance exchange rate as follows: 
 RPP = PpfCPI= PpjP 8 e ejE EWPijCPI P 8 
 jWPI=RPCERER p 8 
 
 (4') 
 
 where E is the balance exchange rate, RPC is 
 the real protection coefficient, and ERER is the 
 balance real exchange rate. Recall that neither E 
 nor ERER is (capable of being seen and known). 
 In the pursuit of (money made/good things received), farmers have to carry/hold the 
 cost of inputs. (in name only/very small amount) output price (reward or reason for doing something) is 
 destroyed if input costs are high. Because of this, input 
 prices are a very important element of farming-based 
 production. The prices of the following inputs are 
 especially (connected/related): (material that makes plants grow better)s, bug-killers, improved 
 and high yield varieties of seeds, tractors, and cars. 
 More than that, city-based  wages and the price of person 
 products (that are bought and sold)  have a serious hit/effect on farming-based output 
 prices. An increase in input prices increases input 
 costs and decreases the (reward or reason for doing something) to produce more, 
 ceteris paribus. This is generally the case for external 
 inputs, such as (material that makes plants grow better)s, bug-killers, improved and 
 high yield varieties of seed and machinery which, as 
 imported products (that are bought and sold), at least in many LDCs, see their 
 prices raised by policies that protect industry. On the 
 other hand, in many countries there is a fair amount 
 of subsidization of these inputs as in the case of an 
 overvaluation of currency which (not in a natural way/in a fake way) reduces 
 
 5 If one decides to use both (numbers that change/things that change), then one (number or thing that changes) must be 
 cleaned up for the effect of the other. 
 
 22 
 
 N. Mamingi /Agricultural Money flow 16 (1997) 17-34 
 
 the cost of imported inputs. This brings about an 
 overuse of these inputs which most likely leads to 
 inefficiency over time and may well create (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) problems. Apart from that, some of the inputs 
 may have a negative effect in the long run even 
 when they become available to (away from cities) residents at low 
 cost. For example, some bug-killers can bring about 
 health problems which harm/interfere with future working well or might result in death. The prices of person 
 products (that are bought and sold)  are important to the extent that they enter the 
 personal price index. As the (connected/related) output price 
 (reward or reason for doing something) is the real output price (generally, (in name only/very small amount) 
 price over some personal price index), an increase 
 in the price of (products normally found in stores) brings about a decrease in real output price which in tum makes up a 
 bad thing to produce more. The same story can be 
 told about wages. In fact, in many LDCs governments fix the (in name only/very small amount) output price to make sure that 
 products (that are bought and sold)  are low-priced at a reasonable price in city-based 
 areas and wages offered to city-based  residents have an 
 (good) enough buying-related power. 
 In short, farming-based output price can boost production by increasing the returns of inputs. Farming-based output price is affected by market forces and/ or 
 by government helping action through trade policy (export tax or payments), exchange rate policy, taxes 
 and payments and direct government helping action 
 (i.e. price controls). That is, real output price is 
 subject to two types of distortions: direct taxation 
 represented by trade taxes/import taxes and government constant thought 
 of prices, and indirect taxation (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by currency 
 overvaluation as well as protection of non-farming-based parts/areas. 
 2.2. On the hit/effect of other (things that decide other things) 
 Apart from total/totally/with nothing else mixed in farming-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) captured 
 by prices, there are other factors that affect supply 
 response whose (something left out) generally brings about 
 left-out changeable bias. One set of such factors is 
 public inputs: crop-watering/rinsing with water and some type of human and 
 physical capital-i.e. adult reading and writing ability, (how long a person is expected to live), 
 research, extension, road density, and roads paved 
 (see Binswanger et a!., 1987). Crop-watering/rinsing with water water is 
 expected to affect positively farming-based output 
 through its effect on working well. Adult reading and writing ability, by 
 helping people to blend in or to adopt technical advance faster, is positively related to farming-based 
 
 output. An increase in (how long a person is expected to live) represents a 
 measurement of health which affects output through 
 working well. 
 Population density affects farming-based 
 production. It is expected to be positively linked to 
 farming-based output through land use (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) 
 (Boserup guess) or increase in cropping frequency (Krautkraemer, 1994). 6 In fact, household 
 composition in terms of active people may well change 
 the good effect of population density on farming-based production. 
 Income level improves/increases farming-based 
 output to the extent that the higher the farmer's 
 income the higher the level of production, ceteris 
 paribus. This is mainly explained by the fact that 
 with a higher income the farmer can easily get 
 the much needed inputs that can help boost working well. 
 Technology or spending on research is maybe 
 the key (number or thing that changes) if one has to raise (in a big way) 
 output in the areas such as Sub-Saharan Africa. 
 In fact, an increase in research in the sense of technology advance can help reach the twin goals of 
 farming-based output growth and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (protecting something from harm) through land use (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). A caution, 
 however, is in Qrder since some of the advances can 
 lead to overuse of inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better)s which, in 
 the long run, may reduce farming-based working well. 
 (away from cities) (set of machines) is very important in the farming-based production setting to the extent that a lacking (set of machines) can wipe out all other production 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something). In fact, "(changing to make better/changing to fit new conditions) prices may not be all 
 that is needed to increase the output and incomes of 
 target groups. More often than not, the poor in 
 developing countries are in areas with little 
 access to roads, vehicles, communication, farming services, marketing facilities, and so on. Improving prices may be a necessary condition for restoring 
 incomes, but not a (good) enough one. If farmers cannot 
 get the supplies and services they need, (set of machines) 
 investments may be needed/demanded to give these farmers 
 the ability to increase output and yields" (Demery 
 
 6 Krautkraemer (1994, p. 401) uses "a renewable useful thing/valuable supply 
 model of soil life-creating ability with a curviness with the net benefit 
 function" to show that "as population grows and the demand for 
 food increases, more frequent cropping becomes money-saving." 
 
 N. Mamingij Farming-based Money flow 16 (1997) 17-34 
 
 and Addison, 1987, p. 13). Anyway, better (set of machines) can also be a double edged sword to the 
 extent that it can lead to (chopping down trees) which in turns 
 affects soil quality and working well over time. Better 
 extension and crop-watering/rinsing with water services are also positively 
 linked to farming-based output. 
 (coming from the outside of something) shocks such as weather, civil battle(s)/tensions, 
 or wars are also important in explaining group 
 output. Good weather improves/increases farming-based supply. Weather, in fact, makes up/is equal to one of 
 the most important 'risk' factors that farmers must 
 take into account in the crop selection. It means that, 
 sometimes, the farmer will choose 
 not the crop with the highest return, but the crop 
 which is the most drought-resistant (Bond, 1983). 
 There is a role for crop-watering/rinsing with water here as the last thing just mentioned can 
 temper the negative effect of rain shortfall, for example. Wars and civil battle(s)/tensions do not create an ideal 
 (surrounding conditions) to boost farming-based output. The experience of quite some African countries (e.g. 
 Somalia and Mozambique), where hunger was sustained by wars and/ or civil battle(s)/tensions, is striking. Last 
 but not least, land (features/ qualities/ traits) or soil quality is 
 positively related to farming-based production or supply. 
 To sum up, many factors decide/figure out the path of 
 farming-based supply. The non-including in something of important 
 deciding/figuring out factors brings about estimate biases. 
 
 2.3. (happening at the same time) issue 
 
 The examination of the books shows/tells about that few 
 authors have dealt with the issue of (happening at the same time). To 
 recall, most of the studies on supply response use a 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the following type: 
 
 (5) 
 where Q1 is the farming-based supply, t is the time 
 period, P1 is some price measurement, j is a changeable 
 index, Xj 1 represents other explanatory (numbers that change/things that change), a 
 is a constant term, and u 1 is the usual error term. 
 Eq. (5) hints that there is a unidirectional 
 (things causing other things to happen) from right-hand side (numbers that change/things that change) to farming-based supply; that is, price and other explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are uncorrelated with the error term, ur In 
 reality, it may well be the case that price and supply 
 
 23 
 
 are (at the same time) decided/figured out in which case guesses in Eq. (5) suffer from demandjsupply (happening at the same time) bias. Anyway, (happening at the same time) in the sense 
 of (happening together) desire/decision of price and amount 
 is not a problem if demand is completely inelastic. 
 This situation is very unlikely. In any case, it is 
 a good idea to examine prices on individual basis as in 
 Lopez et al. (1991). Here are some hints. The price 
 of farming-based exportables (export crops) in a given 
 country is most likely (coming from the outside of something) as it depends on 
 the world price and production and the last thing just mentioned do not 
 depend on the country's production. Anyway, 
 the price of a given export crop is probably endogenous if the country's share of the world production is 
 big. The price of farming-based exportables is 
 most likely (coming from the outside of something) if it is fixed by the government. The price of farming-based importables is (coming from the outside of something). The price of farming-based non-tradeables (i.e. 
 staple foods) is endogenous as it depends by and 
 large on domestic supply 1 demand conditions winning/most common in the market. Wage, the price of labor, is 
 endogenous as it depends on the highest wage 
 structure, the price of farming-based non-tradeables, the 
 price of farming-based exportables, education, and technical change. 
 It has been argued that endogeneity is not a 
 problem if Eq. (5) is part of a recursive system 
 (current production depends on fell behind price and 
 other (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) and this amount, once 
 produced, is a major factor deciding/figuring out current price; 
 Tomek and Robinson, 1972, p. 323). This is especially reasonable for some types of valuable things such 
 as once-a-year crops and some types of animals. 
 In fact, there is not only price endogeneity at 
 stake here, but also the endogeneity of other explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). In fact, with the exceptions of pure 
 (coming from the outside of something) shocks, the other explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are by and large endogenous. For example, soil 
 quality depends on past soil quality, the ways of doing things 
 of (producing crops/helping something grow), and external inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better)s 
 (see Salehi-Isfahani, 1993). Road (number or thing that changes) depends 
 on population density and money-based conditions of 
 the location. 
 Failure to deal properly with the (happening at the same time) 
 problem gives rise to (not agreeing/not happening in the same way) guesses. Because of this, 
 the access to help to some exogeneity tests (i.e. Hausman 
 exogeneity test) should become the rule rather than 
 the exception to decide on the (happening at the same time) issue. 
 
 24 
 
 N. Mammgz / Agncultural Economzo 16 ( 1997) 17-34 
 
 2.4. Not mirror-images farming-based supply responses to 
 price changes 
 Farming-based supply is defined as the response of 
 farming-based output to changes in prices, all other 
 factors held constant. The understood idea is that a price 
 increase and a price decrease lead to the same output 
 change (in (value of a number, ignoring its sign)). The farming-based supply in 
 this sense is said to be matching or (able to be un-done, or turned inside-out and used), as a 
 price decrease will bring the supply at its original 
 level. In reality, the fact that 'fixed valuable things' or exactly, 'sticky valuable things' such as land, trees, buildings, 
 or equipment that were got when prices were 
 high, are not thrown away when the prices are low, 
 at least in the short run, hints that price increase 
 and price decrease do not give rise to a almost the same 
 change in output (Johnson, 1958). This is especially true for repeating crops; the output change 
 resulting from price decrease is less than that from 
 price increase. The supply response is then said to be 
 permanent or not mirror-images. Inventions 
 can also explain this thing/event (see Cochrane, 
 1955; Jaforullah, 1993). 
 The irreversibility idea, although possibly 
 sound, has not been widely applied as the (putting into numbers) of price increases and price decreases is not 
 plain/honest/easy. Tweeten and Quance (1969, 1971), 
 Wolffram (1971), Trail et a!. (1978), and Burton 
 ( 1988) attempt to take (prisoner) by force such price (division of something into smaller parts) 
 (see Hallam, 1990; Mamingi, 1996). The neglect of 
 the last thing just mentioned can lead to misspecification bias. 
 2.5. Combining issues 
 Data combining brings about at least two sets of 
 problems that are not always understood or well 
 dealt with in the books. The first problem concerns modeling and/ or method of guess. The 
 second problem is data comparability. 
 
 2.5.1. Modeling 
 Following the books, most of the authors model 
 supply response in a single equation (or multiple 
 equations) as follows: 
 Q 11 =a,+P11 3+X{,J,yJ+u 11 
 
 (6) 
 
 where i = l, 2, ... , n stands for country (or area), 
 = 1, 2, ... , T is the time period index, j = 1, 2, ... , 
 g is a changeable index, Q is some output measuret 
 
 ment, P is some price (number or thing that changes), X is a set of other 
 explanatory (numbers that change/things that change), a, are country clearly stated/particular (numbers that change/things that change), and u 11 is the usual error term. 
 Eq. (6) states that the slope (i.e. not important effect or 
 ability to stretch) is the same across countries. The model 
 becomes a total/totally/with nothing else mixed in cross section model if t = 1 or 
 average values of (numbers that change/things that change) over the period are used. 
 Note that when necessary, time clearly stated/particular (numbers that change/things that change) can 
 be added to Eq. (6). 
 The following two issues are important when 
 guessing Eq. (6). The first basic question is whether 
 the combining of a few countries or areas holds. For 
 example, does it make sense to combine land-rare/not enough 
 countries with land-plentiful countries, developed 
 countries (DCs) with less developed countries 
 (LDCs), high yield countries with low yield countries? In simple terms, the question is whether the 
 countries face the same binding restrictions. The 
 'pooling' test 7 and some prior information are very 
 useful to have an understanding of the problem. 
 If combining is not accepted then the (state where all things are equal) of 
 slopes across countries does not hold. Put another 
 way, the common slope as the mean guess of 
 individual slopes is no longer a good statistic as it is 
 affected by (things that aren't part of the main group). 8 
 In our view, either one tests formally for combining 
 or if possible, one starts with a random coefficient 
 model. The last thing just mentioned can be presented as follows: 
 Q,r =a,+ ptt 3{, 
 
 + X,Jt'Y,J + u,r 
 
 (7) 
 
 This model bold acts cross-country properties and 
 time series properties. 
 Bias resulting from improper combining can blur our 
 understanding of how key farming-based factors affect 
 farming-based supply. 
 2.5.2. Comparability of (numbers that change/things that change) across countries 
 The second set of issues is how to take by force/take control of (numbers that change/things that change) for international comparisons. Group output and prices are the most troublesome (numbers that change/things that change) for 
 international comparison. 
 
 7 It is curious that all the works reviewed below did not 
 formally test for 'to pool or not to combine.' 
 8 Note that the presence of country dummies in the withm 
 (moving backwards) (OLS with country clearly stated/particular (numbers that change/things that change)) IS not necessarIly an avenue for explainmg changing/different slope guesses. The real 
 Issue IS whether some panel members (countnes, areas, etc.) 
 behave hke (things that aren't part of the main group). 
 
 N. Mwningi j Farming-based Money flow /6 ( /997) 17-34 
 
 Concerning output, Rao and Sharma (1991) point 
 out two approaches: (a) the group output repricing method; and (b) the buying-related power equality 
 (PPP) or understood exchange rate method. 
 The group output repricing method "suggests 
 revaluation of the amount vectors of different countries using a single set of prices for different valuable things. These prices may be expressed either in a 
 numeraire currency, in which case the value of output is expressed in that currency, or in the form of 
 relative prices, such as wheat-relatives, in which case 
 the total output in each country is expressed in terms 
 of the numeraire valuable thing'' (Rao and Sharma, 
 1991, p. 199). 
 The important problem of the desire/decision of international prices overall output repricing 
 method has been well enough dealt with by Summers 
 and Heston (1988). To answer the criticism according to which wheat is not all that important in a 
 number of countries, some authors use the Fisher 
 many-sided amount and price index to make output 
 similar across countries. 
 The buying-related power equality (PPP) approach uses 
 the exchange rate as the (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) factor; that is, 
 the output value in country j is the value of output in 
 the country expressed in the country's currency times 
 the exchange rate of the country. Naturally, the 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) factor must be selected appropriately and 
 should depend on the prices and amounts of the 
 farming-based valuable things (Rao and Sharma, 1991). 
 Failure to take this into account introduces serious 
 biases in the measurement. Recent advances by Summers and Heston ( 1988) solve some parts of this 
 problem by using the buying-related power equality of 
 currency. 9 
 Prices and exchange rates are not always easily 
 similar across countries. To recall, real output 
 price is the ratio of (in name only/very small amount) output price to other 
 prices. At the micro level, we argued that there are 
 a few candidates as deflator, all depending on the 
 farmer's behavior. At the group level, the usual 
 candidate is the personal price index (CPI). 
 
 9 ·'Purchasing Power Currency (PPC) is understood as the 
 number of units needed/demanded to buy the same amount of products (that are bought and sold) 
 and services as say, one US dollar would buy in the United 
 States." (World Bank, 1993, p. 2). 
 
 25 
 
 There are two sets of problems here. First, CPI, 
 on which RER and real producer price are based, is 
 not strictly similar across countries as it is generally based on different baskets, different weights 
 and different base periods. Second, misalignment is 
 not taken into account in the (in name only/very small amount) exchange that 
 helps convert foreign currency into local currency 
 (or the other way around, too). As the scientific studies show/tell about, few 
 authors pay attention to this problem. 
 (in almost the same way) to the case of cross-border output comparison, some authors use a wheat equal measurement to solve the above twin problems. This 
 approach has not always been successful (see, for 
 example, the Binswanger et al., 1985, comments on 
 the Peterson, I 979, paper). (opposite from what's expected), the use 
 of many-sided Fisher index combined with that of 
 the understood buying-related power equality exchange rate a 
 Ia Summers-Heston, represent a valuable approach 
 in this big picture (see Binswanger et al., 1985, 1987). 
 
 3. Review of scientific studies 
 This section is a review of scientific studies. It 
 focuses on short-run and long-run price elasticities. It 
 is somehow a add to/addition to previous books reviews (Askari and Cummings, I 977; Bond, 1983; 
 Chhibber, I 989; Rao, 1989; Ogbu and Gwetibouo, 
 1990). 10 To test different studies, we check 
 whether they well enough deal with the issues raised 
 above. The first part of the section deals with amount studies; that is, those whose output is expressed 
 in total yield or yield per land unit. The second 
 part is concerned with studies using land as output. 
 3.1. Review of amount studies 
 Table 1 reports the results of the question (or investigation) for 
 group, subsectoral, and individual crop outputs. 
 The following (popular thing/general way things are going) comes out from the table. First, 
 the short-run price elasticities are small for group 
 (and subsectoral) output. Second, although small, the 
 
 10 Most statements made here also concern studies found in these 
 book-related reviews. 
 
 26 
 
 N. Mamingi /Agricultural Money flow 16 ( 1997) 17-34 
 
 individual crop elasticities are larger than those of 
 group output. Third, where they are received/made from, 
 long-run elasticities are larger than short-run elasticities. Fourth, price elasticities are, by and large, positive. 
 Although not reported in the table, most other 
 deciding/figuring out factors included in the models are found 
 to be very important. To back up (with proof), the elasticities 
 are 0.293 and 0.122 for (rain, snow, etc.) and research 
 ha- 1 , (match up each pair of items in order), in Peterson ( 1979). The elasticities are 2.31 and 0.93 for land quality and average 
 rainfall, (match up each pair of items in order), in Van Schalkwyk and Groenewald ( 1993). The hits/effects are - 1.2 to - 1.5, 0.11 
 to 0.15, and 0.74 to 1.0 for the degree of public 
 involvement in input supply, the percent of government current expense, and population growth, 
 (match up each pair of items in order), in Knife ( 1985). 11 The elasticities 
 are 0.1, 0.08, 0.057, 0.1, for road density, extension, 
 GDP, and (away from cities) population density, (match up each pair of items in order), and 
 other (numbers-based) effects are 1.298, 0.496, 1.325, 
 0.631 for crop-watering/rinsing with water, roads paved, (how long a person is expected to live), 
 and adult reading and writing ability, (match up each pair of items in order), for crop output in 
 Binswanger et al. ( 1987). Rice (producing crops/helping something grow) responds 
 positively to rainfall (0.77) and to high-cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties (0.31) in Bapna et al. ( 1984). Drought negatively affects cereals (- 0.32), cassava (- 0.14), 
 maize (- 0.23), and (grass grown for food) (- 0.30); first (or most important) education improves/increases rice (1.23), and 
 helped grow area per person is negatively linked to rice 
 (- 1.1) and maize (- 0.85) in Knife and Schreiber 
 (1994). 12 Production (number or thing that changes) (0.729), the moving away 
 of actual production from (popular thing/general way things are going) (0.489), and misalignment following Edwards' approach (- 0.451) 
 are, aside from price, important in explaining wheat 
 supply in Argentina (Pick and Vollrath, 1994). In the 
 models using the Nerlove way(s) of doing things, the fell behind 
 (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) is always significant where included and so are time trend and weather. 
 (even though there is the existence of) the existence of some pretty/interesting facts (price 
 elasticities) underlined above (facts also uncovered 
 in many previous books reviews) there are a 
 
 number of issues ignored or not enoughly dealt with 
 that can (in a big way) change  the pretty/interesting facts. 
 With the exceptions of Knife ( 1985) and Knife 
 and Schreiber ( 1994), all studies include some type 
 of output price ((in name only/very small amount) or real) in their basic (moving backwards). Knife as well as Knife and Schreiber 
 use the (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient instead. 
 Knife explains farming-based growth by (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient (or rate of currency (lowering of value)), 
 the public involvement in input supply, the public 
 consumption to GDP in 1970-1981 and the average 
 once-a-year rate of population growth. If one agrees with 
 Eq. (4) or Eq. (4'), then (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient does not fully take by force/take control of real producer price. The 
 same remark holds for Knife and Schreiber, who 
 explain change in crop yields of some food crops in 
 Sub-Saharan Africa by (in name only/very small amount) protection, drought, 
 first (or most important) education, the sum of area under (lasting for a short time) 
 crops plantable land per person of (away from cities) population and 
 area under permanent crops per person of (away from cities) population. 
 Concerning exchange rates, with the exceptions of 
 Knife (1985) in one of his models, Jaeger (1992), 
 and Pick and Vollrath ( 1994), all authors do not 
 include exchange rates in their set of explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change). This is mainly explained by Eq. (4) or Eq. 
 ( 4') which basically states that the real producer 
 price already contains information on the real exchange rate. So, Jaeger (1992) who uses (at the same time) real effective exchange rates and real producer prices along with disaster (number or thing that changes) and weather 
 to explain farming-based exports at the group as 
 well as the individual crop level, is rather suspicious. 
 This may well explain why he gets from time to 
 time a wrong sign for the hit/effect of exchange rate 
 (i.e. an appreciation of real effective exchange rate 
 of 100% gives rise to a 33% increase in the farming-based exports of once-a-year crop exporter countries) or an 
 unimportant real producer price (this is the case for 
 tree crop exporter countries). 13 In his (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), 
 the (happening together) including in something of the two (numbers that change/things that change) can 
 
 11 Knife ( 1985) has two models: one with (in name only/very small amount) protection 
 coefficient and another with real currency (lowering of value). The other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are the same in both models. 
 12 Note that the coefficients are not elasticities here. 
 
 13 If the real effective exchange rate is left out/kept out, the hit/effect of 
 the real producer price shows up; it is 11.5% instead of 1.7% and 
 is significant. 
 
 N. MaminKi / AKricultural Money flow 16 I 1997) 17-34 
 
 be reasonable if one (number or thing that changes) is cleaned up for the 
 effect of the other. The Pick and Vollrath ( 1994) 
 study seems fine since it takes by force/takes control of real exchange rate 
 by misalignment and real output price by (in name only/very small amount) 
 export price. The use of real currency (lowering of value) in 
 Knife ( 1985) would be fine if combined with other 
 missing (numbers that change/things that change) in Eq. ( 4' ). 
 Binswanger et al. (1987) are a model of good 
 study in terms of changeable coverage. In fact, although 
 external shocks factors are missing here, the study 
 anyway contains the major explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) 
 that we can think of: real producer price, crop-watering/rinsing with water, 
 road density, roads paved, (how long a person is expected to live), adult 
 reading and writing ability, research, extension, GDP, (away from cities) population 
 density, and agroclimatic (possible greatness or power). Bapna et al. 
 (1984) is also almost the same as  the above study in terms of 
 changeable coverage. 
 Peterson (1979), in his thin slice study dealing 
 with developed (DCs) and less developed countries 
 (LDCs), includes output price, weather (long-run 
 once-a-year (rain, snow, etc.)), and technology (research (book, magazine, etc.) for each country) as explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). 
 There is probably a certain amount of misspecification bias due to the (something left out) of important (numbers that change/things that change) 
 such as (how long a person is expected to live), adult reading and writing ability, and crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 that have changed over time. For example, by adding 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water in Peterson's model, Chhibber (1989) finds 
 that the price ability to stretch passes from 1.27 to 0.97. 
 Knife ( 1985) contains some misspecification 
 problems. It is known that weather changes, as well 
 as land quality, in Africa are quite important in 
 explaining farming-based growth. Another problem of 
 misspecification is that the (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient or the currency (lowering of value) rate used by the 
 author only (takes control of) part of the real producer price. 
 In fact, as Eq. (4) or Eq. (4') shows, if one uses 
 (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient, then two other (numbers that change/things that change) are left out: real exchange rate and real foreign 
 price. If one uses currency (lowering of value) rate, then 
 (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient and real foreign price 
 are left out. 
 (how long a person is expected to live), income, roads (density and quality), research, extension, soil quality, population 
 growth, and country dummy (numbers that change/things that change) are important 
 explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) that can be included in Jaeger 
 (1992). 
 Lopez et al. ( 1991) explain farming-based export 
 supply in Malawi and Tanzania by the price of 
 
 27 
 
 farming-based exportables, the price of farming-based 
 non-tradeables, the wage rate, an index of weather, 
 and an index of technical change. All the prices are 
 (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized by the price of farming-based importables. 
 Population growth (or density), workers, and 
 road (number or thing that changes) may well be missing (numbers that change/things that change) in these 
 (moving backwards). Note that their high R 2 can most likely 
 be explained by including fell behind prices aside 
 current prices. 
 Gunawardana and Oczkowski ( 1992) is an interesting study which explains paddy supply by the 
 price ratio ((promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) price of paddy to (material that makes plants grow better) 
 price), crop-watering/rinsing with water, credit, givebackal sales of rice. 
 This is one of the rare studies where credit (number or thing that changes) 
 directly appears as an explanatory (number or thing that changes). Although 
 they get a very high R 2 (0.97 for yield), the 
 including in something of other important (numbers that change/things that change) (e.g. population density) may well change the short-run and the 
 long-run elasticities. 
 Van Schalkwyk and Groenewald (1993) use price 
 ratio, land quality, average rainfall, and dummies (to 
 capture (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change over time) to explain farming-based supply in South Africa. Missing (numbers that change/things that change) in 
 this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) may include roads, workers, 
 and population growth. As for the previous study, 
 the high R 2 may be explained by including 
 fell behind (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) do not think about/believe in 
 their models, among others, population growth, population density, and (how long a person is expected to live). More than that, as 
 underlined above, another source of misspecification 
 starts from the use of (in name only/very small amount) protection coefficient instead of real producer prices; that is, some 
 exchange rate (number or thing that changes) and real foreign price are 
 missing. Note that some of the high R 2 may be due 
 to the presence of country dummy (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Pick and Vollrath (1994) contain some left-out 
 (numbers that change/things that change) in some equations (i.e. workers). The 
 models with extreme left out (numbers that change/things that change) show up with 
 low R 2 - This is the case for Nigeria (0.36). 
 As underlined completely/in a hinting way above, there is some 
 difficulty in testing the Nerlove model in terms 
 of left-out changeable misspecification. Fell behind output 
 (or area) usually explains a great part of difference/different version of 
 output (large (thing that's given/work that's done) to R 2 ). Yet the including in something 
 of fell behind output and time (popular thing/general way things are going) does not give us the 
 hit/effect of a few (numbers that change/things that change) of interest. 
 Lopez et al. ( 1991) is the best scientific work in 
 
 Table I 
 Price elasticities with amount as (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) 
 
 N 
 
 00 
 
 Areajperiod 
 
 Data/method 
 
 Author 
 
 Output 
 
 Price 
 and falls behind 
 
 53 countries 
 62-64/68-70 
 31 SSA 70-81 
 31 SSA 70-81 
 58 countries 69-78 
 58 countries 69-78 
 58 countries 69-78 
 21 SSA 70-87 
 14 SSA 70-87 
 7 SSA 70-87 
 7 SSA 70-87 
 14 SSA 70-87 
 II SSA 70-87 
 4 SSA 70-87 
 Tanzania 64-84 
 Tanzania 65-84 
 Cameroon 47-64 
 Nigeria 49-64 
 Tanzania 45-67 
 Ghana 63-81 
 Kenya 66-80 
 Kenya 72-90 
 Tanzania 70-88 
 Malawi 70-87 
 S. Africa 76, 81, 88 
 
 Cross-S IV 
 
 Peterson (1979) 
 
 Qw 
 
 Pw,f 
 
 rQ 
 rQ 
 Q 1111 (group) 
 Q1111 (crop) 
 Q1111 (animals) 
 
 NPC, 
 Pmf,l 
 
 QleC 
 
 pcpi.ma 
 
 Qetc 
 Qacr 
 Cocoa 
 Coffee 
 Cotton 
 Tea 
 Tea 
 Cotton 
 Cocoa 
 Palm oil 
 Sisal 
 
 pcpi.ma 
 
 India 54-77 
 India 
 Sri Skinnya 52-87 
 10 SSA 80-89 
 
 9 SSA 80-89 
 6 SSA 80-89 
 Argentina 71-88 
 Indonesia 71-88 
 Venezuela 71-88 
 Nigeria 71-88 
 
 Knife ( 1985) 
 Knife ( 1985) 
 B inswanger et al. ( 1987) 
 B inswanger et al. ( 1987) 
 Binswanger et al. ( 1987) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Jaeger ( 1992) 
 Mshomba ( 1989) 
 Mshomba ( 1989) 
 Behrman ( 1968) 
 Oni ( 1969) 
 Gwyer ( 1971) 
 Bond ( 1983) 
 Bond ( 1983) 
 Sharma ( 1992) 
 Lopez et al. (1991) 
 Lopez et al. (1991) 
 Van Schalkwyk and 
 Groenewald ( 1993) 
 T series Nerlove Chhibber ( 1989) 
 Combined GLS-SUR Bapna et al. ( 1984) 
 Combined GLS-SUR Bapna et al. ( 1984) 
 Gunawardana and 
 T series OLS 
 Oczkowski ( 1992) 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) 
 Panel within 
 Panel within 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) 
 Panel within 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) 
 Panel within 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) 
 Panel within 
 Knife and Schreiber ( 1994) 
 Panel within 
 Pick and Vollrath ( 1994) 
 T series OLS 
 T series OLS c 
 Pick and Vollrath (1994) 
 Pick and Vollrath ( 1994) 
 T series OLS 
 Pick and Vollrath ( 1994) 
 T series OLS 
 Cross-SOLS 
 Cross-SOLS 
 Panel within 
 Panel within 
 Panel within 
 Panel 3SLS 
 Panel 3SLS 
 Pane13SLS 
 Pane13SLS 
 Panel 3SLS 
 Panel 3SLS 
 Panei3SLS 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series Nerlove 
 T series 2S LS 
 T series 2SLS 
 Panel OLS 
 
 Qlec 
 QleC 
 Qtec 
 QleC 
 
 Qtec 
 APE 
 
 Exch. rate 
 var. 
 
 Price SRE 
 
 Price LRE 
 1.27-1.66' 
 
 0.02 
 
 &amp;gt;a 
 
 n.a. 
 0.15 'a 
 
 RDP, 
 pmf.t 
 Pmf.t 
 
 RE 
 RE 
 RE 
 RE 
 RE 
 RE 
 RE 
 
 pcpi.ma 
 pcpi.ma 
 pcpi.rna 
 
 pcpi.rna 
 
 pcpi.ma 
 
 rate 
 rate<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
