AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 Developments in biophysical and bioeconomic (testing out) of 
 farming-based systems: a review 1 
 Caleb A. Oriade * , Carl R. Dillon 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow and (away from cities) (the study of people), University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA 
 Accepted 5 May 1997 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper reviews the features and uses of some recent biophysical and bioeconomic (testing out) models in farming-based money flow/money-based studies 
 research. Problems connected with earlier models are discussed and the extent to which recent machines (that reproduce the real thing) have talked to/looked at these concerns is 
 valued at. Some important factors that will improve the continued relevance of machines (that reproduce the real thing) as research and decision support tools are pointed to/showed. 
 © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Maybe more than any other research way(s) of doing things employed in farming-based money flow/money-based studies, the growing 
 (quality of being liked a lot or done a lot) of systems approach and (testing out) ways of doing things is rather (excellent/very unusual) judging from the reported number of computer programs in the last 20 years. The 
 use of this way of doing things in farming-based research, which 
 was described as (compared to other things) novel in 1971 (Dent and 
 Anderson, 1971), had become so (existing all over a large area) a few 
 years later to the extent that two surveys of over 300 
 books each did not exhaust available (books, magazines, etc.) 
 in the field (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 
 1977). Ever since, no serious attempt has been made 
 to begin/try such a complete review as it is 
 doubtful if the value of such an exercise would 
 permit the amount of useful things/valuable supplies needed/demanded. Instead, the 
 recent (popular thing/general way things are going) is to narrow the focus of such studies to 
 
 Corresponding author. 
 This project was given money by Arkansas Farming-based Experiment 
 Station project no. 1464. 
 * 
 
 1 
 
 some clearly stated/particular (testing out) systems andjor farming-based 
 practices (Musser and Tew, 1984; Braat and Van 
 Lierop, 1987; Dillon et al., 1991). 
 In almost all the surveys of (testing out) use in 
 farming, certain ends/end results are almost the same 
 (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) the extent of/the range of such studies. The surveys 
 have attributed the attractiveness of (testing out) to the 
 low amount of (able to be done) other choice ways of doing things for tackling the built-in energetic and/ or (random/including random data points) nature 
 of farming-based problems. Also, the appeal of (testing out) has been improved by increasing computer ability at a (compared to other things) cheaper cost. However, certain 
 concerns have been raised having to do with the wisdom 
 of employing (testing out) tools in every study. The 
 goal of this exercise is to review some of the 
 recent machines (that reproduce the real thing) 2 and their computer programs to physical 
 
 2 In this study, machines (that reproduce the real thing) refer to models that are developed for 
 (testing out) purposes (Musser and Tew, 1984; Dillon eta!., 1991). 
 This definition differs from Anderson (1974) where machines (that reproduce the real thing) 
 refer to the modelers (people) and simulands are used for the 
 models. 
 
 0169-5150/97 j$17.00 © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Pll SO 169-5150(97)000 12-1 
 
 46 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 and/or (related to the body function of living things) issues in farming. Such information will help identify the possible strengths of 
 (testing out) that the modelers can build upon, as well 
 as the possible hidden traps to avoid. Now that (testing out) 
 is more and more being used for decision support, information from such a occasional test could prevent expensive mistakes from being made or repeated. 
 In the sections that follow, some idea-based issues in (testing out) are first discussed. Next, factors 
 that could improve or limit the appeal of (testing out) 
 are highlighted. Third, the distinguishing features of 
 the class of machines (that reproduce the real thing) commonly used in farming-based production research are presented. Fourth, a 
 number of common machines (that reproduce the real thing) and their applications 
 are surveyed. Finally, an evaluation of these machines (that reproduce the real thing) and their computer programs is begun/tried while some 
 of the factors that could improve the continued relevance of this way(s) of doing things are pointed to/showed. 
 
 2. Certain ideas in (testing out) 
 For the benefit of explaining/big show, a brief summary of 
 certain issues in (testing out) is presented as a thorough talk of these ideas has been done/tried in other places (Dent and Anderson, 1971; Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977). (testing out) 
 is a number-based moving around/misleading and tricking of a symbolic model of 
 a system with a view to creating experimental 
 information about the systems or the model of systems (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; 
 Czaki, 1984). Five phases in (testing out) are usually 
 recognized. These are: the model (detailed description of exactly what is required), limit/guideline guess, checking (for truth) (which may also include adjustment), validation and rewriting/redoing stages 
 (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; Musser 
 and Tew, 1984). The tasks to be completed in 
 these phases are somehow self-explanatory except 
 for the checking (for truth) and validation functions which 
 are often misinterpreted. As will be seen in the next 
 section, these two steps are probably the mostly 
 criticized parts/pieces of (testing out) which deserve 
 further explanation. 
 Checking (for truth) is the process of beginning and building on the truth 
 or correctness of model's reality (Dent and Anderson, 1971). It is the process by which the investigator decides/figures out whether or not the model (does/completes) in 
 accordance with the meant purpose (Johnson and 
 
 Rausser, 1977). Checking (for truth) may be done/tried at 
 the level of programming the model (Dillon et al., 
 1991) and/or (finding and correcting mistakes in) the program (Anderson, 
 1974; Law and Kelton, 1991). On the other hand, 
 validation is the process of learning the closeness 
 of the model to reality which is reflected in the 
 model's ability to copy the needed/demanded (features/ qualities/ traits) of the systems and satisfying the modelling 
 goals (Dent and Anderson, 1971; Wright, 1971; 
 Johnson and Rausser, 1977). Simply put, the goal of validation is to learn the usefulness, rather 
 than the truthfulness, of the model (Dillon et al., 
 1991). 
 Understood in the above ideas of checking (for truth) and 
 validation is the fact that both duties need not be 
 performed by the same set of investigators. Often, 
 machines (that reproduce the real thing) are usually not developed oy the end-users. 
 Therefore, while the function of model checking (for truth) 
 may rest with the developers, the users are certainly 
 responsible for validating the models to establish the 
 relevance of such machines (that reproduce the real thing) to the clearly stated/particular problems 
 under (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). 
 Naylor and Finger (1971) give three methodological ideas of validation in money flow/money-based studies which 
 can be extended to validation in computer (testing out). Law and Kelton ( 1991) describe on these 
 ideas by providing clearly stated/particular recommendations on 
 how these ideas can be done. The first 
 idea, rationalism, holds that money-based models are 
 simply a system of logical deductions from (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) 
 reasons of definite truth that are not themselves open to scientific validation (Naylor and Finger, 1971). This way the role of validation is to identify a 
 set of basic ideas (you think are true) controlling/ruling the behavior of 
 the system being modeled. For this idea, the 
 operational (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) proposed by Law and Kelton 
 (1991) is that the model should possess high face 
 truth/trueness that seems reasonable to people who are 
 full of knowledge about the system being modeled. 
 These hidden (under) ideas (you think are true) may be identified by 
 using any combination of these methods: conversations with system experts, (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) of the system, 
 studying the results from earlier attempts, checking 
 the existing explanations, the use of experience and gut feeling. 
 The second idea, scientificism is in complete 
 fighting against/bad feelings about rationalism as it refuses any ideas (you think are true) that cannot be independently (checked for truth/proved true). To im- 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 plement this idea, Law and Kelton (1991) recommend the testing of model's ideas (you think are true) scientifically 
 by using either the goodness of fit statistics, sensitivity analyses or other testing limits/guidelines. Finally, the 
 last idea, positive money flow/money-based studies holds that a acceptable validation is the one that (shows or proves) an (producing a lot with very little waste) ability of the model to (describe the future) the dependent 
 (numbers that change/things that change) that are treated by the model (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) 
 whether the hidden (under) ideas (you think are true) are valid or not. 
 Naylor and Finger (1971) further argue that a 
 acceptable validation is one that includes basic 
 elements of the three ideas in a multistage validation (MV) fashion. In MV, each of the three idea-based positions is thought of as a necessary but not 
 (good) enough procedure for validating (testing out) experiments (Naylor and Finger, 1971; Ray and Richardson, 1978). The first stage in MV calls for the 
 creation of a set of guesses or claims 
 hidden (under) the model. The second stage tries to 
 validate the claims subject to the limits forced by existing (related to studying numbers) tools. The third and final 
 stage in MV tests the model's ability to (describe the future) the 
 behavior of the system under (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). For this 
 definite test, when real systems exist, validation 
 may be a (compared to other things) easy job  of comparing the 
 (like the real thing) data to real, out of sample data (King et 
 al., 1993). If the population distribution of the real 
 systems is known, the created data can be tested 
 (related to numbers) to see whether they could come from 
 such a distribution (Anderson, 1974). However, if 
 information on the real systems is not available, 
 which is the common reason for most ex ante (testing out) analyses, validation becomes (not definite) and 
 the expert opinion plays an important in deciding/figuring out 
 the believability of the model (Law and Kelton, 1991). 
 In all cases, an acid test of acceptable validation is 
 the ability to show that the (testing out) model leads to 
 a better decision which cannot be easily received/got 
 with different ways of doing things (Wright, 1971). 
 
 3. Strengths and weaknesses of (testing out) 
 Many factors have added/have given to the 
 (existing all over a large area) use of (testing out) in farming-based money flow/money-based studies research. First, by training, money-flow experts are 
 generally not prepared to begin/try physical (trying new things out/testing ideas scientifically) that would produce needed information 
 
 47 
 
 for money-based studies. Therefore, when acceptable 
 experimental data can not be sourced from physical 
 scientists, (testing out) becomes unavoidable because of 
 the relative ease of creating the input-output data 
 that are needed. Also, (testing out) provides a means 
 for incorporating certain (random/including random data points) (numbers that change/things that change) (e.g., 
 states of nature) that are not easily (capable of being seen and known) but 
 can help a better understanding of the system 
 being modeled. (testing out) becomes a more powerful 
 tool when the created data lead to good management decisions that cannot be outclassed by using 
 other choice ways of doing things. (testing out) can substitute for 
 large scale physical (trying new things out/testing ideas scientifically) while ex ante 
 (testing out) can aid the understanding of a system that 
 does not exist or that is now not practical to 
 experiment (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 
 1977). 
 Another factor that is responsible for the (able to explode/emotional) use of (testing out) is the increasing computer 
 power and (ability to be easily paid for) (Dillon et al., 1991; King et 
 al., 1993). One of the early concerns of (testing out) is 
 its high cost. For this reason, Dillon (1971) notes 
 that (testing out), once started, will continue until 
 available money is exhausted. The (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) of 
 Anderson (1974) that a study through (testing out) 
 always soaks up more useful things/valuable supplies than expected a 
 priori duly (completes/goes along with) this position. Therefore, It 
 is not surprising to see an increased use of (testing out) as (related to computers and science) advances lower computation 
 costs and make it very competitive when compared 
 to physical (trying new things out/testing ideas scientifically) or other methods. 
 Most of systems (testing out) has been used to 
 address complex (random/including random data points) and/ or energetic problems in farming. Application to crop-watering/rinsing with water projects 
 represents a big part of (testing out) 
 (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; King 
 et al., 1993). In general, (testing out) has been used 
 mostly as a research tool with little (serious thought/something to think about/respect) 
 for its believability where believable models are machines (that reproduce the real thing) that have been widely accepted to the extent of 
 being used as an aid in making decisions (Law and 
 Kelton, 1991). However, the increasing demand for 
 such believable models is now stimulating interest in 
 the development of (made to do one thing very well) machines (that reproduce the real thing) that meet 
 these needs (King et al., 1993). 
 The criticisms of (testing out) are also worthy of 
 (serious thought/something to think about/respect). Almost all scientific applications 
 have not placed much higher cost on the importance of 
 
 48 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 model validation (Johnson and Rausser, 1977; King 
 et al., 1993). Since a majority of these machines (that reproduce the real thing) are 
 usually developed by parties that are external to their 
 later usage, validation is a requirement for 
 telling whether the pre-planned model ideas (you think are true) and the resultant model prescriptions are transportable and related to the new (surrounding conditions) or 
 problem under (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something). Also, some users may 
 need to strengthen their reason for employing 
 (testing out) tools as it is possible that (able to be done), costeffective other choice ways of doing things that can produce superior results are available. 
 While the modelling goals of money-flow experts often involve some optimization, possible developers 
 and users sometimes do not recognize that (testing out) 
 is not an best procedure and its computer program to a problem does not automatically lead to an 
 best solution. While the search for an (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 way of using (testing out) as a means of optimization 
 is an area deserving attention, few approaches have 
 been suggested to deal with optimization of systems 
 through (testing out) modelling (Anderson, 1974; 
 Czaki, 1984; Azadivar and Lee, 1988). According to 
 Azadivar and Lee (1988), these are: the Response 
 Surface Way(s) of doing things (RSM), direct search, and 
 (random/including random data points) Guess Method (SAM). RSM involves the guess of the moving backward limits/guidelines of 
 linear or quadratic form of (testing out) results (Box 
 and Wilson, 1951; Smith, 1976). If the number of 
 (able to be done) (testing out) results is limited, direct search 
 for best results may be possible either with repeated cycles (Anderson, 1974; Czaki, 1984) or 
 by careful list and test of all possible 
 results (King et al., 1993; Swinton and King, 
 1994). However, since a big number of (testing out) models are often (random/including random data points) and more complicated in nature, the third category, SAM, which is a 
 group of (related to numbers) come togethernt search methods, 
 may be more appropriate (Kushner and Clark, 1978). 
 A (experience-based thinking) procedure developed by Azadivar and 
 Lee (1988) for improving complex (random/including random data points) systems modeled by (testing out) is a good example of 
 the SAM method. However, users need to balance 
 the gains of optimization with the extra costs of 
 chasing after any of these optimization procedures. 
 Other criticisms of (testing out) include: the need to 
 validate the machine (that reproduces the real thing) in every computer program which 
 makes its use time-using/eating and expensive 
 
 (Ramos, 1987), the separation between model results and real world situations (Anderson, 1974), the 
 fact that many (testing out) decisions and inputs are 
 pre-planned and uncontrollable this way needing 
 an combined cooperation for the machines (that reproduce the real thing) to 
 be able to change for other research (Musser and Tew, 
 1984). 
 
 4. Biophysical and bioeconomic (testing out) 
 
 Surveys of machines (that reproduce the real thing) and their computer programs have 
 usually been managed and did/done by subject area (Dent and 
 Anderson, 1971; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; Czaki, 
 1984; Musser and Tew, 1984). Although there is no 
 agreement as to the appropriate language for this classification, the categories given by Johnson and 
 Rausser (1977) will be enough. Their five broad classes 
 are the firm and process, the market, the group, 
 the development and the valuable thing from nature models. 
 In farming-based production, a sub-set of firm and 
 process models, otherwise known as biophysical 
 machines (that reproduce the real thing), are very common (Boggess, 1984; Musser 
 and Tew, 1984). Biophysical machines (that reproduce the real thing) (BPS) are 
 process models that clearly account for the (related to the body function of living things) andjor physical parts/pieces of farming-based production (Musser and Tew, 1984). These machines (that reproduce the real thing) 
 provide the means of creating production response 
 surfaces needed/demanded for scientific production research 
 (Boggess, 1984). 
 Often, BPS and bioeconomic machines (that reproduce the real thing) or models have been used interchangeably. A bioeconomic 
 model is a mathematical representation of a (related to the body function of living things) system which describes (related to the body function of living things) processes and 
 (describes the future) the effects of management decisions on 
 those processes (King et al., 1993). In practical 
 applications, there seems to be no clear honor/difference 
 between BPS and bioeconomic models (BEMS). For 
 instance, the books referred to in BPS and BEMS 
 surveys often overlap (see, e.g., Musser and Tew, 
 1984; Dillon et al., 1991; King et al., 1993). However, a few attempts have been made to distinguish 
 between both classes of sii):lulators. In general, BPS, 
 by themselves, do not irytlude an money-based part. Musser and Tew 1984{) say/argue that it is the 
 importance of physical processes that (makes different) 
 BPS from BEMS. However, this honor/difference fades as 
 BPS is intensively used to solve money-based problems. 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 A more definite difference between BPS and BEMS 
 can be gathered from King et al. (1993). They (see/hear/become aware of) 
 that BEMS generally fall within the class of (describe the future)ive models where (related to the body function of living things) processes are represented by a (compared to other things) small number of equations 
 relating current state and control (number or thing that changes) levels to 
 future states of the system. (in the opposite way), BPS belong 
 to a class of process models where (compared to other things) described/explained 
 subsystems of physical and (related to living things) processes 
 are linked in an overall representation of plant (or 
 animal) growth in such a way that the structure and 
 limits/guidelines of part subsystems are based on 
 general possible models of specific physical or 
 (related to the body function of living things) processes. Anyway, it is rather hard to tell the difference between both machines (that reproduce the real thing) in practice and the rest of this survey will focus on 
 both sets of machines (that reproduce the real thing) both/together. 
 
 5. Survey of BPS and BEMS machines (that reproduce the real thing) 
 The machines (that reproduce the real thing) reviewed in this section are neither 
 representative nor thorough of all (connected/related) models. 
 Rather, the choice was influenced either by their 
 acceptance, as reflected in the number of applications, or by the long/big involvement of farming-based 
 money-flow experts in their development. Even with these 
 judging requirements, it is conceivable that some important machines (that reproduce the real thing) would have been accidentally left out. 
 SOYGRO (Wilkerson et al., 1983) and CERES 
 (Ritchie and Otter, 1985) models are among the most 
 famous process models that have been used in testing out whole crop-soil systems. Although SOYGRO 
 was developed as a decision support tool for crop-watering/rinsing with water and pest management, it has been mostly used 
 for research purposes (Hoogenboom et al., 1992). 
 SOYGRO tests out the yield, growth and development of soybeans (Glycine max L. Merr) as a function of soil, weather and management (numbers that change/things that change) 
 (Wilkerson et al., 1983). From its early version in 
 the early 80's, SOYGRO has gone through big 
 changes such that it now is one of the most 
 flexible models whose truth/trueness of results is no longer 
 location-specific or (surrounding conditions)-dependent. Hoogenboom et al. (1992) describe the measures that were 
 taken to make sure that the (statements about the future) of the model are 
 reliable. During checking (for truth), the code was checked 
 to secure/make sure of that the programming logic was 
 
 49 
 
 consistent and a true reflection of the system being 
 modeled. This was good with the aid of 
 (finding and correcting mistakes in) tools of FORTRAN collectors and some 
 static program (things or people that carefully study things). For adjustment, data from 
 experimental places/locations in Gainesville, Florida were compared to model (statements about the future). SOYGRO has been a lot validated in different locations in USA and 
 Europe (Hoogenboom et al., 1992; Moulin and 
 Beckie, 1993; Nagarajan et al., 1993; Savin et al., 
 1994; Gabrielle et al., 1995). Unlike many machines (that reproduce the real thing), transportability of SOYGRO is improved by the 
 not brand-name format that was adopted for typing things so 
 that site-clearly stated/particular information can be used for model 
 (statements about the future). 
 Mostly, the above features of SOYGRO 
 are shared by other -GRO models for grain (peas, beans, lentils, etc.). 
 They are PNUTGRO for peanuts (Arachis hypogea 
 L.) and BEANGRO for common beans ( Phaseolus 
 low-class and offensiveis L.). Also, these attributes describe 
 CERES (an (word made up from the first letters of words) for crop guess through 
 useful thing/valuable supply and (surrounding conditions) (creation/combination)) class of models 
 for cereals. The purpose of CERES models is to 
 create yield guesses by modelling factors that 
 were thought about/believed to be most (connected/related) in yield desire/decision. These factors include plant growth and development, soil water and nutrient status (Ritchie and 
 Otter, 1985). Random factors that could be controlled by management such as pest and disease 
 (situations where large numbers of harmful or disgusting things exist) were not thought about/believed. CERES Wheat and 
 CERES Maize are the common types of CERES 
 models. CERES and -GRO models are among the 
 models within the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of IBSNAT-DSSAT 
 (the International Benchmark Places/locations Network for 
 Agrotechnology Move (from one place to another) Project Decision Support 
 Systems for Agrotechnology Move (from one place to another)) whose goal 
 was to (make something look or work the same way every time) the structure of these models in 
 order to improve their suitability for any area 
 (Hoogenboom et al., 1992). Validation results for all 
 or any parts/pieces of SOYGRO and CERES models 
 have generally shown a acceptable level of writing between (capable of being seen and known) data and tested out 
 variates, although certain sub-routines often require 
 some re-adjustment before realistic model guesses 
 are received/got (Moulin and Beckie, 1993; Nagarajan et 
 al., 1993; Savin et al., 1994; Gabrielle et al., 1995). 
 FLIPSIM (Richardson and Nixon, 1986) is a 
 FORTRAN computer (testing out) model that was developed for carefully studying the probable results of 
 
 50 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 different policies and income tax developments on 
 typical farms. It is a firm level, recursive, (testing out) 
 model which creates the once-a-year production, farm 
 policy, marketing, (money-related) management, growth, 
 and income tax parts/pieces of a farm over a planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  of up to ten years (Richardson and 
 Nixon, 1986). FLIPSIM identifies the best path 
 of crop businesses/projects by in a planned way listing 
 and testing the results of all (able to be done) other choices. Checking (for truth) and validation of FLIPSIM was 
 created after the multistage approach suggested by 
 Naylor and Finger (1971). 
 HERB (Wilkerson et al., 1991), WEEDSIM 
 (Swinton and King, 1994) and WEEDCAM 
 (Lybecker et al., 1994) are all recent BEMS which 
 are (nearby/useful) decision support systems for the management of farming-based pests (mainly weeds). HERB 
 was first in the series of these pest management 
 models to be developed. HERB is a computer-based, 
 interactive, menu-driven program that can create 
 after-coming into view herbicide recommendations for money-making soybean production (Wilkerson et al., 1991). 
 Using the field-clearly stated/particular information supplied by the 
 user, the model provides some (able to be done) weed 
 control other choices and their connected hits/effects on 
 weeds and returns (King et al., 1993). Data received/got 
 from North Carolina experiments were used to adjust HERB model. Information on the clearly stated/particular procedures employed for model checking (for truth) and validation is rather very small but acceptable results with 
 HERB computer programs have been reported (Wilkerson et 
 al., 1991; Tricks et al., 1992). WEEDCAM is almost the same 
 to HERB except it is a bioeconomic model for 
 managing both pre- and after-coming into view weeds in 
 watered com (Zea mays L.).lt is a spreadsheet-based 
 computer software which was developed and validated in Colorado. Its format assumes the knowledge 
 of spreadsheet data management. This new approach improves the flexibility and strength of the 
 model with its liberal data entry and moving around/misleading and tricking 
 procedures. 
 WEEDSIM extends the edges of something/unexplored areas of the above 
 weed management models by recognizing a more 
 reasonable picture/situation of many weeds and multiple 
 control plans within a energetic setting. It is a 
 computer-based, pattern of behavior, bioeconomic weed management model for com and soybeans that identifies 
 a two-year path of weed control treatments that 
 
 (make as big as possible) net returns per area of land. The two-year (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet) 
 enables the model to track the carryover effects of 
 current weeds and control measures in later 
 season. WEEDSIM, like the other two pest management models, identifies the weed control plans 
 that (make as big as possible) returns by in a planned way listing 
 and testing (money made/good things received) under all possible sequences 
 of (able to be done) weed control actions, rather than using 
 energetic programming or other optimization procedures. For checking (for truth), the steps described in Law 
 and Kelton (1991) were followed while (related to studying numbers) 
 tools and expert opinions were used in model validation. (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from on-field validation trials hints that WEEDSIM is a promising tool for improving returns and/or reducing herbicide use when 
 compared to farmers' ordinary practices (Buhler 
 et al., 1996; Porcella et al., 1996). A related model, 
 GWM (Tricks et al., 1994), which has a better users' 
 (connecting point/way of interacting with something) and which is much more flexible 
 than WEEDSIM in terms of its data entry abilities is now being field-tested in a few locations. 
 GLEAMS ((underground water that supplies wells) Loading Effects of Farming-based Management Systems) (Leonard et al., 1987) 
 is a (testing out) model for testing the effects of 
 different management systems on the movement of 
 farming-based chemicals. It is a good tool for facing the (underground water that supplies wells) quality concerns of chemical usage. Another related model is AGNPS (Farming-based NonPoint Source) (Young et al., 1989) which 
 is an event-based water quality model for carefully studying 
 nonpoint-source pollution in farming-based (related to areas of land that drain into a river). 
 Since a major restriction to the (existing all over a large area) use of 
 these water quality models is their time-using/eating 
 input data demands, (land-area-based/location) information systems 
 (GIS) have been successfully (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) with AGNPS (Tim and Happy, 1994). This development has 
 proved to be an effective way to collect, move around/mislead and trick, 
 see (in your mind) and carefully study the input and output data of 
 AGNPS (Srinivasan and Arnold, 1994). GLEAMS 
 and AGNPS have ben found to be useful tools for 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) planning in different locations (Bingner 
 et al., 1992; Sugiharto et al., 1994; Foltz et al., 1995; 
 Rode and Frede, 1997). 
 EPIC (Wearing away-Working well Hit/effect Calculator) 
 (Jones et al., 1991) was developed by a (using different kinds of expert knowledge) team of USDA (people who work to find information) at the Blacklands 
 Research Center in Temple, Texas. EPIC is a dy- 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 namic model that can be used to guess soil wearing away and its hits/effects on crop production. The nine 
 major parts/pieces of EPIC are: weather, (water science), 
 wearing away, nutrient cycling, soil temperature, land, 
 crop growth, crop and soil management, and money flow/money-based studies. EPIC has been a lot used and the 
 model appears to give acceptable results with mini- 
 
 51 
 
 mal adjustment (Bryant et al., 1992; Rosenberg et al., 
 1992; Foltz et al., 1995; Hughes et al., 1995). 
 CEEPES (the Complete (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Money-based Policy Test System) (Bouzaher et al., 
 1995) is an (having different things working together as one unit) system of (testing out) models 
 and policy evaluation tools that helps a planned 
 test of trade-offs from different agroenvi- 
 
 Table I 
 Some machines (that reproduce the real thing) and their applications 
 Machine (that reproduces the real thing) 
 
 Description 
 
 Examples of Application 
 
 AGNPS(Young eta!., 1989) 
 
 Water quality model for carefully studying nonpoint-source pollution 
 in farming-based (related to areas of land that drain into a river). 
 
 CEEPES(Bouzaher eta!., 1995) 
 
 Integrated system for testing trade-offs from other choice 
 agroenvironmental policies 
 Process models for (describing the future) growth, development and 
 yield of (pertaining to each person or thing) cereal grains. 
 
 Kozloff et a!., 1992;Sugiharto 
 et a!., 1994;Rode and Frede, 
 1997. 
 Bouzaher et a!., 1995. 
 
 CERES models(Ritchie and Otter, 1985) 
 
 CIM(Brown et a!., 1983) 
 CORNF(Stapper and Arkin, 1980) 
 COTTAM(Jackson et al., 1988) 
 EPIC(Jones eta!., 1991) 
 FLIPSIM(Richardson and Nixon, 1986) 
 
 GAFS(Hutton and Hinman, 1968) 
 GLEAMS(Leonard eta!., 1987) 
 GOSSYM(Baker et a!., 1986) 
 GRAZE(Loewer et a!., 1980) 
 HERB(Wilkerson eta!., 1991) 
 SORGF(Maas and Arkin, 1978) 
 
 A computer-based model for managing insect pests in cotton 
 A biophysical (testing out) model for corn 
 A model for testing out the growth, development and yield 
 of cotton. Almost the same as  GOSSYM. 
 Pattern of behavior model for guessing soil wearing away hits/effects on crop 
 production 
 A firm level, (testing out) model for creating production, 
 (money-related) and marketing data. 
 A general farming-based firm machine (that reproduces the real thing) 
 Model for testing effects of management systems on 
 movement of farming-based chemicals 
 A model for testing out the growth of cotton. 
 Pattern of behavior model for testing out beef-search production as a 
 function of both management and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (numbers that change/things that change). 
 A bioeconomic model for after-coming into view control of weeds 
 in soybeans. 
 A biophysical (testing out) model for (grass grown for food). 
 
 SOYGRO(Wilkerson et a!., 1983) 
 
 A process-oriented computer-based model for (describing the future) 
 growth, development and yield of soybeans 
 
 SW AT(Brown and Hollis, 1996) 
 
 A semi-scientific model for (describing the future) concentrations of 
 bug-killers entering surface water from farming-based land. 
 A (water science) model for testing out water balance and related 
 processes in (away from cities) (bowls/areas drained by a river) 
 
 SWRRB(Williams et a!., 1985) 
 
 TAMW(Maas and Arkin, 1980) 
 WEEDSIM(Swinton and King, 1994) 
 
 A Biophysical (testing out) model for wheat. It is very almost the same 
 to CERES-Wheat 
 A energetic bioeconomic model for multiple weed management in corn and soybean. 
 
 Parsch et a!., 1991;Johnson et 
 a!., 199l;Moulin and Beckie, 
 1993. 
 S zmedra et a!., 1991. 
 Dillon et a!., 1989. 
 Dillon eta!., 1989. 
 Foltz et a!., !993;Hughes et a!., 
 1995;Sabbagh eta!., 1992. 
 Duffy et a!., 1986;Bai1ey and 
 Richardson, 1985;Perry et a!., 
 1986;Salassi eta!., 1987. 
 Harris and Mapp, 1986. 
 Foltz et a!., 1993. 
 Misra and Spurlock, 1991. 
 Parsch and Loewer, 1987. 
 Tricks et a!., 1992. 
 Harris and Mapp, 1986; Dillon 
 et a!., 1989. 
 Boggess and Amerling, 1983; 
 Boggess et a!., 1985; Szmedra 
 et a!., 1991; Parsch et a!., 
 1991; Nagarajan eta!., 1993. 
 Arnold and Allen, 1996;Brown 
 and Hollis, 1996. 
 Arnold and Williams, 
 1987;Singer eta!., 1988;Savabi 
 et a!., 1988. 
 Dillon eta!., 1989. 
 Swinton et a!., 1995;Buhler et 
 a!., 1996;Forcella et a!., 
 1996;0riade et a!., 1996. 
 
 52 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 ronmental policies. This is a useful policy test 
 model especially with the growing concern (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 the potential (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and health effects of 
 farming-based chemicals. The four major parts/pieces 
 of CEEPES are: policy, farming-based decision, future 
 and transport, and health and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) risk. 
 Other machines (that reproduce the real thing) that have featured in books 
 include SORGF (Maas and Arkin, 1978), CORNF 
 (Stapper and Arkin, 1980), TAMW (Maas and Arkin, 
 1980), COTTAM (Jackson et al., 1988), GOSSYM 
 (Baker et al., 1986), CIM (Brown et al., 1983), 
 GRAZE (Loewer et al., 1980), GAFS (Hutton and 
 Hinman, 1968), SWRRB (Williams et al., 1985) and 
 SWAT (Brown and Hollis, 1996). Features of these 
 machines (that reproduce the real thing) are summarized in Table 1. 
 6. A survey of selected applications 
 As with machines (that reproduce the real thing), this survey does not think about/believe 
 all scientific work involving some (testing out). Instead, the few that were selected only serve to illustrate the width of issues for which (testing out) 
 methods have been thought of appropriate. The categories include crop-watering/rinsing with water, crop management, pest 
 management, animals management and farming 
 and (surrounding conditions). 
 
 6.1. Crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 BPS and BEMS have been used a lot to 
 decide/figure out the best portion of crop-watering/rinsing with water water 
 without over-fully using the underground waters. Mapp and Bidman (1976) employed GAFS to test out a representative farm and guess returns under different 
 length of time and extreme harshness of soil moisture and air-related stresses during the critical stages of crop 
 development. (like the real thing) farm incomes under different plans helped the recommendation of 
 plans and policy efforts that are best under different water useful thing/valuable supply situations. Bernardo et al. 
 (1987) used a biophysical (testing out) model, 
 SPAW-IRRIG, to create yield response to crop-watering/rinsing with water schedules. The crop-watering/rinsing with water activities so created 
 were later employed in a mathematical programming 
 model that identified crop-watering/rinsing with water plans for held back profit (biggest increase/best possible extent) under limited water 
 supply. Bernardo (1988) employed SORGF to test the effects of (related to space or existing in space) (quality of changing over time or at different places) of crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 
 applications on the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of crop-watering/rinsing with water. The 
 growth and yields of (grass grown for food) were tested out under 
 both the idea (you think is true) of evenness and equality and non-evenness and equality in water application. This formed the basis for 
 comparing benefits under (related to space or existing in space) (quality of changing over time or at different places) to returns from ordinary practice of uniform sprinkler 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water. 
 On crop-watering/rinsing with water and risk, Boggess and Amerling 
 (1983) employed SOYGRO to explore the effects/results/suggestions of crop-watering/rinsing with water investments on risk and returns to 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water plan. This crop model was used to 
 guess yield response of crops to crop-watering/rinsing with water with 
 seventeen years of historical weather data. Using 
 cost guesses for different crop-watering/rinsing with water practices created by a computer-based crop-watering/rinsing with water cost generator 
 program, crop-watering/rinsing with water plans that could (make as big as possible) 
 present value of returns under different weather conditions were identified. Harris and Mapp (1986) employed SORGF to test out (grass grown for food) returns to 
 (random/including random data points) soil water and other production and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) conditions. The returns were later subjected to (random/including random data points) control comparisons in order 
 to identify the water-conserving crop-watering/rinsing with water plans 
 for grain (grass grown for food) farmers that depend on the Ogallala underground water in Oklahoma. Bosch and Eidman (1987) 
 used a bioeconomic model to explore the value of 
 soil and weather information for choosing best 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water plans when risk preferences of decision makers are not neutral. The study tested out the 
 value of information for an expected utility making the most of decision maker whose representative farm contains both watered and non-watered land under 
 corn, soybean and rye production in Minnesota. 
 Although the crop-watering/rinsing with water scheduling plan was examined, the model proposed can be employed to 
 carefully study the returns to any production input under 
 risk. 
 
 6.2. Crop management 
 With FLIPSIM, Duffy et al. (1986) tested the 
 effects of different farm programs and levels of 
 price (quality of changing over time or at different places) on the survival and growth of Texas 
 cotton farms. Five levels of price (quality of changing over time or at different places) and 
 three farm policy options under 1981 Farm Bill were 
 tested out for two representative cotton farms. Perry 
 et al. (1986) employed the model to test other choice cropping patterns and share leasing arrange- 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 ments that can improve the money-based ability to be done of 
 (person or business who occupies a house, office, etc.) rice and soybean farmers in Texas. FLIPSIM 
 was used to test out chance distributions of 
 returns to a typical producer. (random/including random data points) control 
 ways of doing things were later applied to these returns in 
 order to identify (producing a lot with very little waste) plans and establish the 
 relationship between crop rotation practices and the 
 nature of share-leasing arrangements. Against the 
 background of (lowering in number/getting worse) land under rice production 
 in the Mississippi River Delta area of the United 
 States, Salassi et al. (1987) also used FLIPSIM to 
 decide/figure out the money-based survivability of rice farms if 
 the winning/most common money-based conditions continue. The study 
 led to the identification of business/project mix and production practices that would sustain a higher level of 
 production. 
 With CERES models, Johnson et al. (1991) (described the future) crop yields under different input levels to 
 help their test of on-farm effects of cropping plans that could reduce nitrate (underground water that supplies wells) 
 pollution. These crop yields were in tum employed 
 in optimization and linear programming models from 
 which guesses concerning leaking-(money made/good thing received) tradeoffs of representative farms were drawn. Parsch et al. 
 (1991) developed an mixture of CERES-wheat and 
 SOYGRO models which they used to test the 
 risk-return tradeoffs of double-cropped wheatsoybean producers such that the costs of early harvest of winter wheat are paid/made up for by improved 
 returns of early soybean plantings. With other models, Misra and Spurlock (1991) used GOSSYM to 
 create produce information needed/demanded for the identification of (producing a lot with very little waste) cotton cropping systems that balance 
 the dual goal of making the most of whole-farm returns 
 while reducing the risk of rare/not enough  (work done by traveling to a place to watch, listen, learn, etc.) time. In a 
 study that (examined closely) the best crop mixes as risk 
 preferences of farmers change in the Blackland 
 flat land areas of Texas, Dillon et al. (1989) employed four 
 crop (testing out) models (i.e., CORNF, SORGF, 
 T AMW and COTTAM) to create the needed input-output data. The money-based decision problem 
 was solved by applying mean-variance programming 
 to the (like the real thing) returns. 
 6.3. Pest management 
 Reichelderfer and Bender (1979) developed a 
 (testing out) model that described the physical produc- 
 
 53 
 
 tion relationships between Mexican bean beatles, 
 control inputs and soybean yields under different 
 conditions. The (testing out) model was later used to 
 (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the relative social and money-based advantages of other choice methods of controlling these 
 insect pests in soybeans. Boggess et al. (1985) developed and employed a multi-species bioeconomic 
 (testing out) model, the Florida Soybean Integrated 
 Crop Management Model (SICM), that could prescribe best pest management plans for soybeans within a pre-decided, multiple species setting. 
 SICM, which has been included into SOYGRO, 
 was used to test out the population patterns 
 (ability to reproduce, development and death) for common 
 insect pests of soybeans and under different weather, 
 cultural and soil conditions. 
 Szmedra et al. (1991) used the Cotton Insect 
 Management (CIM) (testing out) model to study the 
 hit/effect of extending the boll weevil destruction 
 (BWE) program to Mississippi River Delta area of 
 the United States on producers' returns and the 
 effectiveness of such pest control actions. The model 
 helped the desire/decision of the effectiveness of BWE 
 participation and non-participation under low and 
 high levels of (having different things working together as one unit) pest management (IPM). 
 Nyangito et al. (1996) employed a whole farm (testing out) model, the Technology Hit/effect Test System, to test the hit/effect of different disease control methods on the money-based ability to be done of dairy (cows, bulls, etc.) 
 production among small holder farmers in East 
 Africa. Returns under different different procedure (that protects people from disease) programs were tested out and (random/including random data points) control tools helped the identification of (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 plans for useful thing/valuable supply poor, risk disliking farmers in 
 the study area. 
 For site-clearly stated/particular management of weeds, Tricks et 
 al. (1992) used HERB to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the value of 
 information about weed patchiness for improving the 
 recommendations of HERB that were based on nonpatchy weed distributions. In a related study, Oriade 
 et al. ( 1996) employed a changed version of WEEDS1M to examine the potential money-based and (things that are good for the planet) of site-specific weed management 
 relative to the ordinary uniform control of weeds. 
 Tests with this model were carried out within 
 a energetic but pre-decided (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). 
 For testing the effects/results/suggestions of bug-killer policy 
 on returns to pest control, Swinton et al. (1995) used 
 
 54 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 WEEDSIM to test out the effect of local bans and 
 taxes on triazine herbicide use in com (Zea mays 
 L.). 
 
 6.4. Animals management 
 
 Brorsen et al. (1983) developed and used a 
 stocker (cows, bulls, etc.)  growth (testing out) model to guess 
 physical and money-based results of different stocker 
 production systems. The model was used to calculate 
 energy needed things, dry matter intake, and stock 
 gains and weights of different production systems 
 in Oklahoma. Parsch and Loewer (1987) used a 
 biophysical model, GRAZE, to decide/figure out whether 
 rotational or continuous grazing results in best 
 performance for steers (area of grassy land)d on Bermuda grass 
 ( Cynodon dactylon L. Pers.) in western Arkansas 
 and when faced with weather doubt. The (area of grassy land) growth and animal weight gain under nine rotational grazing plans were tested out with the 
 model. Plans were compared on the basis of net 
 returns while variance and other measures of breaking up/spreading out were used to measure the riskiness of each grazing 
 plan. 
 6.5. Farming and (surrounding conditions) 
 
 Sabbagh et al. (1992) developed and used EPICPST model to test out the effects of different farming-based management practices on crop produces and 
 bug-killer losses by surface runoff, (material that sinks in liquid) movement, and leaking under crop-watering/rinsing with water in the High 
 Plains area of Oklahoma. Kozloff et al. (1992) 
 used AGNPS in a Minnesota (related to an area of land that drains into a river) to test out 
 the relative effectiveness of different cropland retirement big plans/layouts/dishonest plans with respect to budget outlays for 
 once-a-year payments to landowners, reduction in downstream (material that sinks in liquid) produce and nutrient loss, and reduction in on-site wearing away. Foltz et al. (1993) combined 
 output from EPIC and GLEAMS with a farm level 
 linear programming model to test the money-based 
 and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) effects/results/suggestions of selected eastern 
 Com Belt farming systems. Sugiharto et al. (1994) 
 used EPIC and AGNPS to test out the effects of 
 selected management practices on connected (material that sinks in liquid) and phosphorus yields starting from farming-based land used for dairy operations. They tested out 
 1990-1991 land management other choice practices 
 
 on three soils in the Upper Leafy house Creek area of 
 Wisconsin and compared the quality of (dumped chemicals)s 
 from fields and watersheds to current standard practices. Bouzaher et al. (1995) used CEEPES to test . 
 the money-based and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) effects/results/suggestions of 
 atrazine ban in the Com Belt area of United States. 
 Hughes et al. (1995) employed EPIC and money-planning 
 tools to test both the short-run a money-making state and 
 long-run (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of some farming-based 
 practices in the Grain cropping area of Jordan. 
 6.6. Miscellaneous 
 
 Other applications of BPS and BEMS include the 
 desire/decision of best timing of harvests, test of research working well and marketing analysis. 
 Kellogg et al. (1988) developed a bioeconomic model 
 which they used, along with best control 
 ways of doing things, to decide/figure out the best time periods for 
 opening the harvest season for Bay Scallop fishery in 
 North Carolina. Bosch and Shabman (1990) developed a bioeconomic model which they later used to 
 study the effects of other choice types of research 
 information on the returns to oyster production. The 
 model results provide an understanding of the nature of 
 research (things that are important) that is appropriate for improving 
 working well in the oyster industry. Finally, in 
 marketing, Bailey and Richardson (1985) have used 
 FLIPSIM to test different marketing plans 
 for cotton. Daily features and cash cotton prices were 
 tested out by the model and the hit/effect of different 
 marketing plans to the farm's survival and money-based success was serious and stubborn within a whole-farm 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). 
 
 7. Opinion and evaluation 
 
 Although earlier surveys (Anderson, 1974; Johnson and Rausser, 1977; Musser and Tew, 1984) point 
 to a majority of (testing out) computer programs in 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water studies, machines (that reproduce the real thing) are now being richly 
 applied to pest management, animal and crop production, risk and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) issues. Usually/(in the past), 
 machines (that reproduce the real thing) have been used to resolve energetic and/or 
 (random/including random data points) problems. However, its use in static and 
 pre-decided cases has been increasing. Also, while 
 the first (or most important) goal of (testing out) is to forecast 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon j Farming-based Money flow 17 ( 1997) 45-58 
 
 crop (or animals) yields, (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) hints that its 
 (possibility of/possible happening of)  guessing (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.) and in creating 
 certain inputs and (middle-position) products is being 
 explored. 
 Recent BPS and BEMS have improved much as serious attempts have been made to avoid 
 hidden traps connected with earlier systems. Model 
 builders (have taken advantage of/have made money from) (related to computers and science) advances 
 in making their systems more strong, flexible and 
 portable. Programming modules are more and more 
 being (done or made to look the same way every time) and it is not unusual/amazing to find 
 (testing out) programs that, in addition to being somehow user-friendly, possess advanced graphic abilities. Sometimes, quality supporting paperwork that is 
 just like commercial software is now being given. However, a big proportion of machines (that reproduce the real thing) 
 are still awkward and poorly-designed to the 
 extent that their developers often insist on formal 
 training of possible users before permitting the use 
 of such systems. 
 There is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of improved combined 
 cooperation between physical and social scientists 
 which has resulted in the development of more strong and widely-tested machines (that reproduce the real thing). However, this 
 argues with one of the reasons often brought up for 
 developing new machines (that reproduce the real thing) which is the lack of 
 certain desirable features in the earlier models. For 
 instance, the reason for developing SOYGRO, 
 instead of using the then existing soybean models, is 
 the need for a simpler model that has the ability to 
 test out crop growth in response to daily microclimate and stress factors (Wilkerson et al., 1983). 
 Also, WEEDSIM was developed because of the 
 inability of earlier pest management models to account for the more reasonable energetic nature of weed 
 problems within a multiple species and multiple 
 control setting (Swinton and King, 1994). Since 
 these machines (that reproduce the real thing) were developed without any commercial intent, it is possible for more strong and 
 widely related models to come out  from group efforts that lead to the upgrade of existing 
 systems instead of developing new ones. With this 
 approach, desirable features that don't have enough earlier models can be included in later versions. 
 The structure of money/giving money (to) model-building projects 
 sometimes has effects/results/suggestions on the shelf-life and 
 (quality of being liked a lot or done a lot) of the resultant machines (that reproduce the real thing). Model developers often depend on research grants for developing 
 
 55 
 
 their systems and interest in such models reduces/lessens once 
 grant money is exhausted. A system of storage-related 
 models and the connected useful thing/valuable supply personnel is related to in securing/making sure of maximum returns to model-building trips/businesses and avoid unnecessary (making copies of something/more than one person doing the same thing) of 
 efforts. 
 The checking (for truth) and validation parts of existing 
 models both during system development and later applications have improved much. Users 
 now regard validation as a key part of project 
 putting into use. Almost all studies now includes 
 some elements of validation. However, in most cases, 
 on-field validation trials were carried out at locations 
 close to where (first information) for calibrating the systems 
 were sourced. Rather than proving the strength 
 of the machines (that reproduce the real thing), this location bias may account for 
 the high degree of writing between the tested out and experimental results. For instance, models 
 that were validated outside the immediate modelbuilding (surrounding conditions) often have to be re-adjusted in 
 order to get acceptable model results (Moulin and 
 Beckie, 1993; Nagarajan et al., 1993; Savin et al., 
 1994; Gabrielle et al., 1995). 
 Still on validation, there seems to be no agreement 
 as to how validation steps should go ahead. For validation of BPS and BEMS, some modellers have 
 relied heavily on basic comparisons of tested out and 
 watched/followed results. Sometimes, (not definite) expert 
 opinion is tried to decide/figure out the acceptable level 
 of congruence. It is certain that disagreement on 
 what makes up/is equal to an acceptable form of validation 
 procedures will continue until generally in a good mood 
 standards are set. Until then, Naylor and Finger 
 (1971) multi-stage approach as increased by Law 
 and Kelton (1991) which was described earlier may 
 serve as a convenient starting point. 
 (testing out) seems like a way(s) of doing things of convenience. Some studies that employed (testing out) tools 
 did not (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) whether different plans 
 that could produce almost the same  or superior results were 
 easily available. Also, (testing out) results are sometimes understood/explained as best solutions. This end/end result is valid only if (testing out) routines have incorporated an optimization search way of doing things such that 
 the resultant (testing out) results have came together to 
 the results of any optimization process. Some of the 
 possible optimization search methods were highlighted in an earlier section of this review. 
 
 56 
 
 C.A. Oriade, C.R. Dillon/ Farming-based Money flow 17 (1997) 45-58 
 
 8. End/end result 
 (testing out), econometric and mathematical programming methods be one of the best known 
 ways of doing things for tackling the different questions in 
 applied money-based research. However, the review 
 shows how (testing out) is a (like nothing else) method that can 
 help the resolution of certain complex and j or 
 energetic problems that might otherwise remain uncontrollable/uncurable. Therefore, the continuous relevance of BPS 
 and BEMS as good research tool is certainly not 
 in doubt (even though there is the existence of) the (almost nothing/very little) events of their (using something the wrong way) and (very mean, unfair treatment). 
 The importance of (testing out) to management decision making is reflected in the increasing number 
 of (testing out)-based decision support systems that is 
 now in use. This represents a move/change from the ordinary role of (testing out) as a purely research tool. It 
 also places a higher higher cost on the quality of 
 (testing out) results as the acceptable margin of error 
 disappears. As a result, in order to secure/make sure of the 
 usefulness of (testing out) methods in helping best management decisions, the leftover/extra concerns 
 that are highlighted in this and almost the same  studies should 
 be talked to/looked at. 
 
 Responses 
 The authors thankfully admit/recognize/respond to the help 
 of Matthew Mason with the book-related review. Also, 
 the authors are thankful to the two unnamed reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions. 
 
 References 
 Anderson, J.R., 1974. (testing out): Way(s) of doing things and computer program in 
 farming-based money flow/money-based studies. Rev. Marketing Agric. Econ. 43, 3-55. 
 Arnold, J.G., Allen, P.M., 1996. Guessing hydrologic budgets 
 for three Illinois (very important events). J. Hydro!. 176, 57-77. 
 Arnold, J.G., Williams, J.R., 1987. Validation of SWRRB machine (that reproduces the real thing) for water supplies in (away from cities) (bowls/areas drained by a river). J. Water Res. Planning 
 Manage. 113, 243-256. 
 Azadivar, F., Lee, Y., 1988. Optimization of separate (number or thing that changes) 
 (random/including random data points) syst<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
