AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 The hit/effect of the tomato agroindustry on the (away from cities) poor in Mexico 
 Marfa Antonieta Barron, Fernando Rello* 
 Faculty of Money flow, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico 
 
 Abstract 
 This article faces/deals with the issue of whether the tomato agroindustry (TAl) has been an effective tool in the reduction of 
 (away from cities) poorness. The TAl is by far the most important agroindustry in Mexico in terms of exports and employment creation. Most 
 of the laborers employed by the TAl in northwest Mexico are (lasting for a short time) traveling workers coming from poor areas in 
 southern Mexico. Conditions of poorness-caused traveling are explained. The (features/ qualities/ traits) and plans of large, modern 
 tomato businesses/projects are carefully studied. The main end/end result is that traveling worker income earned in the tomato fields and packing plants, is 
 basic for the bare survival in villages in poor areas. However, this does not provide a solution to poorness 
 help because traveling worker income is not (good) enough to add/give to (transfer of money from individuals to businesses) in the moving communities, or the to 
 create the conditions for endogenous local development.© 2000 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. 
 Keywords: Tomato agroindustry; Employment; Traveling; Poorness; Mexico 
 
 1. Introduction 
 This article carefully studies the role of (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) and 
 agroindustry in the generation of income and the improvement of living conditions in (away from cities) Mexico. The 
 position one often meets in the available 
 books as well as a position taken by different Latin 
 American governments, is that the export agroindustry is a means of (helping increase/showing in a good way) fair (away from cities) development. It is important therefore to present/cause the following 
 question: has agroindustry in fact been an effective 
 instrument in the reduction of (away from cities) poorness? 
 Unfortunately, there is a low amount of studies carefully studying 
 the effects of agroindustry on (away from cities) poorness. Most of 
 the studies have (focused mental and physical effort) on agroindustrial technology, financing, forms of association, and markets. 
 These studies provide little information on the effects of agroindustry on incomes and employment in 
 * Corresponding author. Present address: Medanos 39, Col. Las 
 Aguilas, 01710 Mexico DF, Mexico. 
 
 poor areas. Some studies, however, have 
 gave/given useful ideas on the labor market (e.g., 
 Wilcox-Young, 1993, for northern Mexico). 
 To deal with this gap in knowledge, we began/tried a 
 study of the tomato agroindustry (TAl) in Mexico, and 
 its hit/effect on employment in poor areas away from cities. The TAl especially, and the (the study of plants) agroindustry in general, are interesting for a few reasons. 
 In general, in terms of output, employment, processing/packing, and exports, (the study of plants) agroindustry is the most important agroindustry in Mexico. 
 According to data from the Ministry of Farming, 
 (the study of plants) makes up/is equal to 18% of Mexico's farming-based 
 production and half of its farming-based exports. Due 
 to the highly labor-intensive nature of (the study of plants) 
 and (plant-related) processing, it creates more than 
 20% of the total labor-days within the Mexican farming-based part/area. More than that, (the study of plants) agroindustry 
 has survived and grew/showed/waved in the current climate of 
 (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other), and has (branched out/done different things) exports to the US 
 market and increased its scale of production. 
 
 0169-5150/00/$ - see front matter© 2000 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. 
 PII: S0169-5150(00)00090-6 
 
 290 
 
 M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 Especially, the TAl is the most important of the 
 (plant-related) agroindustries. TAl has created a (related to a large area) 
 labor market to which workers are attracted from the 
 country's poor (away from cities) areas. Thousands of 
 native (to) poor (person) workers leave these poor areas 
 every year to labor in the tomato fields in the north of 
 Mexico. 
 Our research question is whether the TAl is adding/giving to poorness help in traveling worker-sending areas, especially, in communities in Oaxaca, which 
 send traveling workers yearly to TAl fields in Sinaloa 
 and Baja California, in the northwest of Mexico. 
 We go ahead as follows. First, we examine labor 
 supply status and the traveling caused by poorness in 
 the Mixteca area and Valles Centrales, both areas 
 being in Oaxaca. Second, we examine the labor market in northern areas where the TAl packers operate, 
 including wages and working and living conditions of 
 the workers' families. Finally, we test the hit/effect of 
 the TAl on the living standards of the Oaxacan poor (person) families that send traveling workers to the TAl areas. 
 
 2. Labor supply created in the poor areas 
 exporting labor 
 We guess that labor supply to Mexican 
 agroindustry coming from not important (away from cities) zones depends, among other things, on the degree of poorness 
 and on the lack of jobs in the sending areas. If 
 poorness (irritates/makes worse) and living conditions break down, 
 then the "push factor" to move will increase, or 
 at least the (reward or reason for doing something) will increase to look (for), outside 
 of farming or outside the sending area, other 
 sources of employment or income that are not to be 
 found within the local (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 As a result of the use of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programs and (away from cities) reform programs, (away from cities) 
 poorness in Mexico has deepened during the past 
 ten years. At the same time, both internal and external 
 traveling have increased significantly. The number of 
 (away from cities) poor increased during 1984-1992, from 6.7 to 
 8.8 million living in extreme poorness (INEGI-CEPAL, 
 1993). Another study of the "social part/area" of farm-related, both "ejidos" ((person or business who occupies a house, office, etc.) organizations) and other 
 communities, decided that (away from cities) poorness in ejidos 
 is huge. 47.3% of ejido farmers were poor in 1994 
 (de Janvry eta!., 1997). 
 
 There is enough information available in Mexico 
 to decide that the principal response of (away from cities) families to worsening living conditions has been to look (for) 
 an income outside farming on their own farm. 
 This response is also common among farming-based 
 field-workers in other countries. Three surveys have 
 been carried out (not very long ago) on ejido homes, providing 
 information on sources of family income and change 
 in those incomes over time. The first two surveys 
 were carried out in 1990 and 1994, by the Ministry 
 for Land-related Reform. The third was carried out in 
 1997, by the Institute for Land-related Development and 
 the World Bank. Analyses of these data include de 
 Janvry et al. (1997, 1998), Lanjouw (1998), CEPAL 
 (1999), and Davis (1999). 
 Earnings outside own-farming are very important 
 to the poorest (away from cities) families. For example in 1994, 
 small farmers with holdings of less than 2 ha, whose 
 little land placed them among the poorest, earned only 
 18% of their family income from own-farming and 
 animals farming/managing money, whereas their income from other 
 sources (working outside the farming-based part/area and 
 working in wage-employment in the farming-based part/area) amounted to 47% of their total income. Payments from traveling workers to other areas within Mexico, 
 and from people (who leave their own countries) to the US made up another third 
 of their incomes. Yunez-Naude eta!. (1998) reach the 
 same end/end result using general balance models applied to (away from cities) towns in Mexico. This demonstrates the 
 great importance to poor (away from cities) families in Mexico of 
 income from traveling. 
 The areas with high rates of out-traveling, such 
 as our focal area, Oaxaca, are poor and very rare/not enough 
 in natural and workers. They are dependent on 
 low wages from unskilled jobs, and live in barely (easy to get to, use, or understand), poor areas that create very 
 little employment. Poorness rates in these areas are 
 high and increasing. In 1970, 74% of the Mixteca 
 population had an income level of less than twice the 
 minimum wage, which placed them below the poorness 
 line. In 1990, this percentage had grown to 80%. Faced 
 with this danger and the lack of jobs, the response of many families has been to move towards 
 the northwest to work in the vegetable fields. 
 Majority of people/of the group moves. There are 
 whole villages of seasonal traveling workers. A survey 
 carried out in Coatecas (Valles Centrales) points to/shows 
 that 87% of the 217 families surveyed had family 
 
 M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 members who were traveling workers. Out of these traveling workers, 
 72% went to Sinaloa to work on the tomato and other 
 vegetable fields. This demonstrates the great importance of employment created by the TAl for the poor 
 of Oaxaca (Ortiz, 1998). 
 
 3. TAl, axis of the labor market 
 The high labor needed things demanded by the 
 production and packaging of tomatoes and other vegetables has led to the creation of a wide (related to a large area) 
 market for labor. Guesses made by the Program of 
 Farming-based Day-Workers of the Ministry of Social 
 Development suggest that, in the State of Sinaloa 
 alone, 135 000 traveling worker day-workers crowd together from 
 different areas of Mexico. 
 The demand for work depends on the energy 
 of the (plant-related) business and their technology. The 
 TAl companies, that participate in the labor markets 
 of the northwest are modern, large and (branched out/done different things). 
 They operate in different areas, and in association 
 with other national and foreign companies in both the 
 agroindustrial and (money-related) parts/areas. The largest companies control between 1000 and 2500 ha. These are 
 owned or rented lands, on which they employ the most 
 up-to-date technology. Their owners have become 
 rich exporters. The largest are big businessmen, 
 owners of warehouses in the wholesale markets of 
 Mexico City and Guadalajara. Further details on the 
 TAl can be found in Echanove ( 1999) and Lara and 
 de Grammont (1999). 
 Recent (popular things/general ways things are going) in vegetable production and export 
 point to/show medium-level growth. However, the TAl has increased its size and share of the (the study of plants) part/area. 
 There is also (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of concentration in the TAL 
 One also watches/states increasing (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) in (plant-related) production as part of a business plan 
 to boost penetration of Mexican produce into export 
 markets. According to data from to the Ministry of 
 Farming, 14 (plant-related) varieties were produced 
 in Mexico in the early 1970s, while in 1994 there were 
 more than 80 varieties, some of them fancy and (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) 
 vegetables. 
 The TAl, (even though there is the existence of) the continuing modernization of 
 its technology, has always been, and continues to be, 
 labor-intensive. All the tasks involved are done manually - seedling production either in (glass buildings where plants are grown) or 
 
 291 
 
 in the fields, planting out cuttings, (producing crops/helping something grow), and 
 collecting. This can be contrasted with the mechanized collecting and packing of processed tomatoes 
 common across the US. Tomatoes are also much 
 more labor-intensive than maize, the main cereal 
 crop. The number of work days per hectare of tomato 
 going along with/matching up to the technology available previous 
 to ferti-crop-watering/rinsing with water is calculated at about 122 days, 
 instead of 29 days needed/demanded for the production 
 of maize. 
 The TAl operates within a big picture  of strong international competition for control of the final markets 
 for (plant-related) produce, within the US and Canada. 
 (related to computers and science) modernization forms part of this commercial fight. Over the last few years, Mexican horticulturists have begun to close the (related to computers and science) failure/mistake 
 that separates them from their competitors, and to 
 introduce both plastic-culture (a way of doing things needing/ordering the planted land to be covered in plastic sheets) 
 and ferti-crop-watering/rinsing with water. Both technologies raise labor needed things per hectare. This is especially so since 
 raising production rates from 30 to 60 or more tons 
 per hectare, increases labor needs for the manual 
 collecting involved. The last thing just mentioned is an unskilled job 
 performed by the traveling workers. Labor needs have 
 also increased for produce-selectors to work in the 
 packing plants. 
 In addition to use of new technology, flexible and ad 
 hoc means of labor organization are being used. For 
 example, more (made to do one thing very well) labor is needed/demanded in view of 
 these new production ways of doing things, in better-paid positions (engineers and technicians) for supervising production. Yet TAl firms continue to use unskilled 
 seasonal traveling worker native (to) workers for collecting, 
 as well as local women in the packing plants. The 
 greater volume of harvest (arising from use of new 
 technologies and resulting increases in working well) is handled by taking on more traveling workers and 
 more women workers. The areas are still hired by the 
 traditional hiring methods. The situation here is, therefore, one of combining modern production technology 
 with old forms of labor organization. 
 It is a great advantage for the TAl to have access to cheap labor that it can employ completely at the 
 convenience of the industry's methods and production rhythms. Field and collecting tasks are carried 
 out by traveling worker native (to) workers. Often these are 
 whole family groups, including the children. They 
 
 292 
 
 M.A. Barron, F. Rello/Agricultural Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 are employed on a seasonal basis for the 6 months 
 a year that an farming-based cycle lasts. They are hired 
 for piecework or by the day, but with a said 
 minimum daily (weight/number of tons) to be collected. They are 
 hired for low wages and with hardly any work-related 
 benefits. 
 The basic plan of the TAl consists of combining investment in the most up-to-date technology 
 with the intensive use of cheap labor, and this makes up/is equal to the basis of the TAl's competitive advantage. 
 The possibility of finding workers, at low cost and in 
 the numbers and at the times needed/demanded by the companies, is very important to these companies. 
 Therefore they put into use hiring methods designed to secure/make sure of the supply of labor in the production process. 
 Even though some day-workers arrive in these production areas under their own will, the majority 
 of workers are hired by, or bound to, the companies from the workers' place of origin. As harvest 
 approaches, the employer contracts (people or businesses who buy goods to sell to stores, not you) who 
 travel from Sinaloa to labor-exporting areas in the 
 States of Oaxaca or Guerrero. (people or businesses who buy goods to sell to stores, not you) and buses 
 arrive at a given site on dates known to everyone 
 locally, and begin to select people. When they have 
 got together 50 or 60 workers, they transport them to 
 Sinaloa. 
 Is the TAl an business/project based on cheap labor? 
 Without doubt, the existence of low-cost traveling worker work 
 represents a huge advantage to, and benefit for, such 
 a business. This industry benefits from the flow of 
 poorly paid labor, because it keeps the business's labor costs low while keeping high its competitive level 
 and (money made/good things received). However, the (wanting to beat others in contests) of the TAl 
 does not depend only on (compared to other things) low (moneys paid for working), but 
 also on a well-demonstrated ability to improve its 
 technology and increase its working well. 
 
 4. Recent (popular things/general ways things are going) in labor supply and living 
 conditions 
 Recent (popular things/general ways things are going) in the northwest's labor market are 
 marked by an important fact for traveling workers: labor supply has grown faster than labor demand. The 
 existence of this new process was suggested by the (able to be seen/worthy of attention) increase in new participants to this labor market in 
 1997 as compared to 1995. The group of day-workers 
 moving for the first time to San Quintfn, in the State 
 
 of Baja California, rose from 31 to 44% of the total 
 numberofmigratingmen between 1995 and 1997. The 
 corresponding figures for moving women showed 
 an increase from 29 to 50% (Barron, 1997). The fast 
 growth in labor supply is explained by the (worsening / rusting, crumbling, etc.) in poor (person) farming, and the fast growth 
 in traveling, in response to (away from cities) poorness. Although 
 less quickly than the labor supply, the TAl's labor 
 demand has grown too. The last thing just mentioned is mainly the result of an increase in crop production, which means a 
 greater volume for manual harvest, because of this more labor 
 demand. 
 This situation is equal to a (popular thing/general way things are going) towards saturation of the labor markets. This has significant negative effects on the real wages earned by day-workers, 
 on the hiring methods used by the TAl, and on the living conditions of the day-workers. The TAl has taken 
 advantage of the existence of a more plentiful labor 
 supply to give preference to workers with the most 
 physical strength and experience, and has reduced the 
 hiring of children. At the same time, it has also chosen 
 labor-hiring methods that suggest a more intensive use 
 of the labor force (hiring by piecework). This means 
 of hiring is convenient, in terms of income, to both 
 parties. For the TAl, it shows/indicates a reduction in the total labor cost. The stronger, more able, workers can 
 harvest 100 baskets a day or more, by that/in that way increasing 
 their daily income but at the cost of large amounts of physical expense and of a (too) early or soon (having nothing left/having no strength left) of their 
 work ability (to hold or do something). 
 The situation is one of dangerous work and living conditions. Traveling worker day-workers who reach San 
 Quintfn are lodged in camps that have earthen floors, 
 walls of (with a rippled surface) cardboard, and roofs of the same 
 material or of (with a rippled surface) metal, materials which make 
 the change (to help someone)/place to live and sleep terribly hot in summer and very cold in winter. They have no running water and 
 no latrines. Working conditions are no better. (serving or acting to prevent harm) equipment is lacking, and cases of drunkenness 
 are frequent due to the accidental eating of poisonous 
 farming-based chemicals. However, the National Program for Farming-based Day-Laborers that operates in 
 the area, has made good progress in its attempts 
 to improve the living conditions for traveling workers. 
 It has established creches, health-centers, and schools 
 for very young children. In Sinaloa, the Program's 
 presence has been even stronger, and living conditions 
 have as a result improved. 
 
 M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 5. Test of the effects of the TAl 
 5. 1. Efj'ect on wages 
 Are day-laborers' wages low? The wages paid by 
 the TAl are just like rates in other areas of commercial farming within Mexico, and therefore they 
 are not low in this respect. However, they are low 
 compared to wages in the manufacturing industry, 
 since industrial workers' wages usually include the 
 legally established benefits, such as Sunday pay, 
 social security, holiday pay and (moneys paid regularly after retirement), none of 
 which is included in the farming-based day-laborer's pay. 
 On an international level, the Mexican farming-based 
 day-laborer is at a clear disadvantage relative to his/her 
 look carefully in (to try to better see something that's unclear)  US or Canada. The farmworker in US earns 
 about US$4.00 per an hour and in Canada 
 CA$6.95, in Mexico this amount would be paid for a 
 day's work. 
 There is a evenness in wages in the areas 
 studied. According to the responses from the 16 people interviewed in Oaxaca, their wages go up and down 
 around 40 Mexican pesos. (There are 9.3 pesos to the 
 US$_$.) These figures occur with those given in the 
 Day-Laborers Program in Culiacan, Sinaloa and by 
 a survey carried out in San Quintin, Baja California 
 in 1997, where the wages went up and down between 40 and 
 50 Mexican pesos (Ban·6n, 1997). Higher wages are 
 paid for piecework but they do not compare with 
 those paid for day-labor since they suggest a greater 
 work period. (thing that's almost the same as another thing) in wages over areas could 
 be due to the tomato packers' following almost the same  wage 
 policies and that many tomato packing firms have operations in different areas. Besides, the day-workers 
 work (one after the other) in different areas and know the 
 wages paid in those areas and would not accept a 
 lower wage than that paid in other areas. 
 
 5.2. The hit/effect on employment 
 The main good effect of the TAl on poorness 
 is to be seen in employment creation. This is the 
 TAl's principal (thing that's given/work that's done) to the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 poor areas, where there is an common 
 lack of valuable things from nature and work. In the Valles Centrales outmigration area, there is a number of 
 small-holdings: 11% of families own less than 1 ha, 
 
 293 
 
 32% have up to 2 ha, and 24% have 3 ha. Most of the 
 area has an bad/unhelpful climate, so farm income is 
 not enough to make happy the family's needs. 1 
 The families have to look for employment outside 
 farming. One choice is craft work (the lie/construction 
 of articles using raw materials from palm trees). According to a survey, 97% of the families have at least 
 one member working at this. However, the income 
 from these manufacturing only covers the (instance of buying something for money) of 
 the family's daily maize consumption. 2 The most important off-farm income comes from traveling labor. 
 The last thing just mentioned is the most important source of family income. The 86% of the 217 families interviewed have 
 members that are traveling workers. In 50% families 
 with traveling workers, 1-3 members are traveling workers, in 35% of 
 the families, 3-6 members are traveling workers, and in 15% 
 more than 7 members are traveling workers. More than half of 
 the population leaves these towns to work. 
 Previous information points to/shows that traveling has 
 speeded up since 1985, the year that marked the 
 Mexican money problem. Before 1980, only 11% of 
 the population interviewed had traveling experience, 
 while starting from 1985 75% of those interviewed 
 began to move. 
 The advantage of traveling workers have in the TAl is 
 that they can find stable employment for many 
 months of the year. That is impossible in the outmigration areas. It is not surprising that the traveling 
 period is long, because a longer period of traveling 
 means a higher conesponding income earned by the 
 workers, and so greater savings to be taken home. 
 The TAl has created a demand for labor that has 
 (used/put into action) significant multiplier effects within the TAl 
 areas. Many workers come from the Sinaloa Singing voices, 
 a poorer area in the hills, but close to the inigated 
 plains, where the tomato crop is spread around. The question 
 is, does the flow of workers from Oaxaca displace the 
 local Sinaloan workers? (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) it does not. There 
 are no records of unemployment in the areas away from the cities of 
 Sinaloa, a state that has a marked money-based energy. 
 If there were an excess of local labor, the TAl businessmen would not have to spend money employing 
 
 1 This (related to a large area) information and the following is to be found in 
 Ortiz (I 998), who studied a sample of 217 family units in Coatecas 
 Altas, Valles Centrales. 
 2 The daily income for an 8 h per day is 7 pesos, which is the 
 equal of 2 kg of maize. 
 
 294 
 
 M.A. Barron, F Rella/ Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 (people or businesses who buy goods to sell to stores, not you) to hire labor from in other places, given that traveling workers receive the same wages as locally-hired 
 day-workers. 
 Another issue is whether the traveling has a negative effect in the outmigration areas, creating labor 
 shortages there. This does not appear to be the case, 
 since the demand for workers is very low there, where 
 the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is spoiled. Moving poor (person) workers 
 usually return home in time to plant their own survival/income plots. 
 5.3. Effects on income 
 The sample of 217 families carefully studied by Ortfz does 
 not provide enough information to carefully study family income plans nor the hit/effect of income and savings from traveling on poorness levels. To complement 
 the sample, we interviewed 16 traveling worker families from 
 Valles Centrales, Oaxaca, applying a more long/big 
 list of questions than that used by Ortiz. The sample size, 
 though small, is (good) enough as a case study to create 
 guesses for further research. The results are laid 
 out in Tables 1 and 2. 
 
 The interviews showed that the minimum traveling period is 3 months, the most frequent is 6 months, 
 and there are even families who move for 1.5 years 
 at a stretch. This information happens with data from 
 Ortiz's survey that, of 636 traveling workers interviewed, 27% 
 moved for a period of between 2 and 5 months, 66% 
 moved for between 6 and 9 months, and 7% moved for more than 10 months. 
 What are the deciding/figuring out factors of the traveling workers' 
 earnings, and of their savings? The most important 
 factors, in this order, are the length of traveling time, 
 and the number of workers per family. Our data show a 
 strong relationship (0.89) between income and length of time 
 of traveling. Relationship between income and number 
 of family workers is weaker and there is no relationship 
 between income and (moneys paid for working) paid (Table 1). 
 The importance of these two factors has an hit/effect 
 on the amount of savings piled up, as is shown 
 in Table 2. The traveling plan consists of placing 
 on the labor market the greatest possible number of 
 family members, and of moving for the longest time 
 possible without leaving alone (and forgetting) (producing crops/helping something grow) of the family 
 plot of land. This explains why whole families leave, 
 and why they stay away for a few months at a time. 
 
 Table 1 
 (money paid for working), income and income (things that decide other things)" 
 Family income: pesos per year 
 1800.00 
 2160.00 
 9600.00 
 11520.00 
 16128.00 
 16128.00 
 16128.00 
 16560.00 
 16632.00 
 21120.00 
 23040.00 
 26460.00 
 34800.00 
 54000.00 
 54720.00 
 74880.00 
 
 Workers per family 
 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 4 
 4 
 3 
 3 
 4 
 4 
 
 5 
 5 
 4 
 2 
 4 
 
 Weeks of traveling 
 
 Daily wage 
 
 4 
 8 
 8 
 24 
 16 
 16 
 16 
 23 
 
 75b 
 45 
 JOOb 
 40 
 42 
 42 
 42 
 40 
 42 
 40 
 40 
 42 
 40 
 45 
 60b 
 60b 
 
 22 
 22 
 24 
 21 
 29 
 50 
 76 
 52 
 
 Relationship of income 
 No. of workers=0.41 
 Weeks of traveling=0.89 
 Daily (money paid for working)=0.15 
 "Source: Personal description, based on interviews with families. Valles Centrales, Oaxaca, 1999. 
 b (moneys paid for working) paid by piecework. 
 
 M.A. Barron, F Rella/ Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 295 
 
 Table 2 
 Savings of traveling worker families and their deciding/figuring out factors 1999a 
 Family 
 
 Savings (pesos)b 
 
 No. of weeks they can feed 
 themselves with savingsc 
 
 A 
 B 
 
 37720 
 32032 
 23850 
 18060 
 13420 
 12180 
 12118 
 11808 
 10496 
 8928e 
 7920 
 7750 
 6688 
 4876 
 2025 
 
 178 
 151 
 112 
 85 
 63 
 57 
 57 
 56 
 49 
 42 
 37 
 36 
 31 
 23 
 10 
 
 c 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 G 
 H 
 
 J 
 K 
 L 
 M 
 N 
 0 
 
 Dependence coefficientd 
 
 I 
 
 1.25 
 
 1.75 
 I 
 2 
 
 1.3 
 
 a Source: Based on authors' interviews with families. 
 b Savings are equal to the income minus the cost of the basic foodstuffs as reported by those interviewed. 
 c Multiple of the weekly cost of basic foodstuffs for family members in the zone of origin. 
 d Number of traveling worker families divided by number of traveling workers. 
 e Income for 1998. 
 
 The day-workers who move for many months and 
 are unable to return in May to plant their own land, 
 enter into land agreements. 
 On the basis of this information it could be said 
 that there exist at least two family survival/income plans. The first is the most common and consists of the 
 combination of traveling and survival/income farming. 
 Families move some months and come back in time 
 to help grow their plots with survival/income products. The 
 second plan is to move for a longer period and to 
 pile up more savings to be invested later in their 
 community. In this case family plots are rented to relatives or trusted neighbors. 
 The savings piled up by the traveling workers 
 change/differ  according to the traveling plan of each family. However, in all cases the total is big, when 
 the following factors are taken into the process of carefully thinking about something. 
 First, the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of survival/income farming and the employment sources to be found locally in the workers' 
 places of origin cannot (promise that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) any family (good) enough 
 income for survival. Second, family spending on food 
 in their places of origin is (compared to other things) low, guessed 
 at 212 Mexican pesos per week (US$22.5), which is 
 5512 pesos per 6-month period for a family of five. 
 
 Almost all the families interviewed saved more than 
 5512 pesos, which means that they can all live for 
 6 months back in their home communities without 
 needing to earn any further income (Table 2). So, the 
 saved savings of the traveling worker day-workers will 
 cover all their basic needs, although at an elemental 
 level of survival/income. 
 The final use to which the traveling worker families put their 
 saved savings shows/tells about the importance of those 
 savings to the families. All of them stated that they 
 spend their savings on food and household expenses, in 
 other words they use their savings for survival. Some 
 families talked about/said that they invested in the redecoration of their homes, the (instance of buying something for money) of animals, (material that makes plants grow better), 
 a control/harness, but only one family talked about/said having used 
 their savings to buy land. The income of these latter 
 families is obviously higher than the income of the 
 families who spend their savings only on food. This 
 establishes a clear relationship between the level of 
 savings and the kind of spending. 
 The information gathered provides ideas of 
 the child labor issue. In the current big picture  of intense 
 commercial competition between Mexican and North 
 American horticulturists, the US horticulturists are 
 
 296 
 
 M.A. Barron, F. Rella/ Farming-based Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 pressurizing the governments of the US and Mexico 
 to put into use and enforce rules against child 
 labor, because, according to them, child labor puts 
 US horticulturists at a disadvantage. This argument is 
 false, because the wages paid to the children are the 
 same as wages to adults. On occasion, the adults even 
 help the children fill the said minimum daily 
 needed things in order to wanant those daily wages. 
 In this way, the employment of children does not 
 put Mexican tomato growers in a better competitive 
 position. More than that, child labor is reducing due to 
 the fast growth in adult labor supply. 
 That the TAl agrees to hire minors explains the low 
 level of the dependency coefficient for the families of 
 moving day-workers shown in Table 2. This represents a great advantage to these families in that they 
 can this way (in a big way) raise their earnings. Prohibiting child labor in the tomato fields would represent 
 a extreme blow to the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of moving families. 
 The National Program of Farming-based Day-Laborers 
 guesses that between 30 and 35% of family income 
 is created by children. However, the employment 
 of children involves big costs to traveling worker families because they cannot attend school. There are no 
 education programs in the working fields for traveling worker 
 children. Besides, working conditions in the fields of 
 Sinaloa and Baja California are hard for the children. 
 5.4. Effects/results/suggestions for (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 Seasonal traveling does not create conditions for 
 (able to last/helping the planet) money-based development in the sending areas. The greater part of traveling income is still 
 (already decided beforehand to happen) just to secure/make sure of survival. Very little is invested 
 in the natural, physical or workers of these 
 communities. Conditions for endogenous growth of 
 sending-area have not been improved by the traveling. For example, the extra income is not (good) enough for 
 the workers to buy land and (material that makes plants grow better), except in a few 
 cases. The lengthy (not being there; not being present)s also result in neglect 
 of the workers' own land. Family plots are (usually/ in a common and regular way) 
 badly attended due to traveling. The fact that children also move in order to work, means that they do 
 not attend school in any regular manner, causing to continue 
 the high levels of (can't read or write) common in Oaxaca, and 
 the low level of (possible greatness or power) in  workers. 
 This last problem needs to be given special attention. Education is a basic test/list of questions in the matter of 
 
 access to better-paying jobs. Because of their lacking 
 education, the day-workers are criticized to occupying the hardest, worst-paid positions. If the educational level of the children does not improve, they 
 will continue working and earning just the same as 
 their parents, by that/in that way recreating these same conditions 
 of poorness. To summarize, this farming-based big plan/layout/dishonest plan of 
 infra-survival/income traveling work is being caused to continue. 
 It is a non-(able to last/helping the planet) means of job, because it 
 would enter into deep trouble if, for any reason, the traveling 
 flow were intenupted. 
 
 6. Ends/end results 
 First, the employment offered by the TAl is important to the survival of whole villages in Oaxaca, and to 
 other settlements that find themselves trapped in conditions of unemployment and extreme poorness. These 
 jobs offer them an income very hard to get in 
 their poor, not important villages in Oaxaca. 
 Without these earnings, many of these people would 
 already have left alone their home villages, or would 
 be living there under even worse facts or conditions (that surround someone). 
 Second, this good effect is not the result of 
 good wages and work-related benefits given by the 
 TAl, because, as discussed above, wages are low and 
 benefits and working and living conditions are poor, 
 and they represent a (huge, almost shocking, difference between two things) to the earnings and 
 richness of large, modern companies. The positive 
 hit/effect is more the result of the big picture  of extreme 
 poorness in which the traveling workers find themselves, 
 and the lack of energy in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of the areas that they come from. Faced with this big picture  of 
 almost no local work other choices, seasonal traveling 
 to the fields of Mexico's northwest is unavoidable, and 
 there is no doable/possible substitute for this. 
 Third, discussions before the signing of NAFTA 
 suggested that the fruit and vegetable production and 
 export part/area was going to bring huge benefits to 
 Mexico. While it is true to say that vegetable exports 
 have proved to be an other choice to (away from cities) unemployment, they cannot resolve the problem of (away from cities) poorness 
 and backwardness, related to deeper (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) factors. 
 Fourth, traveling worker earnings allow the families to survive, but they add/give hardly any capital to the 
 local community. As a result, this income does not 
 add/give towards the creation of local conditions 
 
 M.A. Barron, F. Rella/Agricultural Money flow 23 (2000) 289-297 
 
 starting up endogenous development. It does not represent a synergetic development, which would raise 
 the productive ability (to hold or do something) of the labor-exporting areas 
 in the same way as in the TAl areas. 
 Fifth, it would this way not be unwisely in a rush to suggest that the 
 TAl, which makes big (money made/good things received), assume a larger 
 role in the war on poorness of these traveling worker communities, the very people who have made those (money made/good things received) 
 possible. This would not agree the TAl's (wanting to beat others in contests). This could be done/tried in any of the 
 following ways: (1) cooperating more in educational 
 programs; (2) construction of classrooms; (3) paying 
 teachers who educate the children of traveling worker laborer; 
 (4) improving the living and working conditions of the 
 traveling worker day-workers in the TAl areas. 
 
 References 
 Barron, M.A., 1997. Empleo en Ia agricultura de exportaci6n en 
 Mexico. Juan Pablos-UNAM, Mexico. 
 CEPAL, 1999. Efectos sociales de Ia globalizaci6n sword Ia 
 economfa campesina en Honduras. Mexico y Nicaragua, 
 Mexico. 
 de Janvry, A., Gordillo, G., y Sadoulet, E., 1997. Mexico's 
 second land-related refmm. Household and Community Responses, 
 1990-1994. Center for US-Mexican Studies, University of 
 California, San Diego, La Jolla. 
 de Janvry, A., Sadoulet, E., 1998. Land-related mixed-up nature and 
 quality policies. In: (series of events) of the Latin American 
 
 297 
 
 (school) course on Farming-based Mixed-up nature and (made different) 
 Policies, Mexico. 
 Davis, B., 1999. The (change to make better/related to changing something) plans of Mexican ejidatarios 
 in the face of Neoliberal reform. In: World Bank, Mexico 
 Ejido Reform: Avenues of (change to make better/related to changing something)- Five years Later, Vol. 
 II, Background Paper. (surrounding conditions) and Socially (able to last/helping the planet) 
 Development Part/area Management Unit. 
 Ech:lnove, F., 1999. Los empresarios horticolas y sus procesos 
 de integraci6n y diversificaci6n. In: Grammont, H. (Coord.), 
 Empresas, Reestructuraci6n Productiva y Empleo en Ia 
 Agricultura Mexicana. Plaza y Valdes Editores, Mexico, 1999. 
 INEGI-CEPAL, 1993. Magnitud y evoluci6n de Ia pobreza en 
 Mexico, 1984-1992, Mexico. 
 Lanjouw, P., 1998. Poorness and nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in Mexico's 
 Ejidos, 1994-1997. In: World Bank, Mexico Ejido Reform: 
 Avenues of (change to make better/related to changing something)- Five years Later, Vol. II, Background 
 Paper. (surrounding conditions) and Socially (able to last/helping the planet) Development 
 Part/area Management Unit. 
 Lara, S., de Grammont, H., 1999. Reestructuraci6n productiva y 
 mercado de trabajo (away from cities) en las empresas horticolas. In: de 
 Grarnmont, H. (Coord.), Empresas, Reestructuraci6n Productiva 
 y Empleo en Ia Agricultura Mexicana. Plaza y Valdes Editores, 
 Mexico. 
 Ortiz, M., 1998. Familias campesinas en condiciones de muy 
 alta marginaci6n en Oaxaca. El caso de Coatecas Altas. 
 Unpublished. 
 Yunez-Naude, A., Taylor, J.E., Dyer, G.A., 1998. Farm-nonfarm 
 linkages and farming-based supply response in Mexico: a 
 villagewide modeling (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). In: (series of events) of the IFPRI 
 Workshop Plans for Stimulating Growth of the (away from cities) Farm 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in Developing Countries. Airlie House, Virginia. 
 Wilcox-Young, L., 1993. Labor demand and agroindustrial 
 development: the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Mexico. J. Dev. Stud. 30 (!), 
 168-189. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
