AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 A gravity model analysis of meat trade policies 
 Won W. Koo *·a, David Karemera 
 a 
 
 b' 
 
 Richard Taylor a 
 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58105, USA 
 b Department of Money flow, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA 
 (Accepted 11 May 1993) 
 
 Abstract 
 The ordinary gravity model is changed for a single valuable thing and applied to meat markets to decide/figure out 
 factors affecting trade flows of meat. This study (shows or proves) that the gravity model for a single farming-based 
 valuable thing can be limit/guidelineized more effectively by using time series and thin slice data rather than thin slice data alone. This study shows/tells about that trade policies and payments used by exporting and importing countries, 
 animals production ability (to hold or do something) in countries, and distances play an important role in deciding/figuring out trade flows of meat. 
 Long-term agreements (accomplish or gain with effort) the highest performance toward improving international meat trade. Import quotas 
 and the hoof-and-mouth disease on beef greatly weaken meat trade. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 The world meat market is a good example of 
 market helping action. Exporting countries fight against one another to increase and/ or maintain their (your share of sales out of all sales)s. Most exporting countries use Long-term trade agreements with the 
 importing countries and direct payments to domestic producers to (help increase/show in a good way) exports. Most importing countries use different types of trade restrictions, ranging from (not numbers-based) restrictions 
 (e.g., a complete ban of meat imports due to 
 health care concerns related to hoof-and-mouth 
 disease) to (numbers-based) restrictions by forcing 
 quotas to protect domestic producers. In some 
 importing countries, direct payments to con- 
 
 * Corresponding author. 
 This research was managed and did/done under a special research grant, 
 No. 90-34192-56675 (ND 5004). 
 
 sumers are used to (help increase/show in a good way) domestic production 
 and to reduce foreign imports. 
 Trade flows of valuable things are usually decided/figured out on the basis of the way of thinking/basic truth/rule of (serving to compare two or more things) advantage in a free trade market system. 
 Since trade flows of meat are twisted/partially untrue/lied about by government helping actions, (things that decide other things) of the trade 
 flows and their money-based effects are not clearly 
 known. The goals of this study, therefore, 
 are to identify and test factors affecting volume and direction of meat trade flows. Special 
 attention is given to carefully study clearly stated/particular effects of 
 export promotion programs and import restriction policies on the world meat trade. 
 Most research work in this area used (related to space or existing in space) 
 balance models based on mathematical programming computer codes (Takayama and Judge, 1964; 
 Bawden, 1966; Mackinnon, 1976; Koo, 1984). In 
 these studies, trade flows are explained by the 
 prices of valuable things in importing and exporting 
 countries and transportation costs between coun- 
 
 0169-5150/94/$07.00 © 1994 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
 SSDI 0169-5150(93)E0028-L 
 
 82 
 
 W W Koo eta!. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 tries. However, Thompson (1981) pointed to/showed that 
 (related to space or existing in space) balance models (did/done/completed) poorly in 
 explaining trade flows of valuable things that are 
 generally twisted/partially untrue/lied about by exporting countries' export 
 promotion programs and importing countries' 
 protection policies. A valuable thing-specific gravity 
 model, therefore, is used to test two-sided 
 trade flows of meat and account for the policy 
 factors (like nothing else) to the pairs of trade partners. 
 Gravity models have been used to describe 
 two-sided trade flows between country pairs. Formal possible foundations of the models were 
 given in Anderson (1979) and Bergstrand 
 (1985, 1989). Typical gravity models contain the 
 following (number or thing that changes) parts/pieces: (1) money-based factors affecting trade flows in the origin countries, 
 (2) money-based factors affecting trade flows in the 
 destination countries, and (3) natural or (not made by nature/fake) 
 factors improving or restricting trade flows. Natural or (not made by nature/fake) factors would include trade policies. In this study, the typical gravity model for 
 group products (that are bought and sold)  is respecified to carefully study trade 
 flows of meat. 
 Traditional models commonly use thin slice data clearly connected with or related to a particular year. Our study 
 leaves from the tradition by using combined time 
 series and thin slice data. The creation 
 greatly improves the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of the results and 
 permits the use of the information available over 
 a few years for each pair of trading countries. 
 Further, we (show or prove) how the Hausman (detailed description of exactly what is required) test and the Breusch and Pagan test are 
 used to choose between competing models. The 
 study shows strong (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that single valuable thing trade models should include trade policies. 
 The development of the valuable thing-specific 
 gravity model for the world meat trade is presented in the next section. Econometric issues 
 and (detailed description of exactly what is required) tests are discussed in Section 2. 
 Then guessed models, using the econometric 
 ways of doing things of Hsiao (1986), and the analysis of 
 our findings are presented in Section 3. The last 
 section includes ending/deciding statements. 
 2. Valuable thing-specific gravity model 
 
 The derivation of the single valuable thing gravity 
 model follows the procedure pointed to/showed in trade 
 
 books. According to Linneman (1966) and 
 Bergstrand (1985, 1989), a gravity model is a 
 reduced form equation from a partial balance 
 of demand and supply systems. The demand 
 equation for the clearly stated/particular valuable thing is received/made from 
 from making the most of the constant ability to stretch of the 
 substitution (CES) utility function subject to income restriction. The supply equation is received/made from 
 from the firm's profit (biggest increase/best possible extent) procedure in 
 exporting countries with useful thing/valuable supply inputs gave out 
 according to the constant ability to stretch of change (CET) during the production process. 
 The valuable thing-specific gravity model, under 
 market balance conditions of demand and 
 supply systems, can be received/made from as follows: 
 
 ( 1) 
 i=1,2, ... ,N and j=1,2, ... ,M 
 where X;j is the volume of valuable thing traded 
 from country i to country j; Y; Oj) represents 
 income of country i (j); cij is transport cost 
 (c.i.f.jf.o.b.) between countries i and j; Tij represents any other factors either helping or resisting 
 trade between countries i and j; P; (lj) is the 
 price of the valuable thing at country i's export port 
 (country j's import port); Eij is the spot exchange 
 rate - the value of country j's currency in terms 
 of country i's currency; and e;j is the random 
 error term. Eq. (1) is received/made from possibly in 
 Bergstrand (1985). 
 An exporting country's income can be understood/explained as the country's production ability (to hold or do something), while 
 an importing country's income is the country's 
 buying-related power. It is expected that trade flows 
 are positively related to the exporting and importing countries' income. Transportation costs and 
 taxes/import taxes, which are trade (blocking things), should be negatively related to volume of trade flows. The prices 
 of a valuable thing in exporting and importing countries are important in deciding/figuring out trade flows. A 
 valuable thing moves from a country in which the 
 prices of the valuable thing are low to countries in 
 which the prices are high. Trade flows are guessed to be positively related to changes in 
 export prices and negatively related to changes in 
 import prices. Exchange rates are one of the most 
 important factors affecting trade flows. Appreciation of a country's currency against other curren- 
 
 W W Koo et al. 1Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 cies reduces the country's exports and increases 
 imports, and (lowering of value) stimulates the country's 
 exports. 
 Unlike traditional gravity models of group 
 good trade in Bergstrand (1985, 1989), Anderson 
 (1979) and Linneman (1966), the valuable thingspecific gravity model can includes the (like nothing else) 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) and policies connected with trade 
 flows of the clearly stated/particular valuable thing in exporting and 
 importing countries. In the model, an exporting 
 country's income is replaced with the country's 
 farm income (GoP for the farm part/area) to represent the country's overall production ability (to hold or do something) of 
 farming-based valuable things. Also, animal 
 numbers in exporting and importing countries are 
 included in the model to measure animals production ability (to hold or do something). 1 The price (numbers that change/things that change) are replaced with export and import unit value indices. 
 In meat trade, the t;j (number or thing that changes) in Eq. (1) is replaced with export promotion and import restricting (numbers that change/things that change). Exporting countries use different export promotion programs, including Long-term 
 agreements between pairs of trading countries 
 and payments to producers. Meat from one country is (made different) in terms of quality from other 
 countries. Dummy (numbers that change/things that change) representing specific 
 countries are included in the model. 
 On the import side, the hoof-and-mouth disease is a major factor resisting meat trade. A few countries maintain a complete ban on beef 
 imports from countries infected with hoof-andmouth disease. A dummy is introduced to account for meat trade flows from countries infected with the disease. 2 Quota is another 
 trade-resistant factor and a major protection (tool or object used to do work or measure something) (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) by importing countries to protect their domestic businesses. 
 The (numbers that change/things that change) helping trade are expected to be 
 positively related to trade flows while those resisting trade are guessed to be negatively related to the flows. 
 A dummy (number or thing that changes) representing trade flows of 
 meat among EC member countries is also included in the model. It is guessed that (related to Europe) money-based (combination of different things together that work as one unit) in EC improved meat 
 trade among members. The scientific model also 
 includes an closeness dummy (number or thing that changes) representing border countries under an idea (you think is true) that 
 
 83 
 
 more trade happens between countries with common border. The scientific gravity model for meat 
 trade is therefore specified as follows: 
 eO' 12L D ij eO' 1JO D ij e a 1411 D ij e 0' JSE D ij 
 
 i=1,2, ... ,N and 
 
 (2) 
 
 j=l,2, ... ,M 
 
 where A, (A) represents animal number in 
 country i (j); Dij is distance between countries i 
 and j; S; (S) represents producer (person) 
 payments in country i (j); ED;j is a dummy (number or thing that changes) identifying trade flows among EC member 
 countries ( = 1.0 if both countries i and j belong 
 to EC, and zero otherwise); LDij is a dummy 
 (number or thing that changes) representing Long-term agreements; OD;j 
 is a dummy (number or thing that changes) identifying countries forcing import quotas; HD;j is a dummy (number or thing that changes) used 
 to identify and separate origin countries infected 
 with hoof-and-mouth sicknesses from those free 
 from the disease; and U,j is the random error 
 term. Producer helping payment equal (S;) is defined 
 as an group helping payment measure given to producers; (in almost the same way), consumer helping payment equal (S.) 
 is 
 1 
 defined as an group helping payment measure given to 
 people. 
 Finally, some statements are in order (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 the appropriateness and use of (not numbers-based) (numbers that change/things that change) to represent trade policies. Trade policies 
 were not in force for every year and country 
 during the period of the study. Some program 
 values were zero at times. So, policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 were coded into (not numbers-based) (numbers that change/things that change) to limit those 
 differences/different versions. We recognize that (not numbers-based) (numbers that change/things that change) 
 identify average effects, but they gave/given more 
 clear results. 
 
 3. Econometric procedures and source of data 
 
 As pointed to/showed earlier, classical gravity models 
 used thin slice data to guess trade relationships in a particular year. However, in the real 
 world, thin slice data watched/followed over a few 
 years may provide more useful information in 
 deciding/figuring out trade flows than thin slice data 
 alone. This is especially true for farming-based and 
 animals valuable things for which trade flows are 
 
 W W Koo et al. 1Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 84 
 
 Table 1 
 List of countries included in the meat trade analysis 
 Exporting 
 countries 
 
 Importing 
 countries 
 
 Exporting/Importing 
 countries 
 
 Argentina 
 Australia 
 Brazil 
 Denmark 
 Ireland 
 New Zealand 
 Uruguay 
 Yugoslavia 
 
 Egypt 
 Greece 
 Japan 
 Singapore 
 Switzerland 
 Saudi Arabia 
 
 Belgium 
 Canada 
 Germany 
 France 
 Italy 
 Netherlands 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 
 highly dangerous due to weather conditions in importing and/ or exporting countries. The guessed limits/guidelines of the model with thin slice 
 data for a particular year may not provide correct information in testing trade flows of a 
 valuable thing. Because of this, in this study we propose to 
 limit/guidelineize the econometric model in Eq. (2) 
 with both thin slice and time series data. 
 Countries included in the analysis are shown 
 in Table 1. Time period thought about/believed is from 1983 
 to 1989. Countries working at rare trade 
 were left out/kept out in the analysis to keep/hold data con- 
 
 Table 2 
 Covariance model guesses of the meat trade models under other choice ideas (you think are true) on (detailed description of exactly what is required) of trade effects (dependent 
 changeable: amount/quantity of meat traded) 
 (number or thing that changes) I Coefficient 
 
 A are zero 
 
 i's farm income (Yj) 
 j's income (y) 
 i's export unit price (P;) 
 j's import unit price (P) 
 Exchange rate (Eii) 
 Distances (Dii) 
 i' s animals production (A) 
 j's animals production (A j) 
 i's payments to producer (S;) 
 j's payments to consumer CS) 
 Long term agreement (LD;) 
 Quota (OD;) 
 H-M disease (Hoii) 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) for EC (Eo;) 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) for closeness 
 Argentina 
 Australia 
 Brazil 
 Canada 
 EEC 
 Uruguay 
 USA 
 Yugoslavia 
 Rz 
 DF 
 F-test of zero 
 Policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Hausman test 
 Breusch-Pagan test 
 White test 
 
 0.14 
 0.22 
 1.22 
 -0.35 
 -0.02 
 -0.22 
 0.59 
 -0.11 
 0.08 
 -0.25 
 1.42 
 -1.86 
 3.65 
 2.30 
 1.16 
 -0.61 
 -2.22 
 -0.36 
 -2.48 
 -3.22 
 -0.54 
 -1.83 
 -2.24 
 
 &#126;j and A, 
 different 
 from zero 
 
 Uii are zero 
 for all i, j 
 
 for all t 
 (4.98) 
 (0.53) 
 (4.98) 
 ( -1.56) 
 ( -0.87) 
 (- 2.95) 
 (0.62) 
 (- 0.31) 
 (0.47) 
 (-3.18) 
 (5.74) 
 (-8.69) 
 (14.09) 
 (8.73) 
 (5.36) 
 (-2.13) 
 (-9.39) 
 ( -1.24) 
 (-9.06) 
 (-14.77) 
 (- 6.47) 
 (-7.77) 
 (-6.47) 
 
 *** 
 * ** 
 * ** 
 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 * ** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 
 0.02 
 0.12 
 0.78 
 0.16 
 0.04 
 -0.34 
 0.09 
 -0.33 
 0.10 
 -0.28 
 1.41 
 -1.53 
 3.92 
 2.18 
 1.31 
 -0.311 
 -0.84 
 -0.10 
 -1.80 
 -2.98 
 -2.05 
 -0.60 
 -4.08 
 
 (0.54) 
 (3.57) 
 (3.35) 
 (0.72) 
 (1.42) 
 ( -4.67) 
 (0.67) 
 (- 3.81) 
 (0.67) 
 ( -6.85) 
 (5.08) 
 (- 6.99) 
 (14.98) 
 (8.49) 
 (6.02) 
 (- 0.38) 
 (- 2.54) 
 (-0.11) 
 (-5.33) 
 (-9.93) 
 (- 3.06) 
 ( -1.88) 
 ( -13.73) 
 
 *** 
 *** 
 ** 
 * ** 
 *** 
 * ** 
 * ** 
 * ** 
 *** 
 *** 
 * ** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 * ** 
 
 0.01 
 0.10 
 0.87 
 0.13 
 0.03 
 -0.28 
 0.36 
 -0.32 
 -0.01 
 -0.27 
 1.44 
 -1.41 
 3.87 
 2.37 
 1.40 
 0.23 
 -0.03 
 0.82 
 -0.72 
 -1.87 
 -2.97 
 -0.46 
 -2.77 
 
 0.61 
 1060 
 
 0.68 
 1060 
 
 0.59 
 1060 
 
 26.2 
 
 24.0 
 
 18.9 
 
 695.8 
 542.2 
 38.9 
 
 540.6 
 346.0 
 39.2 
 
 282.4 
 267.6 
 23.4 
 
 (0.33) 
 (2.31) 
 (3.56) 
 (0.57) 
 (0.76) 
 ( -3.80) 
 (2.86) 
 (- 3.39) 
 ( -0.02) 
 (- 6.23) 
 (5.15) 
 (- 6.53) 
 (14.76) 
 (9.11) 
 (6.92) 
 (0.28) 
 (- 0.12) 
 (0.94) 
 (-2.59) 
 (-5.87) 
 (-2.51) 
 (-1.91) 
 (- 8.66) 
 
 *** 
 *** 
 ** 
 * ** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 *** 
 * ** 
 
 * * *, significant in two-tail t-test 1% level; * *, significant in two-tail t-test at 5% level. Numbers in parentheses are t-values of the 
 corresponding (numbers that change/things that change). 
 
 W W Koo et al. 1Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 sistent over time and thin slice units (the pairs 
 of trading countries). (money-related) data, such as gross 
 domestic products, and exchange rates were taken 
 from the International Money-based Fund's (IMF) 
 International (money-related) Statistics and world tables 
 published by the World Bank. Data on amount 
 and dollar amount/quantity of meat exports and imports 
 were taken from the United Nations International Trade Statistic Yearbook. Animal numbers 
 were gotten from FAO Production Yearbook. 
 Export price data were figured out/calculated by dividing the 
 total value of exports by the amounts exported. 
 Import prices were figured out/calculated by dividing the 
 total value of import by the amount imported. 
 Eq. (2) includes trade policies used by exporting and importing countries. The appropriateness 
 of policy changeable enlargement should be subject 
 to (detailed description of exactly what is required) tests. An F-test statistic developed by Godfrey (1986) shows that in modelling 
 specific valuable thing trade flows, trade policies affecting the valuable thing flows should be included 
 in the models. Data on export promotion programs and trade restriction policies were gotten from Hillman (1978), Longworth (1984), 
 Ojalla (1985), Patterson (1983), Simpson (1982) 
 and USDA (1988, 1989). Payments given to producers and people, expressed in terms of producer helping payment equal (PSE) and personal 
 helping payment equal (CSE), were gotten from the 
 U.S. Department of Farming. 
 Ocean freight rates are not available for all 
 countries included in the analysis. An other choice 
 is to guess an ocean freight rate function with 
 available sample rates for each year and to use 
 the function to guess missing rates. This approach, however, did not provide especially superior results aside from the job  of dealing with 
 errors-in-changeable modeling. We used distances as 
 a substitute 3 for transport cost. The distances were 
 calculated by using the oceanographic maps published by the U.S. Navy. 
 
 85 
 
 where xijt is trade (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) from i to j at 
 time t (t = 1, 2 ... T); ZiJt is a similar 
 trade (thing that decides something) vector; &#126;i is the trade effect 
 connected with the country pair i and j; and Ar is 
 the time effect (designed only for/happening only within)  a particular year. Eq. 
 (3) has the main advantage of allowing for different individual and time effects for each country 
 pair. Following the explanation for carefully studying combined 
 data, the null guess that &#126;i = 0 and A1 = 0 
 was rejected by the Breusch and Pagan test statistic 4 reported in Table 2. Since the country pair 
 effects (&#126;) and the time effects (Ar) are very different from zero, whether the effects 
 are fixed or random should be serious and stubborn. The 
 Hausman (detailed description of exactly what is required) test 5 (Table 2) suggests 
 that the fixed effect model commonly known as 
 the covariance model should be used in this analysis (Hausman, 1979, p. 1269). The White test for 
 heteroscedasticity (White, 1980) points to/shows that error terms do not have serious heteroscedasticity 
 within thin slice units. 
 Added/more (numbers that change/things that change) added to the scientific 
 model in Table 2 are dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for (next to) countries and dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for exporting 
 countries (Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, 
 Canada, EC, Uruguay, the United States, and 
 Yugoslavia). 6 
 All models in Table 2 are guessed by using 
 Least Squares ways of doing things on (numbers that change/things that change) expressed 
 in moving away forms. As explained in Hsiao (1986, 
 p. 31), no dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for individual country 
 pairs and/ or time effects are needed. 
 Model 1 is based on the idea (you think is true) that only 
 the time effects (Ar) are equal to zero. Model 2 is 
 based on the idea (you think is true) that only the thin slice effects (p.i) are zero. Model 3 is based on an 
 idea (you think is true) that all trade effects change/differ  over both 
 thin slice and time series units through the 
 intercept term. Model 3 is the (producing the most with the least waste) since 
 the model does not include any restrictions and 
 is, therefore, used in the analysis. Most guessed 
 limits/guidelines have the expected signs and are (meaningful numbers). 
 
 4. Results 
 
 Eq. (2) in time series and thin slice form is 
 as follows: 
 
 (3) 
 
 Effects of income, price, and exchange rate. Animal numbers in exporting and importing countries are used to represent a measure of animals 
 production ability (to hold or do something) in these countries. Also, gross domestic product for the farm part/area is 
 
 86 
 
 W W Koo eta!. 1Agricultural Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 used for overall production ability (to hold or do something) in the farming-based part/area while (extra income you can spend on fun things) is used to 
 represent people' buying power of the 
 importing country. The guessed coefficients on 
 exporters' farm income and animals production 
 are positive as guessed but do not differ 
 significantly at the 5% level. This is mainly because most exporting countries have excess production ability (to hold or do something) of red meat. The guessed coefficients on importers' income and animals production are positive and negative, (match up each pair of items in order), as 
 guessed and differ significantly from zero at 
 the 5% level. This points to/shows that direction of 
 meat trade flow is influenced mostly by importers 
 income and animals production. 
 The guessed import and export price elasticities are negative and positive, (match up each pair of items in order), as 
 guessed. The similar t-values point to/show that the coefficient on the export prices 
 differs significantly from zero at the 1% level and 
 import price does not. What's more, the importance of the elasticities are less than 1.0, in the 
 (value of a number, ignoring its sign), suggesting that amounts of meat 
 traded are not sensitive to meat prices. 
 Exchange rates used in this analysis are defined as changes in the prices of importing countries' types of money in terms of exporting countries' 
 types of money. The coefficient for the exchange rate 
 (number or thing that changes) is positive as guessed. An appreciation of an importing country's currency (a (lowering of value) of an exporting country's currency) makes 
 the exporting country's meat cheaper in the importing country's market and increases trade 
 flows. However, the (proof that one thing definitely causes another) relation is not (meaningful numbers) at the 1% level. 
 
 Effects of trade promotion programs and restriction policies. The model includes trade promotion 
 and restricting policies. (detailed description of exactly what is required) tests point to/show that export promotion programs and traderestricting policies should be included in the scientific model of meat trade. The export promotion program (LTA) has an expected positive 
 sign. The similar t-statistics point to/show that 
 the (number or thing that changes) is significantly related to the amounts of meat traded at the 1% level. Exporters' 
 payments to meat producers, however, do not 
 differ significantly from zero at the 5% level. 
 
 The hoof-and-mouth dummy (number or thing that changes) is significantly related to meat trade. The presence of the 
 disease in some countries prevents trade with a 
 large part of/amount of the world. The (not being there; not being present) of the 
 disease is an important (thing that decides something) to trade. The 
 guessed coefficient points to/shows that freedom from 
 hoof-and-mouth disease is an important improvement to trade. 
 Some importing countries have used quotas to 
 restrict imports to support their domestic animals production. The (number or thing that changes) has a negative 
 sign, and its coefficient differs significantly from 
 zero at the 1% level. This hints that quotas 
 used by the importing countries reduce trade 
 volume of meat. The personal helping payment equal is an group measure of payments given to 
 people in importing countries. The (number or thing that changes) 
 representing the personal helping payment is negative as 
 guessed and differs significantly from zero 
 at the 1% level, suggesting that the positive payments to people lower trade flows of meat. 
 
 Effects of (made different) meat based on countries. 
 The model includes dummy (numbers that change/things that change) representing major exporting countries that produce meat 
 (made different) in quality from one another. For 
 example, Australia produces low quality hamburger meat while the United States produces 
 high quality meat. Dummy (numbers that change/things that change) identifying 
 clearly stated/particular countries of origin are significant at the 
 5% level. This supports the guess that meat 
 products are (made different) by country of origin. 
 Effects of EC and transportation costs. Typical 
 gravity models include distance and dummy for 
 closeness. A longer distance between a pair of 
 trading partners weakens trade. The guessed 
 coefficient on the dummy (number or thing that changes) representing 
 the countries with a common border has a positive. sign and is (meaningful numbers) at the 1% 
 level. This hints that trade volume increases 
 among countries with a common border. The 
 distance (number or thing that changes) is negative and significant at the 
 5% level. This is especially true for meat for 
 which transportation costs are higher than for 
 other farming-based products. 
 The (related to Europe) (combination of different things together that work as one unit) into a common market improved meat trade among the member 
 
 W W Koo eta/. I Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 countries. This supports the explanation of welfare 
 money flow/money-based studies, which proves that money-based (combination of different things together that work as one unit) increases welfare of the member countries 
 through increases in trade book among the 
 countries. The coefficient for the EC dummy 
 (number or thing that changes) is positive as expected and is highly related to the amounts of meat traded according 
 to the t-statistic. This hints that the EC significantly improves meat trade among member countries. 
 5. Ending/deciding statements 
 
 A reduced form gravity model came/coming from a 
 partial balance model of world trade is changed to test trade flows of a single valuable thing and applied to the world meat market to 
 test and carefully study factors affecting meat trade 
 flows. The model for meat trade is guessed with 
 time series and cross section data. Special attention is given to test hits/effects of meat export 
 promotion and import restriction policies on trade 
 flows. 
 This study shows that the changed gravity 
 model is related to single valuable thing trade 
 flows. In the case of meat, the model provides 
 (related to studying numbers) descriptions of meat flows and still keeps/holds the classical features of the ordinary 
 gravity models. 
 On the export side, price of beef, animals 
 production ability (to hold or do something), and differences in meat 
 quality among countries are major factors affecting trade flows of red meat. Exporting countries' 
 payments to producers represented by producer 
 helping payment equal do not influence trade flows. 
 The Long-term agreement significantly improves 
 meat trade between the participating countries. 
 On the import side, importing countries' gross 
 domestic products, animals production abilities (to hold or do something), and trade-restricting policies such as quotas 
 and other border protection, significantly influence trade flows of meat. In general, importing 
 countries' policies influence trade volume and 
 direction more than exporting countries' policies. 
 Common border and money-based union, such as 
 EC, stimulate trade flows, while distances between exporting and importing countries negatively influence trade flows. Hoof-and-mouth dis- 
 
 87 
 
 ease is another factor affecting trade flows of 
 meat negatively. 
 
 6. Endnotes 
 
 A country's production ability (to hold or do something) of animals is 
 related to the country's overall production ability (to hold or do something) of farming-based valuable things, mainly because 
 animals production needs/demands an plentiful supply 
 of other farming-based valuable things such as feed 
 grain, (area of grassy land), and soybean meal. 
 2 The hoof-and-mouth disease is related to 
 only beef trade. Since the model tests trade 
 flows of meat, including beef and pork, beef trade 
 from countries infected with the disease are separated from those that are free of the disease by 
 using a dummy (number or thing that changes). 
 3 Linneman (1966), Bergstrand (1985, 1989) and 
 Summary (1989) used distance as a substitute of 
 transportation costs. 
 4 Breusch and Pagan (1979) show that: 
 1 
 
 g= 
 
 2(;&#126; 1)[_(.E .E (Ee&amp;t) -1] 
 z=l J=l 
 
 2 
 
 t=l 
 
 has a x 2 distribution with appropriate degree of 
 freedom, where N = N 1N 2 and 
 are OLS 
 extras/payments (see Judge et al., 1985). 
 5 Hausman (1978) provides a (detailed description of exactly what is required) test of 
 a model based on the behavior of Uii as follows: 
 m = q'm(q) -lq_ has a x 2 distribution with K deiRE{ is a K X 1 
 grees of freedom, where q 
 column vector of difference between fixed effect 
 (iFE{) and random effect (iRE{) limit/guideline guesses, (match up each pair of items in order), and M(q) = V(iFE{) V(iRE{) is a K X K covariance matrix of difference between variances of 
 and iRE·{ 
 6 Dummy (numbers that change/things that change) representing exporting countries are introduced to account for differences in 
 meat quality among exporting countries under an 
 idea (you think is true) that meat produced in one country is 
 different from that produced in other countries. 
 
 eiit 
 
 =riFE- 
 
 riFE 
 
 7. References 
 Anderson, J. (1979) A possible foundation of the gravity 
 equation. Am. Econ. Rev., 69: 106-116. 
 
 88 
 
 W W Koo et al. j Farming-based Money flow 10 (1994) 81-88 
 
 Bawden, D.L. (1966) A (related to space or existing in space) balance model of international trade. J. Farm Econ., 4: 862-874. 
 Bergstrand, J. (1985) The gravity equation in international 
 trade: some microeconomics foundations and scientific 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). Rev. Econ. Stat., 67: 474-481. 
 Bergstrand, J. (1989) The generalized gravity equation, 
 (related to one company having too much power) competition, and factor proportion explanation in 
 international trade. Rev. Econ. Stat., 71: 143-151. 
 Breusch, T.S. and Pagan. A.R. (1979) A simple test for 
 heteroscedasticity and random coefficient difference/different version. 
 Econometrica, 47: 1287-1294. 
 Godfrey, J. (1986) (detailed description of exactly what is required) Tests in Econometrics. 
 North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
 Hausman, J.A. (1978) (detailed description of exactly what is required) tests in econometrics. 
 Econometrica, 46: 1251-1272. 
 Hillman, J.S. (1986) Nontariff farming-based trade (blocking things). University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln. 
 Hsiao, C. (1986) Analysis of Panel Data. Cambridge University Press, New York. 
 IMF, different volumes. International (money-related) Statistics. International Money-based Fund, Washington, DC. 
 Judge, G.G., Griffiths, W.E., Hill, R.C., Lutkepohl, H. and 
 Lee, T. (1985) The Explanation and Practice of Econometrics 
 (2nd Edition), Wiley, New York. 
 Koo, W.W. (1984) Taxes/import taxes and transportation costs in the U.S. 
 wheat exports. N. Cent. J. Agric. Econ., 6: 99-107. 
 Linneman, H. (1966) An Econometric Study of International 
 Trade Flow. North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
 Longworth, J.W. (1984) Beef in Japan. University of Queensland Press, St. Lucia, New Zealand. 
 
 MacKinnon, J.D. (1976) An computer code for the solution of 
 (related to space or existing in space) balance models. J. Area. Sci., 16: 293-307. 
 Ojalla, E.M. (1985) International Relationships in the World 
 Beef Trade. Macmillan, Hampshire, England. 
 Patterson, G. (1983) The (related to Europe) community as a threat to 
 the system. In: W.R. Cline (Editor), Trade Policy in the 
 1980s. Institute for International Money flow, Washington, 
 DC. Distributed by MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
 Simpson, J.R. (1982) The World's Beef Business. Iowa State 
 University Press, Ames. 
 Summary, R.M. (1989) A political money-based model of U.S. 
 two-sided trade. Rev. Econ. Stat., 71: 179-182. 
 Takayama, T. and Judge, G. (1964) (related to space or existing in space) balance and 
 quadratic programming. J. Farm Econ., 46: 67-93. 
 Thompson, R.L. (1981) A survey of recent developments in 
 international farming-based trade models. Money-based Research Service (book list) and Books of Farming 
 Report 21, U.S. Department of Farming, Washington, 
 DC. 
 UN, different issues. International Trade Statistics Yearbook. 
 United Nations, New York. 
 USDA, different issues. U.S. Exports and Prospects: Dairy, 
 Animalss, and (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.). U.S. Department of Farming, 
 Washington, DC. 
 USDA (1988) Policies and Market Opportunities for U.S. 
 Farm Exports. U.S. Department of Farming, Washington, DC. 
 White, H. (1980) A heteroscedasticity-consistent covariance 
 matrix and a direct test for heteroscedasticity. Econometrica, 48: 817-838. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
