 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
 SCIENCE@DIRECT" 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Guessing the benefits of farm animal welfare laws (and law making) 
 using the contingent (putting a value on something) method 
 Richard M. Bennett*, Ralph J.P. Blaney 
 Department of Farming-based and Food Money flow, The University of Reading, P. 0. Box 237, Reading RG6 6AR, UK 
 
 Received 14 May 2001; received in changed form 13 March 2002; accepted 14 August 2002 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper presents the method and findings of a contingent (putting a value on something) (CV) study that aimed to bring out United Kingdom 
 people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.)' desire to pay to support laws (and law making) to phase out the use of electrical storage device cages for egg production in the (related to Europe) Union 
 (EU). The method takes account of different biases connected with the CV way of doing things, including 'warm glow', 'part-whole' and 
 sample response biases. Guessed mean desire to pay to support the laws (and law making) is used to guess the once-a-year benefit of 
 the laws (and law making) to UK people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.). This is compared with the guessed once-a-year costs of the laws (and law making) over a 12-year period, which 
 allows for readjustment by the UK egg industry. The analysis shows that the guessed benefits of the laws (and law making) outweigh 
 the costs. The study (shows or proves) that CV is a possibly useful way of doing things for testing the likely benefits connected with 
 proposed laws (and law making). However, guesses of CV studies must be treated with caution. It is important that they are taken from 
 carefully designed surveys and that the desire to pay guess method allows for different biases. 
 © 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: Ql8; Q26 
 Keywords: Farm animal welfare; EU laws (and law making); Contingent (putting a value on something); Costs and benefits; UK 
 
 I. Introduction 
 
 Farm animal welfare issues are becoming more and more important within the (related to Europe) Union (EU). 
 This is shown by person concerns about animal 
 welfare and reflected by the increasing amount of 
 laws (and law making) designed to improve the welfare of farm 
 animals within the EU (see Wilkins, 1999). 1 For example a survey of some 2500 people in the UK, Ire*Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-1189316478. 
 E-mail address: r.m.bennett@rdg.ac.uk (R.M. Bennett). 
 1 In the UK, this is also shown by the increase in farm promise 
 big plans/layouts/dishonest plans which contain many standards designed to improve 
 animal welfare, and which are supported by major food stores 
 (such as the RSPCA Freedom Food big plan/layout/dishonest plan and the Tesco chain 
 of food stores). 
 
 land, France, Germany and Italy (Harper and Henson, 
 2001) found that an average of 66% of people said 
 that they had reduced their consumption of animals 
 products due to their concerns about the way that the 
 animals were treated and 60% said that they (bought something for money) 
 'farm animal friendly' products (such as free-range 
 eggs and chicken). 2 As well as the general increase 
 2 Broome (1998) reports that 33% of people in Ireland restricted their consumption of meat (with concerns about animal 
 welfare being the main reason given), while 83% of people 
 in France stated that concerns over animal welfare affected their 
 consumption of some animals products (e.g. veal). Of course, 
 concern about farm animal welfare is not only found in EU countries. For example, PETA (2002) report a survey of people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) in 
 the United States of America that found that 90% 'opposed' the 
 jail of chickens and other animals on 'factory farms'. 
 
 0169-5150/03/$- see front matter© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 doi: I 0.1 016/S0169-5150(03)00037-9 
 
 86 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 in EU laws (and law making) to protect and improve farm animal 
 welfare, it was agreed in 1997 that animal welfare 
 (things to carefully think about) become addded ((in a way that looks back at the past)) to 
 the Agreement (between countries) of Rome beginning and building on the (related to Europe) Community by means of a Rules on Animal Welfare. 
 The Rules is important because it states the desire 
 to "secure/make sure of improved protection and respect for the 
 welfare of animals as living beings" and goes on 
 to state that "in creating and putting into use the 
 Community's farming-based, transport, internal market 
 and research policies, the Community and the Member 
 States will  pay full regard to the welfare needed things 
 of animals ... "(the latter statement had already been 
 part of the 1992 Agreement (between countries) on (related to Europe) Union). This 
 highlights the increasing good concerns about the 
 treatment of animals within the EU and, importantly, 
 clearly recognises animals as beings capable of 
 pleasure and pain rather than as unliving products (that are bought and sold). 3 
 The production of eggs from hens kept in electrical storage device cages has specifically received attention from 
 people, 4 animal welfare groups and policy makers. A UK poll in 1995 (King, 1995) found that 72% 
 of UK people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) thought that the battery-cage system 
 was wrong, while Harper and Henson (2001) found 
 that battery-cage systems were thought 'somewhat 
 unacceptable' on average by people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) in the UK, Ireland, France and Germany. 5 Organisations such as 
 Kindness in World Farming and Eurogroup for Animal Welfare (have done a series of actions to reach a goal) to have cages blocked/forbidden 
 within the EU (CIWF, 2002; Eurogroup, 2002). In 
 July 1999, (related to Europe) Farming Ministers agreed to 
 3 In his excellent written work on money flow/money-based studies and animal welfare, 
 Mcinerney (1993) notes that animal welfare is just another money-based valuable thing for which peoplehave preferences relative to 
 other things they choose to consume with their available income. 
 So, the (animal) welfare standards a (community of people/all good people in the world) chases after are a (by accident) result of the pursuit of its own (human) welfare. 
 4 In response to consumer concerns, some food stores, such as 
 Marks and Spencer in the UK, have stopped selling eggs from 
 cage systems. Fearne and Lavelle (1996) found that people of 
 free-range eggs were mostly influenced by hen welfare (things to carefully think about) followed by perceived higher egg quality, while people 
 of cage eggs were mostly influenced by the price and size of eggs 
 in their buying-related decisions. Morris (1996) notes that although 
 people may be worried about hen welfare and wish to buy 
 non-cage eggs, some will not be (good or well enough) (gave a reason to do something) to actually 
 do so. 
 5 Broome (1998) reports that 70% of French people perceived animal welfare problems with the cage egg system and that 
 this influenced their consumption of eggs. 
 
 ban the keeping of laying hens in electrical storage device cages from 
 1 January 2012 (EU Order 99/74/EC). 
 However, the blocking/forbidding of electrical storage device cages will (force (on people)/cause an inconvenient situation) 
 costs on egg producers, people and (community of people/all good people in the world) as a 
 whole. Do the benefits of such a ban outweigh these 
 costs? In an attempt to deal with this question, this paper presents the method and findings of a contingent 
 (putting a value on something) (CV) study begun/tried in 1996 to guess 
 the benefits of a ban on cages in the EU for people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) 
 of the UK. The paper thinks about/believes the (quality of something that makes people like it or want it) of the 
 laws (and law making) in the light of the study's guesses of benefits and the likely costs of the laws (and law making) within the 
 UK. 
 
 2. Survey methods 
 A list of questions divided into four mam sections 
 was designed. A medical sample/example version of the list of questions is shown in Add on A. The first section 
 contained questions about the extent to which people 
 are worried about farm animal welfare generally 
 and about clearly stated/particular production practices (including 
 egg production using the battery-cage system). This 
 section also asked people about their consumption 
 expense and included questions as to whether 
 their consumption decisions are affected by their animal welfare concerns and their consumption of cage, 
 barn/perchery or free-range eggs. The next section 
 presented information on the battery-cage system 
 generally practised in the EU. This information was 
 checked by animal scientists to make sure that it was 
 scientifically correct and fair in its description. 
 The section then presented the proposal to phase out 
 the use of electrical storage device cages in the EU and asked people if 
 they supported such laws (and law making). They were then asked 
 if they would be willing to pay a specified amount 
 to support the laws (and law making) as a general increase in the 
 price of twelve eggs. A single-bounded (divided into two) 
 choice bring outation method (Church supervisor and Heberlein, 
 1979; Mitchell and Carson, 1989, pp. 101-103) was 
 used. Twelve different bid amounts (see Table 1) were 
 used and randomly gave out to people within the 
 sample. These combinations were chosen following 
 an exploratory survey of people using an open-ended 
 desire to pay (WTP) bring outation format. Before 
 the WTP questions, people were reminded of their 
 limited budget and that any payment to support one 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney/ Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 Table I 
 Responses to desire to pay questions according to bid level 
 (UK pence)a 
 Bid amount 
 
 Yes 
 
 No 
 
 No opinion 
 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 
 70 
 
 44 
 41 
 38 
 33 
 38 
 36 
 31 
 34 
 33 
 34 
 20 
 22 
 
 5 
 10 
 7 
 6 
 7 
 11 
 14 
 10 
 9 
 15 
 13 
 21 
 
 5 
 5 
 4 
 4 
 I 
 8 
 7 
 4 
 6 
 7 
 4 
 2 
 
 87 
 
 The ACORN system is based on UK population (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  data and contains some 54 different categories 
 within the UK population classified according to 
 key (related to how much money and power people have) factors such as age, sex, (related to a group of people with the same race, culture, religion, etc.) 
 group, (whether someone is single, married, divorced, etc.) and family/household structure, 
 occupation, money-based position (income, etc.), education and home ownership. The cover letter sent 
 out with the list of questions not only explained the 
 purpose of the survey but also gave/given a small 
 (reward or reason for doing something) by offering to include people who responded in a 
 free prize draw. One month after the first posting, a further letter and copy of the list of questions 
 were sent to non-people who responded asking them to return a completed list of questions. The response rate 
 was 30%. 
 
 a Bid is an increase on the current egg price. People who responded were 
 (gave opinions about what could or should be done about a situation) of the current egg price (around (British pounds)1.50 per dozen eggs). 
 
 3. Results 
 issue will mean that they have less money 
 available to add/give to other issues or to buy things. 
 People who responded were then asked whether the higher price 
 of eggs pointed to/showed by the WTP amount would affect 
 their consumption of eggs and, if so, by how much 
 (i.e. number of eggs per week). People who responded were also 
 asked their maximum WTP to address all of their farm 
 animal welfare concerns using an open-ended format. 
 Following this section, there was a series of 'debriefing questions'. In the first of these, people who responded 
 were asked (by means of an open-ended question format) to explain their responses to the WTP questions. 
 Then they were asked to score (from 1 to 10) the extent to which each of a series of attitude-related statements 
 reflected their own feelings with regards to the responses that they gave to the WTP questions. These 
 questions were used to explore the clear thinking of people who responded and to test for clearly stated/particular biases of people's responses (the results section gives more detail (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 these questions). The final section of the list of questions 
 contained background questions on the person who responded's 
 sex, age, education, income, occupation and household 
 size. 
 Following pretesting, the list of questions, together 
 with a cover letter, was posted to 2000 people in 
 the UK during the later part of 1996. The sample 
 was selected randomly from all families in the 
 UK but layered according to the ACORN geodemographic classification system (CACI, 1993) to reflect 
 the (related to how much money and power people have) (features/ qualities/ traits) of people/of the group. 
 
 3.1. Concerns about farm animal welfare and 
 support of the cage ban 
 Eighty-six percent of people who responded were 'very 
 concerned' or 'somewhat concerned' that farm animals may suffer or be mistreated (41 and 45%, (match up each pair of items in order)), while only 1% stated that they were 'not at all 
 concerned'. Sixty-one percent acted on their concerns 
 by (buying things for money)/not buying farm animal products on 
 animal welfare grounds (free-range eggs and veal were 
 often talked about/said in this context). Of the three animals production practices presented to them, people who responded scored veal production with calves in confined 
 crates as being most unacceptable, followed closely 
 by cage egg production (both with middle-point scores of 
 I = very unacceptable) with transport of animals for 
 up to 24 h (with food and water at 8 h periods of time (or space)) being 
 less generally unacceptable (with a middle-point score of 2). 
 Over half of the people who responded gave other examples of 
 the treatment of farm animals that they were concerned 
 about. On average, people who responded' families (bought something for money) around nine eggs per week. Sixty-four percent 
 stated that they (bought something for money) free-range eggs, II% barn 
 or perchery eggs and just 9% stated they (bought something for money) 
 battery-cage eggs. Fifty-nine percent of people who responded 
 were female and 41% male, with a mean age range of 
 40-59 years. Mean income range of people who responded was 
 (British pounds)15,000-20,000 per year, while mean household 
 size was 2 (with a range of 1-14 and 0-5 children). 
 
 88 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney/ Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 Seventy-nine percent of all people who responded supported 
 the proposed EU ban on battery-cage egg production and only 7% stated they did not support the ban. 
 Ninety-six percent of all people who responded answered the 
 WTP questions put to them. Table 1 shows responses 
 to the WTP questions according to the bid level, with 
 each of the 12 different bid amounts randomly gave out within the sample. The analysis of WTP responses is presented below. 
 Responses to the WTP 'debriefing' question, which 
 asked people who responded to explain their thinking behind 
 their WTP responses, found that the majority (67%) of 
 people who responded gave income/expenditure and/or animal 
 welfare as the main reasons behind their responses 
 (this question was answered by 87% of all people who responded). For example a typical response was "20p extra 
 for twelve eggs is not much to pay to improve hen 
 welfare, especially since I don't buy many eggs". A 
 minority of 2% of people who responded objected to the laws (and law making) picture/situation presented to them. Table 2 shows a 
 summary of responses to the attitude statements presented to people who responded (people who responded scored from 1 to 10 
 depending on the extent of their agreement to each 
 statement). The first statement was specifically designed to test for 'warm glow' bias (discussed later) in 
 responses to WTP questions, asking people who responded the 
 extent to which they thought about/believed their WTP to be like 
 a money to charity to a worthy cause. The proportion of (compared to other things) high scores for this statement shows 
 that this may have in fact influenced many people's 
 WTP. The second attitude statement was designed to 
 test for 'part-whole' bias (discussed later) of people's 
 responses to the WTP questions, asking them the extent to which they thought about/believed their WTP to be not just 
 
 for hen welfare but for farm animal welfare generally. 
 The (compared to other things) high proportion of people who responded giving 
 a high score to this statement hints that this bias 
 may have in fact changed the way people think's WTP. The third 
 statement looks (for) some further information on people's 
 attitudes to the proposed laws (and law making) to ban battery 
 cages in the EU, as presented in the WTP picture/situation. 
 Nearly 82% of people who responded agreed (compared to other things) strongly 
 that such laws (and law making) is necessary (i.e. gave a score of 
 7 or more to the attitude statement). The fourth attitude statement tried to explore the extent to which 
 people's WTP is for their personal happiness from 
 not using/eating battery-cage eggs, while the fifth attitude statement tried to explore the extent to which 
 people's WTP reflects the happiness they would get 
 from knowing that others would not be reducing hen 
 welfare by using/eating battery-cage eggs. This tests 
 the 'negative externality of animal suffering' argument thought about/believed by Bennett ( 1995) and the public 
 good nature of the laws (and law making). The scorings would appear to show that people are aware that the proposed 
 egg laws (and law making) would provide public good benefits in 
 a way that the market, by itself, cannot and that this 
 may have influenced their WTP. 
 When asked the maximum that they would be willing to pay (in terms of an increase in their weekly 
 household food bill, due to higher prices) to address 
 all of their farm animal welfare concerns, 79% of people who responded gave an amount, with just 5% stating that 
 they found this job  very hard. Ninety-one percent 
 of people who responded to this question gave a positive amount 
 ranging from (British pounds)0.10 to 100. The rest stated a 
 WTP of zero. The mean WTP given by people who responded 
 was (British pounds)5.50 (with a middle-point value of (British pounds)5). 
 
 Table 2 
 Summary of responses to the attitude statements (% of people who responded)" 
 Attitude statement 
 
 WTP is like a money to charity 
 WTP is for welfare generally 
 Laws (and law making) is necessary 
 WTP for personal happiness 
 WTP to prevent others buying 
 
 N 
 
 Score 
 1-2 
 
 3-4 
 
 5-6 
 
 7-8 
 
 9-10 
 
 28 
 12 
 6 
 19 
 23 
 
 9 
 6 
 4 
 4 
 5 
 
 22 
 15 
 8 
 18 
 21 
 
 15 
 22 
 16 
 15 
 15 
 
 26 
 46 
 66 
 44 
 37 
 
 534 
 542 
 548 
 525 
 504 
 
 a People who responded were asked to score from 1 (not at all true of my feelings) to 10 (very true of my feelings). Percentages relate to those 
 responding to the questions and may not add to 100% due to rounding. N: number of people who responded answering each question (out of a total 
 of 591 people who responded). 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 89 
 
 3.2. WTP to support the cage ban 
 
 Table 3 
 Desire-to-pay model for the egg laws (and law making) 
 
 A parametric model was used to guess mean and 
 middle-point WTP. The procedure chosen is an extension of 
 Cameron's (1988) approach, proposed by Hanemann 
 et al. (1991) and is organized and listed below. 
 Let individual i have an understood price or WTP for 
 the animal welfare laws (and law making) given by 
 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Limit/guideline 
 guess 
 
 Standard 
 error 
 
 Pr &amp;gt;chi 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 BID a 
 AVOIDb 
 INCOME" 
 SUPPORTd 
 WARMGLOWe 
 PARTWHOLEr 
 
 -1.9742 
 -0.0307 
 0.8485 
 0.1984 
 1.1743 
 0.0962 
 0.1313 
 
 0.6201 
 0.0087 
 0.3050 
 0.0644 
 0.1994 
 0.0464 
 0.0422 
 
 0.0015 
 0.0004 
 0.0054 
 0.0021 
 0.0001 
 0.0381 
 0.0019 
 
 (1) 
 where WTP; is the person's true, but incompletely 
 watched/followed, desire to pay; x; a vector of explanatory 
 factors which can be watched/followed, Ui a matching random 
 error with zero mean and unit variance that comes up from 
 the unseen factors about i' s WTP, b a vector and 
 s is a scalar to be guessed. Each person who responded is asked 
 whether they are willing to pay a randomly assigned 
 amount (B;). The chance of watching/ noticing/ celebrating/ obeying a positive 
 response to this WTP question is 
 Pr(Yes) 
 
 = Pr(u; 
 
 +-- B;/s 
 
 + x;bjs). 
 
 (2) 
 
 Or, this chance can be written as 
 (3) 
 + d' x;), 
 where c = -1/s and d = bjs. F() is the total amount of 
 
 Pr(Yes) 
 
 = 
 
 F(cB; 
 
 distribution function of u; and its assumed distribution decides/figures out the type of binary choice model used. 
 It is the presence of a different bid level that enables 
 the identification of the scale of the WTP relationship. So, the bid (B;) is included in the right-hand set 
 of (numbers that change/things that change) in the binary choice model along with the 
 explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) (x;). The coefficients received/got 
 from the binary choice model can then be used to identify the limits/guidelines in Eq. (1). The guessed limits/guidelines in the binary choice model are c and d' and so 
 the guesses of b' and s (Bennett and Larson, 1996) 
 will be: 
 b' 
 
 -d' 
 
 = --, 
 c 
 
 -1 
 s=-. 
 c 
 
 (4) 
 (5) 
 
 Once the coefficients of the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) 
 have been guessed from the model, it is then possible to guess WTP. In this case, maximum chance guess procedures were used, specifying a 
 logit model (assuming a logistic distribution function) 
 
 Number of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements): 446; -21og chance: 319.198; 
 chi-square for covariates: 145.378 with six degrees of freedom 
 (P = 0.001); association of (described the future) chances and watched/followed 
 responses: 86.4% agreeing, 13.4% harsh (Yes-350 (described the future), 339 actual; No-96 (described the future), I 07 actual). 
 a BID is the presented bid amount (i.e. from (British pounds)0.15 to 0.70). 
 b AVOID is a dummy (number or thing that changes) (0: no, 1: yes) representing whether 
 the person who responded stated that they avoided buying any products 
 due to concerns about the welfare of animals involved. 
 c INCOME is the income category score of 1-12 for amounts 
 of 0-(British pounds)5000 to &amp;gt;55,000 in steps of (British pounds)5000. 
 d SUPPORT is the level of support given by people who responded to 
 the proposed laws (and law making) to ban electrical storage device cages (where 0: no, 1: no 
 opinion and 2: yes). 
 e WARM GLOW is the combination of two (numbers that change/things that change): (i) a 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) (0: no, 10: yes) pointing to/showing whether the person who responded 
 had stated that their WTP was a payment towards a 'cause' in 
 the open interviewing question and (ii) the score (1-10) given to the 
 attitude question that their WTP is like a money to charity to a 
 worthy cause. 
 r PARTWHOLE is also a combination of two (numbers that change/things that change): (i) a 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) (0: no, 10: yes) pointing to/showing whether the person who responded 
 had stated that their WTP was a payment toward animal welfare 
 in the open interviewing question and (ii) the score (1-10) given to 
 the attitude question that their WTP is not just for hen welfare 
 but for farm animal welfare generally. 
 
 and using standard procedures available in the SAS 
 software package (SAS, 2000). 
 Table 3 shows results for the preferred model following long/big model testing. A large number of 
 test models were used with all (related to information about people) and other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) being included. Money-based explanation suggests 
 that price (i.e. BID), income and preference (numbers that change/things that change) 
 (i.e. AVOID and SUPPORT) should be (things that decide other things) 
 of WTP, and so it was carefully thought about/believed important that 
 such (numbers that change/things that change) be included within the model. The preferred model had the best individual changeable importance and the highest coincidence of (described the future) and 
 watched/followed responses. Nearly 10% ofthe sample stated 
 they had no opinion about the WTP question or 
 
 90 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.J.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 did not state a WTP preference and these people who responded 
 were assumed to have a zero WTP. 
 All of the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) have a high level of 
 (meaningful numbers) connected with them. BID is the 
 presented bid value and the limit/guideline guess shows 
 the expected negative relationship between the size of 
 the bid presented to people who responded and the chance 
 of them giving a 'Yes' response. AVOID is a dummy 
 (number or thing that changes) pointing to/showing whether the person who responded stated that 
 they avoided buying any animals products due 
 to concerns about farm animal welfare. The positive 
 sign points to/shows that those avoiding products on farm 
 animal welfare grounds were more likely to say 'Yes' 
 to WTP questions. INCOME is the income category 
 score (1-12) and is used as a (substitute-related) (number or thing that changes) for (extra income you can spend on fun things). The coefficient is positive, meaning 
 that the higher people's income the more likely they 
 were to say 'Yes' to WTP questions. SUPPORT represents whether people who responded did or did not support the 
 proposed laws (and law making) or had no opinion. The coefficient 
 is positive, meaning that those who stated that they 
 supported the laws (and law making) were more likely to say 'Yes' 
 to WTP questions. WARMGLOW is a (number or thing that changes) that 
 represents the extent to which people who responded thought about/believed 
 their WTP to be like a money to charity to a worthy 
 cause. The positive sign means that the more people who responded agreed with this statement the more likely they 
 were to say 'Yes' to WTP questions. PARTWHOLE 
 reflects the extent to which people who responded thought about/believed 
 their WTP to be not just for hen welfare but for farm 
 animal welfare generally. Again, it has a positive sign 
 meaning that the more people who responded agreed with this 
 view, the more likely they were to say 'Yes' to WTP 
 questions. So, each of the model's (numbers that change/things that change), apart 
 from BID, had a positive upward influence on WTP. 
 Using this model, and including zero WTP values, 
 mean WTP was guessed at (British pounds)0.90 (per dozen eggs) 
 and middle-point WTP at (British pounds)0.45. The model allowed for 
 negative WTP values and had a 'correct percentage' 
 (describe the future)ive ability of over 86%. However, there are a 
 number of possible biases of WTP guesses, which 
 may need to be taken into account. These include 
 warm glow, part-whole, and non-response biases. 
 Warm glow bias is where people who responded' WTP is for 
 the (instance of buying something for money) of moral happiness connected with giving for a good cause (like a money to charity) rather 
 than for the good itself, leading to an upward-(created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 estimate ofWTP (see Andreoni, 1990; Kahneman and 
 
 Knetsch, 1992). Part-whole bias is where people who responded' 
 WTP is for a larger class of products (that are bought and sold)  than the good 
 being offered, again, resulting in an over-statement 
 of WTP (Mitchell and Carson, 1989, pp. 250-252; 
 Carson and Mitchell, 1995). In this big picture, people who responded may feel that they are paying to improve animal 
 welfare more generally rather than just to improve the 
 welfare of caged hens. In the survey results, there was 
 a strong relationship between people who responded who gave 
 high scores to the 'warm glow' and 'part-whole' attitude statements and those who had higher WTP values. Also, the model presented above shows a 
 strong (related to studying numbers) influence of the WARMGLOW and 
 PARTWHOLE (numbers that change/things that change), suggesting an upward bias 
 ofWTP due to both warm glow and part-whole effects. 
 This was corrected by setting these (numbers that change/things that change) to their 
 lowest level for each person who responded within the model and 
 re-guessing WTP. The resultant changed mean WTP 
 is (British pounds)0.47, nearly half of the original guess. Correction for part-whole bias reduced mean WTP by around 
 33% and correction for warm glow bias reduced it by 
 around 15%. 
 Censoring of WTP values at both the upper and 
 lower tails of the distribution was also begun/tried. 
 The reason for this is that WTP should be limited 
 by income (Hanemann and Kanninen, 1999). Individual person who responded's maximum WTP to address all of 
 their farm animal welfare concerns (received/got from an 
 open-ended WTP question) was used as a basis for 
 censoring. Clearly, a person who responded's WTP for the egg 
 laws (and law making) should be somewhat less than their WTP to 
 address all of their farm animal welfare concerns. On 
 the broad idea (you think is true) (based on the findings of this 
 and previous surveys that identified some farm 
 animal welfare issues that UK people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) are concerned 
 about) that there will be a few other farm animal welfare issues that people may have a WTP to address, 
 an upper censoring point was used based on 20% of 
 the WTP for all farm animal welfare concerns (i.e. 
 the idea (you think is true) is that WTP for one issue-to support 
 cage laws (and law making)-should not go beyond 20% of WTP for 
 all farm animal welfare issues). Following censoring, 
 the WTP model increased its 'correct percentage' (describe the future)ive ability to 90%, while mean WTP fell to (British pounds)0.43 
 (i.e. censoring only reduced WTP by (British pounds)0.04). 
 Further correction for survey non-people who responded and 
 any sample selection bias was done/tried. Responses 
 were (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) by weights reflecting the national 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney/ Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 (related to how much money and power people have) profile according to ACORN category. Correction for response (too much of one thing and not enough of another) between (males or females) was also carried out. In fact, response rates were 
 (compared to other things) the same across geodemographic groupings. Response rates from (groups of people related by culture, race, religion, etc.) and those 
 living in multiple house/living units (i.e. small, low cost 
 change (to help someone)/place to live and sleep grouped together in larger buildings) 
 were (in an obvious way) lower, and these groupings had lower 
 incomes connected with them. Correction for sample 
 bias reduced mean WTP by just (British pounds)0.02 to 0.041. 
 
 4. Discussion and ends/end results 
 The results of the survey have showed that the huge 
 majority of people who responded are worried about animal 
 welfare and supported the proposed laws (and law making) to 
 phase out the use of electrical storage device cages for egg production 
 within the EU. More than that, most people who responded would 
 be willing to pay an added amount on the price 
 of eggs to support the laws (and law making). The mean WTP 
 was, at first, guessed at (British pounds)0.90 but after correction 
 for warm glow, whole-part and non-response/survey 
 sample biases, mean WTP fell to (British pounds)0.41 as an increase 
 in the price of twelve eggs to support the laws (and law making). 
 The main issue related to WTP guesses is whether 
 they provide a reasonable measure of people's true 
 WTP. Carson et al. (2000a,b) provide a useful review 
 of the current debate about the CV method. There 
 are clearly some possible biases that can influence WTP guesses. These may be related to the way 
 people understand/explain and respond to WTP questions (which 
 are related to the way in which WTP questions are 
 asked, the picture/situation presented to people who responded, 6 etc.), 
 sample selection and the design and conduct of the survey and the WTP guess methods used. For example Bateman et al. (1999) found a difference/different version in WTP of 
 40% depending upon the bring outation/estimation method 
 used. Such difference/different version may be due, at least in part, to 
 6 Carson et a!. (2000a,b) noted that CV bring outation pictures/situations 
 should be 'consequential' (i.e. be perceived by people who responded as 
 being able to influence policy) if they are to be taken seriously by 
 people who responded, and not possible in the sense of being 'imaginary'. 
 With the benefit of looking back, it would have been better not to have 
 used the word 'imagine' in the picture/situation presented to people who responded in 
 this survey. However, (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) presented hints that people who responded 
 gave (serious thinking/serious thing to think about) to their responses and that the 'face 
 value' of the picture/situation was not damaaged/not broken into. 
 
 91 
 
 poor survey design in some studies, different information being presented to people who responded or the presence of 
 different biases, such as those identified and corrected 
 for in this survey. The (divided into two) choice bring outation 
 method used in this survey is the recommended one 
 (Arrow et al., 1993) for CV surveys, while the general 
 guess method has been commonly used to analyse 
 separate-response CV data and is compatible with money-based explanation (see Hanemann and Kanninen, 1999 for 
 a complete review of (related to studying numbers)/economic analysis of separate-response CV data). The use of 'warm 
 glow' and 'part-whole' (numbers that change/things that change) to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) WTP guesses is an extension of the standard analysis. 
 This study has tried to test for a number 
 of possible biases and to correct for them-but other, 
 maybe unrecognised biases may have existed and 
 not been accounted for? Warm glow and part-whole 
 biases appeared to result in a (compared to other things) large upward 
 bias to WTP. Very few contingent (putting a value on something) studies 
 have tested for these biases and even fewer have 
 corrected WTP guesses to take account of them. 
 It is recognised that the (change to make better/related to changing something) for warm glow 
 and part-whole biases begun/tried in this study may 
 be questioned. 8 Responses to the warm glow and 
 part-whole bias interviewing questions may not correctly reflect these biases, and the simple method of 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) within the parametric model may be seen 
 as a rather (very simple/rough and rude) correction of WTP. Anyway, it is 
 important that CV studies test for the presence of such 
 biases, and that their effects on WTP be taken into account, otherwise WTP guesses may be sneaky and false. 
 The study used a (related to how much money and power people have) classification 
 system to secure/make sure of a representative sample of UK people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.). (numbers that change/things that change) in the parametric model used to guess WTP were all highly significant and the model 
 had a high (describe the future)ive ability. The clear thinking and (state of always working or appearing the same way) of people who responded' responses to WTP questions 
 was tested by means of 'debriefing' questions. Most 
 people who responded gave clear thinking for their WTP responses. Also, there were strong relationships between 
 people's concerns about farm animal welfare, their 
 buying-related behaviour, their income and their WTP. 
 7 For example the survey was done/tried during the period when 
 the numbers of (cows, bulls, etc.)  affected by BSE was still (compared to other things) high. 
 The BSE 'crisis' is likely to have changed the way people think's attitudes to 
 animals production/animal welfare issues. 
 8 In fact, there is debate as to whether 'warm glow' is a (connected/related) 
 issue for CV studies (see Carson et a!., 2000a,b, p. 6). 
 
 92 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 More than that, a mean WTP of (British pounds)0.41 for hen welfare 
 compares (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) with a mean of (British pounds)5.50 to address 
 all of people's farm animal welfare concerns. 
 However, a few questions about the truth/trueness 
 of the findings of the survey remain. First, some 75% 
 of people who responded said they (bought something for money) free-range eggs, 
 yet only around 20% of retail eggs (bought something for money) nationally are free-range ((related to big business) Intelligence, 1998). It 
 is likely that some people who responded wrongly perceived the 
 eggs that they (bought something for money) as free-range. This chance 
 is supported by a national poll of people in the UK 
 (Market and Opinion Research International Limited, 
 1999) which found that over 80% of people did 
 not (understand/make real/achieve) that eggs labelled as 'farm fresh' and 'good 
 country eggs' were from hens kept in electrical storage device cages. 
 This information problem has been recognised by the 
 (related to Europe) Commission, with required labelling of 
 eggs according to method of production being needed/demanded 
 from 1 January 2004. It may also be the case that those 
 who (bought something for money) non-cage eggs were more likely to respond to the survey. 
 A 30% response rate to the postal list of questions 
 was (accomplished or gained). This may seem low but is within the 
 range reported by Thistlethwaite and Finlay (1993) 
 who found response rates to mail surveys ranging from 
 18 to 47%. However, the response rate could have 
 been improved by further reminder letters or, if useful things/valuable supplies had allowed, by carrying out face-to-face interviews. The problem remains that the survey was 
 unable to get direct information on the WTP of 
 non-responders. Those responding to the survey could 
 have had a greater interest in hen welfare (as suggested above in terms of those buying-related non-cage 
 eggs), and so a higher WTP for the laws (and law making). An 
 extreme idea (you think is true) would be that all those who did 
 not respond to the survey had no interest in the issue 
 and had a zero WTP. This is unlikely, but is a useful 
 idea (you think is true) for the purposes of the cost-benefit analysis organized and listed below. Under this idea (you think is true), guessed 
 mean WTP would fall to just over (British pounds)0.12 per dozen 
 eggs. 
 Carson (2000) provides a list of factors to be thought about/believed when testing the quality of a CV study. 
 The first he labels 'face truth/trueness', which is a clearly 
 and correctly described picture/situation, which is reasonable 
 to people who responded. Specifically, Carson states that a CV 
 list of questions should contain (a) an introduction outlining the general big picture, (b) a described/explained description of 
 
 the good, (c) a description of the institutional setting, 
 (d) a clear statement about how the good will be paid 
 for, (e) a method to bring out people who responded' preferences 
 (the (divided into two) choice format is recommended), (f) 
 interviewing questions which ask people who responded to explain 
 their responses and (g) questions to get information on person who responded (features/ qualities/ traits) including attitudes 
 and (information about people/combinations of different kinds of people). The list of questions used in this 
 study (Add on A) contains each of these elements. 
 The second and third factors listed by Carson are (i) 
 that the (connected/related) population must be sampled and (ii) 
 that the sample size should be at least (more than two hundred) 
 and each member of people/of the group should have a 
 positive and known chance of being sampled. For 
 this survey, the (connected/related) population (i.e. all UK people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.)) was sampled and a representative sample of this 
 population was invited to participate in the survey by 
 means of a weighted (related to information about people) sampling method. 
 The sample size was over 500. The fourth factor is the 
 survey method. Carson accepts that mail surveys are 
 cheaper but warns of sample selection bias. Sample 
 selection bias has been admitted/recognized/responded to in this survey 
 and has been corrected for in two, different ways. 
 Finally, Carson talks about/says some other things to think about in testing the quality of a study. Concerning 
 the analysis of results he states that an equation with 
 reasonable explanatory power and coefficients with 
 the expected signs (as given by the model used to 
 guess WTP in this study) provides (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) in support of the suggestion/possible plan that the survey has measured 
 the meant construct. He also states that studies 
 should take income restrictions on WTP into account, 
 which this study began/tried through censoring of WTP 
 responses and including in something of an income (number or thing that changes) in the 
 WTP model. 
 The guessed WTP value can be used to get an 
 guess of the benefits of the proposed laws (and law making) to 
 people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) in the UK. In 2000, UK people (bought something for money) 
 6080 million shell eggs (MAFF, 2001a; over 98% of 
 these were produced domestically). Sixteen percent of 
 the people who responded to the WTP questions stated that an 
 increase in egg price by the bid amount presented to 
 them would result in an average reduction in their consumption of eggs of 18%. Assuming that the remaining people who responded would not reduce their consumption 
 of eggs due to a change in price, UK consumption 
 of eggs is guessed to fall to around 5905 million 
 per year. Also, around 80% of eggs now 
 
 R.M. Bennett. R.J.P. Blaney! Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 (bought something for money) are from battery-cage production systems. 
 So, the proposed laws (and law making) would affect consumption of some 4724 million eggs per year (393.6 million dozen eggs). Given a mean WTP of (British pounds)0.41 per 
 dozen eggs, the guessed benefit of the laws (and law making) 
 would be about (British pounds)161 million per year. If 
 the extreme idea (you think is true) of zero WTP for the laws (and law making) for all non-responders to the survey is applied, 
 and mean WTP is just (British pounds)0.12 per dozen eggs, then the 
 guessed benefit of the laws (and law making) falls to just over 
 (British pounds)48 million per year. 
 This can be compared to an guessed cost of the 
 laws (and law making) to producers of (British pounds)466 million quoted by the 
 Ministry of Farming, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) 9 
 in the UK (MAFF, 200lb). This guess thinks about/believes a 
 12-year (change to make better/related to changing something) period and includes both (change to make better/related to changing something) costs for the industry (capital costs of equipment 
 and buildings replacement, etc.) and (happening now) production costs due to the different production systems 
 used, giving an average once-a-year cost of around (British pounds)39 
 million over the 12-year period. This MAFF guess 
 allows for the use of larger, 'enriched' cages by egg 
 producers as well as barn and free-range systems and 
 so provides an underestimate of the full costs of the 
 laws (and law making) presented to people who responded. Anyway, it 
 gives some idea of the likely scale of the costs compared to the benefits guessed by the contingent (putting a value on something) survey. This seems to suggest that the benefits 
 of the proposed laws (and law making) outweigh the costs, even 
 under the extreme idea (you think is true) that non-responders to 
 the survey had a zero WTP. 
 Although there is likely to be a net gain in welfare 
 in the UK resulting from the (putting into) use of the 
 
 9 
 
 Now the Department for (surrounding conditions), Food and Rnral Affairs. 
 
 93 
 
 EU battery-cage ban, the costs and benefits will not 
 be spread evenly throughout (community of people/all good people in the world). Analysis of WTP 
 by (related to how much money and power people have) group points to/shows that WTP is nearly 
 twice as much among those with high incomes as 
 compared to those with poors. The last thing just mentioned also 
 buy more battery-cage eggs than those with high incomes ((related to big business) Intelligence, 1998). So, it appears that those benefiting most from the ban will 
 be on higher incomes. The amount of the (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 costs carried by people and/or (group of tests) egg producers will depend upon the pricing plan of stores. 
 If egg prices rise a lot then people in the 
 poor group will face a net cost. 
 Laws (and law making) to protect and improve the welfare of 
 farm animals is very important. The market cannot be left 
 to safeguard animal welfare any more than it can be 
 left to safeguard (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) (Mishan, 1993). Before putting into use laws (and law making) it is important that some 
 cost-benefit test is carried out. Contingent (putting a value on something) is a useful way of doing things for helping to test the 
 benefits of laws (and law making), for example to improve hen 
 welfare by phasing out the use of electrical storage device cages. Guesses of WTP from contingent (putting a value on something) studies need 
 to be treated with caution, however. It is important that 
 such guesses are taken from carefully designed surveys and that the guess method allows for different 
 biases. 
 
 Responses 
 We would like to thank the unnamed referees for 
 their valuable comments and suggestions. 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.J.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 94 
 
 Add on A. Medical sample/example example of list of questions 
 All answers that you give will be treated in strictest confidence. Thank you for your 
 help. 
 1. 
 
 To what extent are you concerned that farm animals may be mistreated or that 
 they may suffer in the process of producing our food and other farming-based 
 products? Please circle 
 Very 
 Concerned 
 
 2. 
 
 Somewhat 
 concerned 
 
 Neither concerned 
 nor calm 
 
 Not really 
 concerned 
 
 Not at all 
 concerned 
 
 Do you (instance of buying something for money) or avoid buying any particular farm animal products 
 because of your concerns about the welfare of the animals involved? 
 YES 
 
 NO 
 
 If YES, which products ........................................................... . 
 
 3. 
 
 To what extent are the following acceptable to you? Please score on a scale 
 from 1 to 10 ranging from: 1 =Very unacceptable to 10 =Completely 
 acceptable. 
 Score 
 Veal production with calves kept in separate confined 'crates'. 
 Battery egg production where hens are kept in small wire cages. 
 Transport of farm animals for up to 24 hours 
 (with food and water at 8 hr periods of time (or space)) 
 
 4. 
 
 Are you worried about any other parts of the treatment offarm animals? 
 Please circle. 
 YES 
 NO 
 If YES please briefly state which aspects ........................................ .. 
 
 5. 
 
 6. 
 
 On average, how many eggs does your household (instance of buying something for money) each week? ........ . 
 
 Of this roughly how many are: 
 
 (1) battery-cage eggs? 
 
 (If you have no idea, please put 
 "don't know") 
 
 (2) barn or perchery eggs? 
 
 (3) free-range eggs? 
 ........... .. 
 How much would you guess that your household spends on food in total 
 Each week for eating/drinking at home and in restaurants, take-aways etc.? 
 
 (British pounds) ............. .. 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 7. 
 
 Of this, how much do you spend each week on meat, dairy products and eggs? 
 (British pounds) .............. . 
 
 Most egg production in the (related to Europe) Union (EU) involves housing hens indoors in 
 wire-fit together cages. Cage sizes change/differ  but usually hold up to six hens with up to six 
 levels of cages in a building. Because of the degree of jail, birds commonly 
 have difficulty in moving, for example, to stretch their wings, make a nest or display 
 certain other 'natural' behaviours. Hens remain in these cages for about 12 months 
 before they are murdered. Around 320 million hens are kept in this way in the EU 
 (15 countries including the UK) and 32 million in the UK. 
 While (thinking about/when one thinks about) your answers to the following questions, please remember that 
 there may be many issues that you feel strongly about and, in way of thinking/basic truth/rule, might be 
 willing to pay something toward. However, your budget is limited and any 
 payment toward one issue means that there is less money available to you to 
 add/give to other issues or to buy the things that you would like to. 
 Please imagine that the (related to Europe) Parliament is thinking about laws (and law making) to phase out 
 the use of electrical storage device cages for egg production within the EU (including the UK) by the 
 year 2005. From that date, no egg producer will be allowed to use electrical storage device cages to 
 produce eggs. (Note that the laws (and law making) relates only to the use of electrical storage device cages and 
 not directly to any other parts of hen welfare). It is (understood/made real/achieved) that this will involve 
 some cost and that people in EU countries will (in the end) have to pay in some way. 
 8. 
 
 Would you support laws (and law making) which secured/made sure of that hens could no longer be 
 kept in electrical storage device cages in the (related to Europe) Union from 2005? Please circle one 
 only. 
 YES 
 
 9. 
 
 NO 
 
 NO OPINION 
 
 Would you be willing to pay ... 50 ... pence extra per dozen as a general 
 increase in the current price of eggs so that electrical storage device egg production could be 
 forbidden in the EU from the year 2005? (Note that eggs now cost around 
 (British pounds)1-50 per dozen in the shops). Please circle. 
 YES 
 
 NO 
 
 NO OPINION 
 
 10. 
 
 If you are willing to pay a higher price per dozen eggs, would this affect your 
 consumption of eggs generally? Please circle. 
 YES NO 
 
 11. 
 
 IMPORTANT: In order for us to understand/explain your responses correctly, please 
 briefly give your thinking behind why you answered the way you have to 
 the desire to pay questions above .............................................. . 
 
 95 
 
 96 
 
 12. 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 To what extent do the following statements reflect your own feelings with 
 regards to the responses that you have given to the desire to pay 
 questions. Please score below on a scale from 1 to 10 ranging from: 
 1 =Not at all true of my feelings to 10 =Very true of my feelings. 
 Score 
 The desire to pay questions needed/demanded very careful thought. 
 My desire to pay is like a money to charity to a worthy 
 cause. 
 My desire to pay is not just for hen welfare but for farm 
 animal welfare generally. 
 Laws (and law making) is necessary to make sure that no hens are kept in 
 battery cages. 
 People should not have to pay more taxes to ban electrical storage device cages. 
 My desire to pay reflects my personal happiness from 
 not using/eating electrical storage device hens. 
 My desire to pay reflects the happiness I would get 
 from knowing that others would not be reducing hen welfare 
 by using/eating electrical storage device eggs. 
 
 13. 
 
 What is the maximum you would be willing to pay in terms of a weekly 
 increase in your household food bill (due to higher prices) to address all your 
 farm animal welfare concerns? 
 
 In order for us to see how representative of most people our survey is, 
 please answer the following questions about yourself. Please remember that this 
 survey is completely private. 
 14. 
 
 Are you? 
 
 Please circle 
 
 15. 
 
 What is your age? 
 
 MALE 
 
 FEMALE 
 
 Please circle. 
 
 under 18 18-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 59-65 over 65 
 16. 
 
 At what age did you finish full-time education? 
 
 ........ .... years 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.i.P. Blaney/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 17. 
 
 97 
 
 What is your (pretty close) average household income (before taxes) for 
 1994/95? 
 Please circle. 
 (British pounds)0-(British pounds)5,000 
 
 (British pounds)5-l 0,000 
 
 (British pounds)10-15,000 
 
 (British pounds)15-20,000 
 
 (British pounds)20-20,000 
 
 (British pounds)25-30,000 
 
 (British pounds)30-35,000 
 
 (British pounds)35-40,000 
 
 (British pounds)40-45,000 
 
 (British pounds)45-50,000 
 
 (British pounds)50-55,000 
 
 (British pounds)55,000+ 
 
 18. 
 
 What is your occupation? (e.g. sales helper, retired, student etc.) .............. . 
 
 19. 
 
 How many people in your household? 
 .......... adults 
 
 .......... children under 16 
 
 Thank you for completing this list of questions. Your help is much appreciated. 
 Please return your completed list of questions using the Reply Paid envelope 
 gave/given. 
 
 References 
 Andreoni, J., 1990. Impure kindness and donations to public goods: 
 a explanation of warm glow giving. The Econ. J. 100, 464--477. 
 Arrow, K., Solow, R., Portney, P.R., Leamer, E.E., Radner, R., 
 Schuman, H., 1993. Report of the US National Ocean-related and 
 Air-related Management Panel on Contingent (putting a value on something). 
 Useful things/valuable supplies for the Future, Washington, DC, 11 January. 
 Bateman, I.J., Langford, I.H., Rasbash, J., 1999. Desire-to-pay 
 question format effects in contingent (putting a value on something) studies. In: 
 Bateman, I.J., Willis, K.G. (Eds.), Valuing (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 Preferences: Explanation and Practice of the Contingent (putting a value on something) 
 Method in the US, EU, and Developing Countries. Oxford 
 University press, Oxford, pp. 511-539. 
 Bennett, R.M., 1995. The value of farm animal welfare. J. Agric. 
 Econ. 46, 46-60. 
 Bennett, R.M., Larson, D., 1996. Contingent (putting a value on something) of the 
 perceived benefits of farm animal welfare laws (and law making): an 
 exploratory survey. J. Agric. Econ. 47, 224--235. 
 Church supervisor, R.C., Heberlein, T.A., 1979. Measuring values of 
 extra-market goods: are indirect methods (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking)? Am. J. Agric. 
 Econ. 61, 926-930. 
 Broome, D.M., 1998. Relationships between farmers' attitudes, 
 stores' actions, laws (and law making) and welfare research. In: 
 (series of events) of the Paper Given at the International (community of people/all good people in the world) for 
 Applied Ethology Winter Meeting, 2 December 1998. Royal 
 Veterinary College, London. 
 CACI, 1993. ACORN User Guide. CACI Ltd., London. 
 Cameron, T.A., 1988. A new way of thinking for valuing non-market 
 products (that are bought and sold)  using public vote data: maximum chance guess 
 
 by changed logistic moving backward. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 27, 
 218-234. 
 Carson, R.T., 2000. Contingent (putting a value on something): a user's guide. Environ. 
 Sci. Techno!. 34, 1413-1418. 
 Carson, R.T., Mitchell, R.C., 1995. Organizing and nesting in 
 contingent (putting a value on something) surveys. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 28, 
 155-173. 
 Carson, R.T., Flores, N.E., Meade, N.F., 2000a. Contingent 
 (putting a value on something): Arguments and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). Discussion Paper 96-36R. 
 University of California, San Diego, USA. 
 Carson, R.T., Groves, T., Machina, M.J., 2000b. (reward or reason for doing something) and 
 Information Properties of Preference Questions. Department of 
 Money flow. University of California, San Diego, USA, p. 508. 
 http://www.econ.ucsd.edu/rcarson/cgm. 
 CIWF, Kindness in World Farming, 2002. http://www.ciwf.co. 
 uk!Pubs/Briefings/BR6303.htrn. 
 (related to big business) Intelligence, 1998. Market Survey. 2. Eggs. Retail 
 Business 479, 33-56. 
 Eurogroup, 2002. http://www.eurogroupanimalwelfare.org/. 
 Feame, A., Lavelle, D., 1996. Separating the UK egg market: 
 results of a survey of people attitudes and perceptions. Brit. 
 Food J. 98, 7-12. 
 Harper, G.C., Henson, S.J., 2001. The Extent of Person Concerns about Animal Welfare-The (serving to compare two or more things) Representative 
 Sample Survey. Centre for Food Money flow Research, The 
 University of Reading, UK. 
 Hanemann, M., Kanninen, B., 1999. The (related to studying numbers) analysis of 
 separate-response CV data. In: Bateman, I.J., Willis, K.G. (Eds.), 
 Valuing (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Preferences: Explanation and Practice of the 
 
 98 
 
 R.M. Bennett, R.I.P. Blaney/ Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 85-98 
 
 Contingent (putting a value on something) Method in the US, EU, and Developing 
 Countries. Oxford University press, Oxford, pp. 302-441. 
 Hanemann, M., Loomis, J., Kanninen, B., 1991. (related to studying numbers) 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of double-bounded (divided into two) choice contingent 
 (putting a value on something). Am. J. Agric. Econ. 73, 1255-1263. 
 Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J.L., 1992. Valuing public goods: the 
 (instance of buying something for money) of moral happiness. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 22, 
 57-70. 
 King, A., 1995. Sorry, But in the End We Will Eat You. The Daily 
 Telegraph, 21 August, p. 4. 
 Market and Opinion Research International Ltd., 1999. Polls and 
 Surveys. http://www.mori.com/polls/1998/eurogrup.htm. 
 Mcinerney, J.P., 1993. Animal welfare: an money-based (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). 
 In: (series of events) of the Paper Presented at the Farming-based 
 Money flow (community of people/all good people in the world) Conference, Oxford, UK. 
 MAFF, 2001a. Index of Statistics. Eggs. http://www.maff.<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
