AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ElSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 (easing government rules) of farming-based input markets in Bangladesh: 
 process, hit/effect, and lessons 
 Raisuddin Ahmed 
 International Food Policy Research Institute, 1200 17th Street, N. W Washington, DC 20036-3006, USA 
 Accepted 29 March 1995 
 
 Abstract 
 The study takes a history-based way of seeing things to trace the path of (related to things slowly changing for the better over time) changes in farming-based input markets of 
 Bangladesh. It guesses the importance of the hit/effect of these changes on rice production, the most important crop 
 in Bangladesh farming. It is guessed that the production of rice could have been 20-32% lower than the level of 
 1992/1993, depending on the rice price that would have won under other choice pictures/situations. The 20% credit to 
 market reform relates to a real rice price level 19% higher than the actual 1992/1993 prices. The 32% credit to 
 reform relates to the actual 1992/1993 price levels. The lower (thing that's given/work that's done) of reform (20%) to increased production 
 hints a loss to people not here in the production benefit of reform, while the higher (thing that's given/work that's done) 
 (32%) of reform involves no loss to people. The important/final end/end result is that Bangladesh, without the market 
 changes described in the paper, would have gone back to the situation of regular food problem and high rice prices, 
 as was the case (in the past). 
 The analysis of the process of reform provides interesting lessons for developing countries. A gradual process 
 based on a well-designed organizing of different steps of market reform, especially in the case of (material that makes plants grow better), was a 
 important factor for success. Careful watching during the period of change is another important factor that has to be 
 (put into a hospital)/(made a behavior acceptable) in the system. Second generation problems of market changes, especially the coming into view of an 
 oligopolistic market structure, are possible and warrant a cautionary watch. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 After a long period of long-lasting foodgrain shortages, Bangladesh has (not very long ago) (accomplished or gained) a amazing success in newly appearing as a (only a little bit) independent producer of rice. It is argued in this paper 
 that the market (easing government rules) measures in farming made a significant (thing that's given/work that's done) to this 
 success in rice production. Bangladesh is a country with about 115 million people, 21 million 
 areas of land of (helped to grow) land, and 12 million farms 
 averaging about 1.8 areas of land of land per farm in 
 
 1990. Because of little scope for long/big farming, most of the increased production has had to 
 come from application of modern farming-based 
 inputs and intensive (producing crops/helping something grow). The first serious 
 public effort for introduction of modern inputs in 
 farming began with the advice of 
 the Farming-based Commission of 1960 (Ahmed, 
 1978). A public parastatal, the East Pakistan 
 Farming-based Development Corporation (later 
 known as the Bangladesh Farming-based Development Corporation (BADC)), was established in 
 1963, following a recommendation from the Com- 
 
 0169-5150/95/$09.50 © 1995 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
 SSDI 0169-5150(95)01141-2 
 
 116 
 
 R. Ahmed/ Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 mission. This parastatal was given the job  of, and 
 useful things/valuable supplies for, purchase and distribution of 
 farming-based inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better)s, seeds, farming-based equipment and bug-killers. 
 The BADC soon developed an elaborate organization and physical abilities (to hold or do something) all over the country in order to produce the needed or valuable things and services to 
 farmers. It had a virtual (one company that controls too much) over the four 
 farming-based input markets in Bangladesh, even 
 though it had to obey rules  to the pricing and 
 related policies that the government used to plan from time to time. The purpose of this 
 paper is to examine the process and measure the 
 hit/effect of the recent (easing government rules) of the farming-based input markets that were once vested in a 
 powerful public parastatal. It is hoped that in 
 doing so it will be possible to get a few lessons 
 clearly connected with or related to other developing countries. 
 
 2. (easing government rules) of input markets 
 
 The step-by-step (easing government rules) of markets for 
 modern inputs in farming was carried out 
 partly under pressure from foreign (people who give money or other things) and 
 partly on the (understanding/achieving a goal) that different direct helping actions in these markets were impossible to do/impossible to keep going and 
 unproductive in a longer-term big picture. 
 2.1. Pre-(easing government rules) structure of markets 
 2.1.1. (material that makes plants grow better) market 
 The use of chemical (material that makes plants grow better)s was mostly 
 limited to tea huge houses and to the extent of about 
 11400 nutrient tons in 1959-1960. A significant 
 spread of (material that makes plants grow better)s to poor people began around the 
 time that BADC was established. The sale of 
 (material that makes plants grow better) by BADC in 1977/1978 was 354000 
 nutrient tons (equal to 725 000 material tons), 
 consisting of 65% N, 25% P2 0 5 , and 8% K 2 0 
 (see Add on, Table A1). This is the picture of 
 progress in the consumption of (material that makes plants grow better) before 
 the process of (easing government rules) was set in movement. 
 BADC was the only organization getting 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s from domestic factories and foreign 
 sources. These (material that makes plants grow better)s were first shipped to 
 transit warehouses, (middle-position) warehouses at 
 (related to a plan to reach a goal) points, and Thana Sales Centers (TSCs); 
 
 a thana is an (related to managing and running a company or organization) unit consisting of 
 about 80-90 villages. During 1963-1978, there 
 were 67 (middle-position) warehouses and 423 TSCs. 
 TSCs functioned as both wholesale and retail 
 points in the sense that these sources used to sell 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s to private dealers for retailing to farmers as well as directly to farmers. The other 
 category of wholesalers was the Thana Central 
 Cooperative Associations (TCCAs) that sold (material that makes plants grow better)s to private dealers and farming-based cooperatives at the village level for retail sales to farmers. The share of cooperatives in the total sale 
 was small, only about 12-17%. Private dealers 
 were hired for sales to farmers through a 
 licensing procedure and only about three or four 
 dealers used to serve seven to ten villages. The 
 dealers were not supposed to sell outside a defined area. Dealers would get (material that makes plants grow better)s from 
 specified TSCs and sell to farmers at prices fixed 
 by the government. The fixed price included a 
 commission based on the distance from the TSC 
 to the operation center. Dealers were needed/demanded to 
 maintain registers, which were subject to occasional (careful examination of something) by BADC officers. Leaving out/keeping out 
 the commission prices of (material that makes plants grow better)s were supposed to be uniform throughout the country. The 
 system suffered from many problems arising 
 from too much/too many slow-working controls. 
 2.1.2. Crop-watering/rinsing with water equipment 
 BADC started the low-lift pump crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 (lifting water from surface sources to (next to) 
 fields) using diesel engines and distribution pipes, 
 mainly for reclamation of Haor areas of Sylhet 
 and Mymensingh districts (Haor is a lake-like 
 depression in low-lying (like wet land) stretches of land). 
 Most of these engines were of 2 cusec ability (to hold or do something). 
 BADC used to own, maintain, and operate these 
 pumping sets to supply water to groups of farms 
 on the basis of a flat charge per area of land. At the 
 beginning, the charges covered only about 60% of 
 the operating cost. This experiment in Haor areas 
 led to a fast (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the big plan/layout/dishonest plan throughout the country along riverbanks, large ponds, 
 and lakes. Operation of a large fleet of pumping 
 sets became an awkward job  and expensive too. 
 Therefore, by the end of the 1960s, some changes 
 were introduced. Farmers were needed/demanded to orga- 
 
 R. Ahmed/ Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 nize into crop-watering/rinsing with water groups, supply all diesel fuel 
 costs, and pay a share of the maintenance cost at 
 flat rates per area of land  of watered land. Farm groups 
 were responsible for water management, diesel 
 fuel, and collection of charges. By the mid-1970s 
 a rental system was introduced, within which/by which BADC's 
 responsibility was only to supply an operationally 
 good pumping set on a rental basis and farm 
 groups had to bear all costs, including wages of 
 pump operators. 
 Tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water is the other mode of 
 small-scale crop-watering/rinsing with water development in Bangladesh. 
 This is good for areas where surface water is 
 not available and underground water is the next 
 best source of water supply. The first program on 
 tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water was started by the Bangladesh Water Development Board in the early 1960s 
 with 90 tube-wells of 2-3 cusec ability (to hold or do something) engines 
 in northern Bangladesh. For many years, the project could not successfully attract farmers, even 
 with 100% helping payment. BADC began a deep tube-well 
 program (2 cusec ability (to hold or do something)) around the time when 
 its low-lift pump program reached saturation. In 
 the meantime, Camilla College/school for (away from cities) Development was successfully experimenting with 
 shallow tube-wells of 0.25-1 cusec ability (to hold or do something) 
 through cooperative (communities of people). These shallow 
 tube-wells were found to be much cheaper than 
 BADC tube-wells. The Camilla College/school also 
 put into use a program of training for development of (people and businesses that are not part of the government) tube-well installation ability (to hold or do something) in the country. BADC started a modest 
 tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water program based on 2 cusec 
 wells as early as 1970. At first, BADC operated 
 these tube-wells on the same ways of thinking/basic truths/rules for low-lift 
 pumps. Around 1978 BADC was asked to install 
 tube-wells for farmers on payment of the paid-for cost (20-30% helping payment). Except for these 
 publicly started programs of tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water, 
 there was hardly any private effort in the 
 development of modern crop-watering/rinsing with water until the mid1970s. 
 Crop-watering/rinsing with water equipment (engines, pumps, etc.) had 
 all along a small private market for use in nonagricultural purposes. BADC's equipment was 
 mostly imported under money from other countries. Domestic ability (to hold or do something) for production of diesel engines and pumps 
 was small. Therefore, (easing government rules) of import 
 
 117 
 
 trade became the important thing of market (easing government rules) in farming-based equipment. Before the 
 mid-1980s, the following types of import restrictions were in effect. 
 (a) Private import of diesel engines for crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 was not allowed except for makes and models 
 approved by a (making things all follow the same rules or be copies of the same models) Committee in 
 the Ministry of Farming (MOA) and with 
 special permission from MOA. 
 (b) Private import of pumps for crop-watering/rinsing with water was not 
 allowed except with MOA permission, with 
 foreign exchange through a donor-paid-for 
 project, and with no objection from the Ministry of Businesses. 
 2.1.3. (producing crops/helping something grow) equipment 
 As with other modern inputs in farming, 
 BADC started a mechanized (producing crops/helping something grow) big plan/layout/dishonest plan 
 based on tractors from the beginning of BADC. 
 However, experiments with tractors became unsuccessful rather quickly. After that, the PakJapan (later known as Bangladesh-Japan) Cooperative Big plan/layout/dishonest plan on Farming-based Machineries successfully introduced power tillers for plowing of 
 land by farmers. However, no special public 
 (service business/government unit/power/functioning) was created, as had been done for other 
 inputs, for marketing and distribution of power 
 tillers. Private importers and distributors have 
 been (doing/completing) this function, since some demand for power tillers has been felt in the market. Medium-to-large farms purchase power tillers 
 for renting to neighbors and for meeting their 
 own draft needed things. This way the domestic market was free but the import market was held back. Before the mid-1980s, private import of 
 power tillers was not allowed except for makes 
 and models approved by a (making things all follow the same rules or be copies of the same models) (group that decides or promotes something) in the MOA (Gisselquist, 1992). 
 2.1.4. Bug-killers 
 BADC was given the job  of purchase of 
 plant protection materials, and the Farming-based 
 Extension Department was supposed to conduct 
 operations for crop protection. Because of many difficulties in the storage and handling 
 of poisonous materials and in dispensing these 
 materials to farmers, and because of the recognition that a slow-working (service business/government unit/power/functioning) can hardly take 
 
 118 
 
 R. Ahmed/Agricultural Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 good measures against pests, the ground measures of crop protection, including purchase 
 and distribution of bug-killers were (turned over from the government to private companies) at 
 the end of the 1960s. Private importers began 
 importing and distributing bug-killers through private dealers and general stores of person 
 products (that are bought and sold). However, import of bug-killers by private 
 dealers was allowed only for approved brands 
 and approved dealers with permission from MOA. 
 This approval process might have suggested hidden 
 costs for traders, and import only by brand names 
 was possibly oligopolistic. A 1991 study by 
 Canada's Farming-based Part/area Team in Bangladesh 
 found bug-killer prices as much as double the 
 
 prices in Pakistan (even though there is the existence of) the (not being there; not being present) of taxes/import taxes 
 (Canadian (service business/government unit/power/functioning) for International Development, 1991). 
 2.1.5. Seeds 
 The usual seed markets in Bangladesh 
 involve farmers producing seed for their own use 
 and for sale to markets. Those who need seeds 
 buy from the market. It is not unusual/amazing for 
 some farmers to (focus on doing one thing very well) in the production of 
 seeds. These traditional markets have been the 
 channel of distribution not only among farmers 
 within the country but also between (next to) 
 farmers of Bangladesh and India. The other 
 
 Table 1 
 Step-by-step (easing government rules) of farming-based input markets, Bangladesh 
 Actions 
 (A) (material that makes plants grow better) market 
 1. BADC withdrew from retail and 
 wholesale markets at Thana levels, the 
 first (or most important) distribution points 
 2. Licensing needed thing was stopped 
 and restriction on movement removed 
 (except 5 mile border zones with India) 
 3. (removal of controlling laws) of (material that makes plants grow better) price 
 4. Allowing private traders direct 
 (instance of buying something for money) from factory gates and port points 
 5. Free import from world market 
 (B) Crop-watering/rinsing with water devices 
 1. BADC sold all its low-lift pumps to 
 private parties helped by special credit 
 arrangement for (instances of buying things for money) 
 2. BADC sold all its tube-wells for 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water to farmers and cooperatives; 
 sale supported by special credit 
 arrangement for purchasers 
 3. Restriction on import of engines and 
 pumps withdrawn 
 4. (making things all follow the same rules or be copies of the same models) restrictions limiting 
 makes and models removed 
 (C) Power tillers, bug-killers, and seeds 
 1. Restriction on power tiller import 
 and (making things all follow the same rules or be copies of the same models) needed thing removed 
 2. Restriction on import by brand 
 names liberalized for bug-killers 
 3. Except rice and wheat, all seed 
 import liberalized 
 
 Time span 
 
 Statements 
 
 1978-1983 
 
 This was done at Chittagong Division first. 
 Energetic response from trad&#126;rs 
 
 1982-1983 
 
 1982-1984 
 1989 
 
 Real competition started 
 Energetic response from traders 
 
 1992 
 
 Good response, but fear of oligopoly (continues to exist/continues to do hard or annoying things) 
 
 1980-1982 
 
 Good response from farmers 
 
 1983-1985 
 
 Good response from farmers 
 
 1988 
 
 Extreme fall in prices of engines 
 
 1988 
 
 Extreme fall in prices of engines 
 
 1989 
 
 Modest response 
 
 ±1989 
 
 Modest response 
 
 1990 
 
 Modest response 
 
 Source: Figured out/calculated from information in Mudahar (1984), Sidhu (1992), Gisselquist (1992), Asian Development Bank, (1990), 
 Bangladesh Establishment Division (1992), and personal contact of the author, July 1993. 
 
 R. Ahmed 1Agricultural Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 channel that provides improved varieties developed in research stations is the public system. 
 BADC has been operating about 19 seed multiplication farms for production and distribution of 
 such improved seeds of different crops. The government has developed a seed certification (machine/method/way) for making sure of quality. But complaints that 
 publicly produced seeds are often of poor 
 quality and not available in time are common. 
 BADC has imported seeds in the past in order 
 to introduce high cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties (HYVs) of 
 crops. Examples of imports of Dutch potatoes 
 and Mexican wheat in order to increase production of these two crops are well-known. It is 
 believed that the (easing government rules) of seed markets 
 aimed at (helping increase/showing in a good way) free and competitive international trade in seed would be a strong  (machine/method/way) 
 of (related to computers and science) progress in the farming of 
 Bangladesh. 
 
 2.2. Changes in input markets 
 The history of changes in the farming-based 
 input markets is summarized in Table 1. (easing government rules) of the (material that makes plants grow better) and the crop-watering/rinsing with water equipment markets was the most in control/most common feature of the 
 reform that produced a big hit/effect on 
 production. In the case of (material that makes plants grow better), the response 
 of private trade was very energetic. It was guessed that 8000 wholesalers and 50 000 stores 
 operated competitively in the (material that makes plants grow better) market by 
 1988 (Infanger et al., 1988). The share of private 
 trade went up quite fast; the share was 75% in 
 1989 and about 100% in 1992. Anyway, some 
 doubts still continue that the trade at the import 
 level may (in the end) turn into an oligopolistic 
 structure because of (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) in importation and differential access of traders to capital 
 markets. Throughout the whole process of reform, a carefully designed (machine/method/way) of watching was working to identify newly appearing problems 
 and solve them in time. 
 Maybe the most significant effect of changes 
 was (understood/made real/achieved) in the case of crop-watering/rinsing with water equipment. 
 By early 1989, the cost of a shallow tube-well 
 complete with sinking, pipe, pump, and engine, to 
 irrigate 4-5 ha of land, had fallen to below the 
 
 119 
 
 20 000 ($600) which is about 60% of the paid-for price for such equipment through BADC. 
 As a result, during the period 1988-1990, watered area expanded at a rate roughly twice as 
 quickly as had been (accomplished or gained) in 1978-1986. The 
 practice of using power tillers for (producing crops/helping something grow) is 
 still very thin in Bangladesh. The price of a power 
 tiller had decreased to $1500 in 1989 from $2500 
 only a few months before the (easing government rules) of 
 import ( Gisselquist, 1992). The use of power tillers 
 is spreading faster than before due to the removal of import restrictions; (easing government rules) of 
 markets for seeds and bug-killers has only a modest hint/result/effect for hit/effect in the short run. But in 
 the long run their hit/effect, especially that of 
 seed, is likely to be perceptably large. 
 
 3. Hit/effect of (easing government rules) 
 
 The hit/effect of (easing government rules) can be assumed to 
 consist of two elements: (a) direct hit/effect on 
 farming-based production due to changes in the 
 level of input use; (b) indirect hit/effect on the 
 production of both farming-based and nonagricultural products arising from (giving out things in a different way) of money-related savings (accomplished or gained) through reduction or 
 elimination of input payments. These savings are 
 likely to hit/affect the price of foreign exchange, 
 which in turn may influence production. It is the 
 direct hit/effect that is traced and measured in this 
 paper. Measurement of the indirect hit/effect warrants an (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide modeling that is not attempted here. Anyway, some test of 
 the money-related hit/effect or the importance of a helping payment 
 that was eliminated from the budget is given 
 here. 
 Described/explained calculations point to/show that the money-related helping payment on (material that makes plants grow better)s was of the order of 
 TK 1286 million ($83 million) in 1979/1980, TK 
 1426 million ($57 million) in 1983/1984, TK 1273 
 million ($40 million) in 1988/1989, and only about 
 TK 25 million ($0.6 million) in 1992/1993 
 (Ahmed, 1987; Renfroe, 1991; and personal contacts in the Bangladesh Ministry of Farming, 
 July 1993). The small helping payment in 1993 is meant for 
 correction of minor and trace-element shortages in certain soils. The 1983/1984 figure was 
 
 120 
 
 R. Ahmed j Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 equal to about 14% of the total public development expense on farming and (away from cities) development, and the 1979/1980 figure was equal to 28% of such expense (International 
 Food Policy Research Institute, 1985). Money-related 
 savings arising from (easing government rules) of the (material that makes plants grow better) 
 market are quite significant. A similar guess of the helping payment for crop-watering/rinsing with water is not available. 
 However, the money-related helping payment on the low-lift 
 and tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water program of BADC was 
 guessed to be TK 1035 million ($66.7 million) in 
 1979/1980 and TK 830 million ($33 million) in 
 1983/1984 (Rashid, 1986). By 1986, almost the 
 whole helping payment on low-lift and tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 of BADC had been eliminated. 
 
 3.1. Model for measuring direct hit/effect on rice 
 production 
 Although the hit/effect of policy reform on group production of rice is the goal, the 
 approach to measurement must come from the 
 farm level behavior. Think about/believe a typical farm with 
 a production function 
 
 (1) 
 where V is output, X represents changeable inputs, 
 and Z represents fixed inputs and other shifter 
 (numbers that change/things that change) of the function. The farm is looking (for) 
 (biggest increase/best possible extent) of profit 
 m 
 
 IT=PF(Xl""Xm; zl'"Zn)- LqjXj 
 
 (2) 
 
 j 
 
 where P is the unit price of output, qj is the unit 
 price of the jth changeable input. The fixed costs are 
 conveniently ignored. The (money made/good thing received) making the most of level 
 of input use is given by 
 
 (3) 
 
 By substitution of Eq. (4) into Eq. (2), the restricted profit function becomes 
 
 (5) 
 
 IT=G(P, q 1 ... qm; z 1 ... zn) 
 
 This general function gives (made as big as possible) values for 
 the best sets of (q 1 .-. qm) so that 
 
 (6) 
 
 IT=G*(P,q 1 ... qm;z 1 .... zn) 
 
 It is possible to get output supply and input 
 
 demand functions from Eq. (6) via Shepard's 
 (1970) lemma. 
 The output supply function 
 
 V*=IT(P,q,z) 
 
 (7) 
 
 and input demand function: 
 
 (8) 
 
 X/= Fj(P, q, z) 
 
 The function is negative in input prices. 
 Note that p and q can be expressed in relative 
 terms collapsing the two vectors into one of relative prices of output and input. 
 The values of v * and x/ relate to a typical 
 farm. If there are n number of such farms (measured in (wasting very little while working or producing something) units) in an (process of people making, selling, and buying things), the 
 group values can be gotten by multiplication of v * and x / by n 
 group V:, * = nv * 
 
 (9) 
 
 group Xa = nXj 
 
 (10) 
 
 At the household level, it has been assumed 
 that farms are price takers. In group levels, 
 the prices of outputs and inputs may have to be 
 appropriately treated in the big picture  of the (problem that is important now). 
 Grounded on the microeconomics of production as organized and listed above, an scientific group 
 model is developed that (at the same time) decides/figures out input use and crop production. The model 
 is specified as follows 
 
 FCt = f(PFRt!PR&#126;' AG&#126;' NAR&#126;' CDSt/P&#126;' D) 
 (11) 
 (PFRt!PRt) 
 = 
 
 f(PFDJPR&#126;' 
 
 HYV, 
 
 PFMt!PR&#126;' 
 
 D) 
 
 (12) 
 
 Eq. (3) can be solved for best amounts of 
 changeable inputs represented as x/ as a function of 
 prices and Z 
 
 AGt = f(DPt!PR&#126;' EGt!P&#126;' CDLt!P() D) 
 
 (13) 
 
 DARt= fAG{() PRt!PO&#126;' D} 
 
 (14) 
 
 X/ 
 
 QRt = f(FC&#126;' AG() DAR&#126;' D) 
 
 (15) 
 
 =Fj(p, q, z) 
 
 (4) 
 
 R. Ahmed 1Agricultural Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 where FC 1 is consumption of (material that makes plants grow better)s (urea, 
 triple superphosphate, and murate of potash) in 
 year t (measured in thousands of tons); PFR 0 
 PFD 0 and PFMr are, (match up each pair of items in order), retail, domestic factory gate, and border prices of (material that makes plants grow better) in 
 year t (measured in TK ton -I; prices are weighted 
 average of three types of (material that makes plants grow better)s); PR 1 is the 
 wholesale price of rice in year t (TK ton -I); AG 1 
 is the total watered area in year t (thousands of 
 areas of land); NARr is the nonirrigated crop area in 
 year t (areas of land in thousands); CDS 1 is the shortterm crop loan advanced to farmers from banking 
 institutions and public (services businesses/government units) in year t (10 
 million TK); P is the general price index; PD 1 is 
 the price of diesel fuel in year t (TK ton- 1 ); D is 
 the dummy (number or thing that changes) that takes a value of 0 for 
 years from 1975 to 1984 and 1 for years from 
 1985 to 1993; EGr is the public expense on 
 water control and crop-watering/rinsing with water development in year 
 t (10 million TK); CDLr is the long-term loan to 
 farmers from banks and public (services businesses/government units) in year t 
 (10 million TK); DARt is the dryland rice in year 
 t (areas of land in thousands); HYV is the area under 
 high-cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties of rice (in thousand areas of land); 
 P0 1 is the price of mustard oil seeds (TK ton -I) 
 as substitute for crop prices other than rice. 
 Rice production is selected as the substitute for 
 total crop production. Rice adds/gives about 73% 
 of GDP in the crop part/area; 85% of (material that makes plants grow better)s and 
 95% of watered areas in Bangladesh are used for 
 rice (Chowdhury, 1993). 
 The following guesses are carefully thought about/believed very 
 reasonable in the light of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from previous 
 studies (Ahmed, 1978; Stone, 1987; Horseain, 
 1988): 
 (a) change in (material that makes plants grow better) consumption 
 - due to change in real price of (material that makes plants grow better): negative 
 - due to change in watered area: positive 
 - due to change in nonirrigated area: 
 zero or positive 
 - due to change in volume of crop loan: 
 positive 
 (b) change in watered area 
 - due to change in real price of diesel 
 fuel which is critical for tube-wells and 
 low-lift pumps: negative 
 
 121 
 
 - public expense on water control 
 and crop-watering/rinsing with water: positive or zero 
 - long-term credit to agriculture: positive 
 (c) change in retail price of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 - due to change in domestic factory-gate 
 price: positive 
 - due to change in border price (world 
 price and exchange rate): positive 
 - due to change in HYV: positive 
 (d) change in dryland rice area 
 - due to crop-watering/rinsing with water (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.): negative 
 or zero 
 - due to increase m relative price of 
 rice, positive 
 (e) change in rice production 
 - due to change in (material that makes plants grow better) use: positive 
 - due to change in watered area: positive 
 - due to change in dryland rice area: 
 positive 
 Most of the guesses may appear to be quite 
 obvious and (reasonable/showing good judgment) except the effects of (a) 
 nonirrigated area on (material that makes plants grow better), (b) public expense for water control and crop-watering/rinsing with water on watered 
 area, and (c) long-term credit to agriculture on 
 watered area. In Bangladesh, (material that makes plants grow better) use in 
 nonirrigated crops is generally very (full of spots/sometimes good and sometimes not good) due to 
 different risks connected with such land and (not well developed) technology for nonirrigated crops. 
 In the case of public expense for water control and crop-watering/rinsing with water, the effect is guessed to 
 be either zero or positive mainly for three reasons. First, most of this expense is meant 
 for flood control that does not influence crop-watering/rinsing with water. Second, the part of this expense that 
 goes for crop-watering/rinsing with water is meant for large (greater than 
 2 cusec ability (to hold or do something)) tube-wells and surface crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 structures. Both these types are known to be 
 very ineffective in getting farmers' participation. Third, public expense on crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 and actual watered areas maybe carries/has a  fell behind 
 relationship that could not be realistically specified with the information available. Long-term 
 credit to agriculture in Bangladesh is mostly 
 meant for modern farm equipment. Tube-well 
 and low-lift pump equipment for crop-watering/rinsing with water and 
 
 122 
 
 R. Ahmed/ Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 power tillers for (producing crops/helping something grow) make up/be equal to the main 
 opportunities for such investments in the country's 
 farming. 
 The most important and (connected/related) guess in 
 the big picture  of the focus of this analysis is the 
 effect of the dummy (number or thing that changes), D. The dummy is 
 designed to take by force/take control of the complex effects of different changes caused by the (easing government rules) measures on the levels of use of inputs and production. There is no good  thought (made beforehand) that the 
 effect of the dummy would be positive or negative, except that the coefficient of the dummy in 
 Eq. (15) is expected to be not very different from zero. This is so because the hit/effect on 
 production happens through the hit/effect on the 
 levels of use of inputs, especially in the case of 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s, and because the crop-watering/rinsing with water input is 
 measured in terms of watered area that already 
 is including any effect of change in crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 ways of doing things. The productivities of these inputs are 
 not expected to be influenced by the (easing government rules) measures. Shifts in working well are more a 
 function of (related to computers and science) change that do not relate directly to the (easing government rules) measures, at 
 least within the big picture  of time to which this 
 analysis is limited. However, a brief reflection on 
 these complex changes that are likely to be caused by policy (easing government rules) measures and expected to be (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by the dummy is in order. 
 In the case of (material that makes plants grow better)s, the complex changes 
 caused by (easing government rules) measures that are not 
 clearly included as explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) concern real costs of (material that makes plants grow better)s to producers and 
 availability of the input at the right time and 
 place because of a greatly improved competitive 
 market after (turning things over from the government to private companies), (removal of controlling laws) of market, and decontrol of prices. The price of (material that makes plants grow better) that is included as an explanatory (number or thing that changes) 
 does not include different discounts that the dealers are known to have been providing to purchasers of (material that makes plants grow better)s in order to collect  quick (money made/good things received) 
 by increasing business turnovers. (in almost the same way), (material that makes plants grow better) dealers are known to have chose to/chosen to sales 
 on informal credit to their subordinate stores 
 and farmers (World Bank, 1992; Chowdhury, 
 1993). More than that, increasing the access of (material that makes plants grow better) dealers to factory-gate deliveries, instead of 
 (before that/before now) practiced controlled delivery from 
 
 BADC stores, must have improved the speed and 
 volume of overall supply in the market. In the 
 case of crop-watering/rinsing with water, it was talked about/said in Section 2 
 that the price and supply of low-lift pump and 
 tube-well engines were suddenly changed (price 
 decreased and supply increased) by market (easing government rules), including withdrawal of import restrictions. These price and supply data are not in a planned way recorded anywhere for their treatment as explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) in the model; hence 
 the dummy (number or thing that changes) is designed to pick up the 
 effects. 
 Besides the previous guess, three other 
 (things to carefully think about) holding upon the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of 
 the model need a brief explanation. The first 
 (serious thought/something to think about/respect) concerns the selection of 1984/1985 
 as the splitting point between the after- and preliberalization periods. Although the process of 
 (easing government rules) had gone ahead in a gradual fashion, 
 certain major and most (connected/related) ones happened 
 around 1984. The (removal of controlling laws) and (turning things over from the government to private companies) 
 of the (material that makes plants grow better) market, especially the decontrol 
 of prices, were effectively completed by 1984. The 
 access of dealers to factory gate supply was started around that time. (in almost the same way), the (removal of controlling laws) 
 and (turning things over from the government to private companies) of low-lift and tube-well crop-watering/rinsing with water formally took effect in the years from 1981 
 through 1986, although the trade restriction on 
 import of crop-watering/rinsing with water equipment took effect a few 
 years later. The second (serious thought/something to think about/respect) concerns 
 the fact that HYVs of rice do not appear in any 
 equation. Analysis of HYV area and crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 pointed to/showed that the relationship between the 
 changes in HYV area and changes in watered 
 area was very high (0.91). For this high degree of 
 multicollinearity between the two (numbers that change/things that change), the 
 effect of crop-watering/rinsing with water has to be viewed as (including everything) 
 of the effect of HYVs. Although (material that makes plants grow better) and 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water are also positively related, this relationship is not as strong as between crop-watering/rinsing with water and 
 HYVs. The third (serious thought/something to think about/respect) (related to/looking at/thinking about) the 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) is that the changeable NAG and a few 
 others have not been endogenized in the model. 
 The type of information (e.g. relative a money-making state 
 in watered and nonirrigated crops in a time-series 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built)) were not available to endogenize 
 NAG. More than that, given the known high profitabil.: 
 ity of watered rice crops, NAG remains mostly 
 
 R. Ahmed/ Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 a function of weather conditions (rainfall, 
 drought, etc.). CDS, PD, and COL were not 
 endogenized partly because they are hardly influenced directly by the input market (easing government rules), 
 and partly because such an extension of the model 
 would (in the end) break down into a general balance (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) that is beyond the extent of/the range of the 
 study. 
 The last (serious thought/something to think about/respect) relates to the labor 
 market. No (numbers that change/things that change) on supply and demand for 
 labor are included in the model. (away from cities) labor 
 markets are usually not as twisted/partially untrue/lied about as city-based 
 labor markets because the distortive labor laws 
 are broken in areas away from cities. Therefore, it is the 
 effect of changes in (material that makes plants grow better) and farming-based 
 equipment on labor use in farming-based 
 production that remains to be a valid concern. 
 More than that, once-a-year data on labor services (as against stock of labor) used in production are 
 not available to incorporate such (numbers that change/things that change) as 
 explanatory factors in the equations. In a generally labor extra (process of people making, selling, and buying things), such as Bangladesh, 
 and with a (compared to other things) (clear and appearing as it should/without any changes from the truth)  (away from cities) labor market, the (when something is kept out or not included) of labor from the model is not 
 likely to influence the measurement of the (thing that's given/work that's done) of input market reform to production. In 
 terms of labor's (thing that's given/work that's done) to production in Eq. 
 (15), the hint/result/effect is that such a (thing that's given/work that's done) is 
 mixed with the (thing that's given/work that's done) of land and other 
 inputs. 
 With this brief discussion on guesses and 
 model (detailed description of exactly what is required), results of guess are now 
 presented. 
 
 4. Guess and results 
 
 The system of Eqs. (11)-(15) is guessed using 
 Zellner's (appearing to be) Unrelated Moving backward (SUR) 
 model. This model is (producing a lot with very little waste) as it wasations where 
 the equations are closely connected with the 
 possibility of the error term of one equation 
 being related to the error term of another. 
 Before using the SUR model, the equations were 
 guessed using the simple OLS model. The (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R 2 values were generally quite high. 
 The results prove that most of the guesses 
 concerning input use are true. The effects of the 
 
 123 
 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) designed to take (prisoner) by force the influence of (easing government rules) on (material that makes plants grow better) consumption 
 and watered area (show or prove) that these measures have had a positive and big hit/effect. 
 This good effect on crop-watering/rinsing with water and (material that makes plants grow better) in 
 turn resulted in a good effect on rice production. These findings go against  the arguments by 
 vested-interest groups that (easing government rules) of farming-based input markets have been time-wasting in Bangladesh. 
 (material that makes plants grow better) consumption increased at a once-a-year 
 rate of 9.0% in the preliberalization period 
 (1975-1984) compared with the growth rate of 
 10.04% year- 1 during the postliberalization period. However, the growth in the former period 
 happened from a low base of only 450 thousand 
 tons (see Add on, Table A2). The consumption 
 function of (material that makes plants grow better) shows that (material that makes plants grow better) price 
 relative to rice price, watered area, (for only a short time) 
 crop loans, and the complex sets of forces represented by the dummy are the significant explanatory factors for use of (material that makes plants grow better). Of these factors, 
 the real price of (material that makes plants grow better) at the retail level increased every year at about 4% in the first period 
 but decreased every year at about 3% in the second 
 period. This is mostly because of a fast increase in (in name only/very small amount) (material that makes plants grow better) prices during the later 
 part of the first period. Even though the government tried to control (material that makes plants grow better) prices during 
 the preliberalization period, quickly growing factory-gate prices helped/encouraged by increased production 
 costs, and rising world prices added/gave to these 
 increases in (material that makes plants grow better) prices during the preliberalization period. Once the rise in (material that makes plants grow better) prices 
 reached a peak by 1984, further growt.h was 
 slowed by slow growth in factory-gate as well as 
 world prices in the second period (see Add on, 
 Table A2). A slow growth in rice prices in the 
 second period was (definitely/as one would expect) not low enough to 
 match the very slow rate of increase in the (in name only/very small amount) price of (material that makes plants grow better), this way resulting in a decline 
 in the rate of change in the real price of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 and a positive price effect on (material that makes plants grow better) consumption in this period. 
 (material that makes plants grow better) prices at the retail level are found to 
 be mostly dependent on factory-gate prices 
 and world prices as guessed, the effect of 
 the former being about four times the effect of 
 
 124 
 
 R. Ahmed/ Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 the last thing just mentioned. However, the difference between retail 
 and factory-gate prices peaked just around the 
 time of (easing government rules) but (in a big way) narrowed 
 over the last few years after the (easing government rules) measures 
 had some time to increase competition and so 
 reduce the marketing margin of traders. 
 The effect of forces hidden (under) the dummy 
 (number or thing that changes) has a significantly good effect on the 
 consumption of (material that makes plants grow better)s. The value of the 
 dummy is equal to about 55% of the average 
 consumption of (material that makes plants grow better) in 1984 and 1985. The 
 other two significant factors, (for only a short time) credit 
 (CDS) and watered area (AG), had opposite (or fighting against) 
 (popular things/general ways things are going) between the two periods. Watered area 
 increased at a once-a-year rate of 5.4% in the first 
 period and 20.49% in the second period. But 
 (for only a short time) credit increased at a once-a-year rate of 
 28.83% in the first period and (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) at a rate 
 of 7% in the second period. 
 The higher rate of increase in watered area in 
 the second period is mostly attribut.ed to (easing government rules) policies hidden (under) the dummy (number or thing that changes) as will be seen from the results presented in 
 Table 2. Besides the dummy (number or thing that changes), the other 
 two significant factors are diesel price (PD) and 
 long-term credit to agriculture (CDL). The negative relation between diesel price and watered 
 area, along with a faster increase in 
 diesel price in the first period compared with a 
 slower increase in the second period, hints a 
 good effect of diesel price on watered area in 
 the second period compared with the first. But 
 long-term credit carries/has a  positive relation to watered area. The faster increase in long-term credit 
 in the first period compared with the rate in the 
 second period hints that this factor produced a 
 net depressing effect on the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of watered area in the second period compared to the 
 first. The effect of the forces hidden (under) the 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) is reflected in the coefficient of 
 the dummy. This value is about 130% of the 
 average watered area in 1984 and 1985 and about 
 33% of the watered area in 1992. 
 The (related to numbers) unimportant coefficient of the 
 dummy (number or thing that changes) in Eq. (15) points to/shows, as guessed, that the effect of input market (easing government rules) on the production of rice was (understood/made real/achieved) mostly through the changes in the levels of input 
 
 Table 2 
 SUR guesses of (material that makes plants grow better) consumption, (material that makes plants grow better) price, watered area, and rice production 
 Functions 
 
 iF 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-statistics 
 
 875.62 
 -644.31 
 0.20 
 0.04 
 
 3.98 0.94 
 -2.13 
 8.72 
 1.03 
 
 (1) (material that makes plants grow better) consumption (PC) 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 (material that makes plants grow better) price (PFR/ PR) 
 Watered area (AG) 
 Nonirrigated area (NAG) 
 Short-term credit (CDS/ P) 
 (crop loan) 
 Dummy (D) 
 
 9.82 
 626.62 
 
 (2) (material that makes plants grow better) price (PFR/ PR) 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 Factory-gate price (PFD I PR) 
 Border price (PFM/ PR) 
 HYVarea 
 Dummy(D) 
 
 1.90 
 4.62 
 
 0.069 0.837 0.59 
 0.807 2.592 
 0.227 1.569 
 0.034 1.035 
 -0.031 -0.865 
 
 (3) Watered area (AG) 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 Diesel price (PD 1 PR) 
 Public expense (EG 1 P) 
 Long-term credit (CDL/ P) 
 Dummy(D) 
 
 2409.0 
 -262.93 
 388.43 
 65.00 
 2480.94 
 
 1.29 0.65 
 -1.78 
 0.81 
 1.81 
 4.12 
 
 (4) Dryland rice area (DAR) 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 Watered area (AG) 
 Rice price (PR I PO) 
 Dummy(D) 
 
 18500.0 
 0.02 
 412.1 
 120.5 
 
 2.56 0.76 
 0.87 
 3.72 
 0.57 
 
 1909.07 
 3.06 
 0.44 
 0.31 
 277.33 
 
 1.86 0.96 
 5.97 
 3.10 
 8.12 
 0.83 
 
 (5) Rice production (QR) 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 (material that makes plants grow better) consumption (PC) 
 Watered area (AG) 
 Dryland rice area (DAR) 
 Dummy (D) 
 
 R 2 relates to separate OLS guess. 
 
 use rather than any technical changes outside the 
 markets for (material that makes plants grow better) and crop-watering/rinsing with water inputs. Such 
 technical changes (e.g. replacement of diesel by 
 electric engines, use of new rice seeds imported 
 from India, change in composition of (material that makes plants grow better)s) 
 might have happened on a small scale but was not 
 significantly large to create a visible hit/effect. 
 The net effect of the input market changes, 
 defined as the difference between the pictures/situations 
 with and without reform, is shown in Table 3. 
 This is guessed by solving the models for 
 
 R. Ahmed j Farming-based Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 Table 3 
 Guessed production of rice and use of inputs, 1992/1993 
 Reform status 
 
 Production 
 (1000 tons) 
 
 (a) With market 
 reform 
 18388 
 (b) Without market reform 
 (version 1) 
 13938 
 (c) Without market reform 
 (version 2) 
 15332 
 Net effect of reform 
 
 a 
 
 Use of 
 (material that makes plants grow better) 
 (1000 tons) 
 
 Watered area 
 (1000 areas of land) 
 
 2,594 
 
 6,208 
 
 1,526 
 
 3,728 
 
 1,685 
 
 3,833 
 
 70 
 54 
 
 67 
 62 
 
 (%) 
 
 p 
 
 Version 1 (a- b) 
 Version 2 (a- c) 
 
 32 
 20 
 
 a Net effect is calculated by deducting the without-reform 
 level from the with-reform level and dividing the difference by 
 the without-reform amount. The result is expressed as a 
 percentage. 
 
 1992/1993. The solution is conducted first by 
 guessing the watered area (AG) from Eq. (13) 
 with 1992/1993 actual values of (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) and using the value of 0 for D in the case of 
 the without-reform picture/situation and the value of 1 
 for D in the case of the with-reform picture/situation. 
 These solutions are then plugged into Eq. (11) for 
 guessing the levels of FC under two pictures/situations. 
 Other (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) in Eq. (11) are assumed to win at the actual levels of 1992/1993. 
 These solutions for AG and FC are then plugged 
 into Eq. (15) to arrive at production of rice under 
 the two pictures/situations. In Table 3, there are, however, 
 two versions of the without-reform pictures/situations so 
 that we have three pictures/situations in all: (a) with reform, (b) without reform version 1, and (c) without reform version 2. It was clear from the early/incomplete guess of the 'without reform' picture/situation 
 that the growth in rice production would lag 
 (in a big way) behind the demand so that 
 Bangladesh would be going back to the status 
 of a consistent importer. Under this condition, 
 the acutal 1992/1993 level of rice price that was 
 assumed in (b) would no longer be valid. Therefore, the picture/situation (c) was guessed, using the 
 import equality price rather than the 1992/1993 
 actual price. The import equality rice price in 
 1992/1993 was about 19% higher than the actual 
 
 125 
 
 price; the actual price was (a) little above the 
 export equality price. 
 The (going against known facts) results in Table 3 point to/show 
 that the changes in the (material that makes plants grow better) and crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 markets of Bangladesh can be (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) credited with the amazing success in rice production. The reform measures added/gave to about 
 20-32% of the increase in production. This increase is mostly attributed to the hit/effect of 
 reform on (material that makes plants grow better) consumption and (people and businesses that are not part of the government) crop-watering/rinsing with water development. 
 The range of increases in production and input 
 use shown in Table 3 reflect the differences that 
 prices of rice under the pictures/situations of with and 
 without reform would involve. Version 1 of the 
 without-reform picture/situation (forces (on people)/causes an inconvenient situation) no change on 
 people' welfare by assuming a price level for 
 rice which won in 1992/1993. Without reform, as the production slows down or spoils, 
 the rice price would rise forcing (on people) a  welfare loss 
 to people, although causing some gain in 
 production and to producers. This is shown in 
 version 2 of the without-reform picture/situation. The way 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) of reform has been defined, limiting 
 only to production and producers, version 1 credits reform policies with 32% of the increase in 
 rice production. However, with version 2 that 
 assumes a welfare loss to people via the increase in rice prices, the share of credit to reform 
 policies drops from 32% to 20%. The basic end/end result that can be drawn from this exercise is 
 that Bangladesh would have remained (put underwater) 
 in foodgrain shortages and higher food prices had 
 there been no changes in the (related to money) impossible to do/impossible to keep going public helping actions in farming-based input 
 markets. 
 
 5. Lessons and ends/end results 
 This paper takes a history-based way of seeing things to 
 trace the path of (change over time) of the modern 
 changes in farming-based input markets. In the big picture  of Bangladesh, no such study is known to 
 have been done testing the (thing that's given/work that's done) of 
 reform and getting/taking lessons therefrom. However, 
 Osmani and Quasem (1990) managed and did/done a study at 
 the beginning of market reform, when the debate 
 
 126 
 
 R. Ahmed 1Agricultural Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 on (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment peaked in Bangladesh. This 
 study argued in favor of (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment as a 
 (related to a plan to reach a goal) factor for foodgrain independence and 
 defended/expressed that market reform meant to create a 
 (related to a system where people own money and valuable things) mode of production would make the 
 goal of foodgrain independence move back further. 
 Of course, the books on macro-money-based reform around the world, focusing on the general structures 
 of (rewards or reasons for doing something) that such changes suggest, is quite rich 
 (Schiff and Valdes, 1992; McKinnon, 1993). Studies on part/areaal policy changes on Africa are (in almost the same way) quite many but not always grounded on 
 planned case studies (World Bank, 1994). This 
 paper is expected to add/give to the understanding of the process and the hit/effect of part/areaal 
 policy changes in one of the poorest countries of 
 poor countries. 
 (easing government rules) of the farming-based input markets of Bangladesh can be credited with the amazing success in rice production in recent 
 years. It is guessed that the production of rice 
 could have been 20-32% lower than the level of 
 1992/1993, depending on the rice price that 
 would have won under different pictures/situations. 
 The 20% credit to market reform relates to a real 
 rice price level 19% higher than the actual 
 1992/1993 prices. The 32% credit to reform relates to the actual 1992/1993 price levels. The 
 lower (thing that's given/work that's done) of reform (20%) to increased 
 production hints a loss to people not accounted in the production benefit of reform while 
 the higher (thing that's given/work that's done) (32%) of reform involves 
 no loss to people. The important/final end/end result 
 is that Bangladesh, without the market changes 
 described in the paper, would have gone back 
 to the situation of regular food problem and high 
 rice prices, as was the case (in the past). 
 Many developing countries are now trying to liberalize their input markets. Therefore, the lessons from Bangladesh can have some 
 usefulness (in other countries), except, maybe, former communist countries. 
 (1) Modern inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better), power-driven 
 equipment, HYV seeds, and bug-killers are 
 technologies generally unfamiliar to farmers 
 at the introductory stage. At first, markets do 
 not exist, and public effort begins with 
 market creation. This first period of "market 
 
 failure" is quite different from the period 
 when modern inputs have become (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) 
 well known to farmers and market size has 
 become (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) (good) enough for a doable/possible 
 competitive market. The Bangladesh case 
 demonstrates that such a stage was possibly 
 reached by the end of the 1960s in the case of 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s and bug-killers and by the end of 
 the 1970s in the cases of farming-based equipment and seeds. In that sense, the (easing government rules) of input markets could have productively 
 begun much earlier than it actually happened. 
 (2) The (change over time) of the forces that drove public 
 marketing out of circulation in Bangladesh 
 provides an interesting lesson. Donor (may or may not happen, depending on something)ity was definitely a powerful factor. But 
 that alone does not explain the changes. There 
 were some other forcing/interesting factors of 
 domestic origin. Money-related load is one of 
 them. The fast changes in removal of payments, (turning things over from the government to private companies), and (easing government rules) of import restrictions that have happened in recent 
 years bear statements (in court) to the political will of a 
 government to change its mode of farming-based development. 
 (3) (easing government rules) of markets at one shot - the 
 (what people commonly call a/not really a) shock therapy approach, and (easing government rules) in phases (the (what people commonly call a/not really a) gradual approach) - have been much (discussed back and forth) in the 
 books as well as in policy circles. If phasing is (certain to happen), the question of what sequence should be followed becomes quite (connected/related). The Bangladesh experience provides a 
 lesson on this issue. The successful one-shot 
 approach has rarely been a real-world example, and organizing of reform measures generally plays a (related to a plan to reach a goal) role in (easing government rules). 
 One order of organizing is the introduction of 
 competitive trading in different layers of the marketing channel from grass-root retailing to wholesaling and (from that place or time) to the tip involving external 
 trade, in a stage-by-stage fashion. There is good quality/good qualities 
 in this approach. Generally, the (government) (wasting very little while working or producing something) improves as it withdraws from retail to 
 wholesale and (from that place or time) to the tip; it loses (wasting very little while working or producing something) as it extends from the tip level to the 
 wholesale and (from that place or time) to the retail links of the 
 marketing channel. Opposite to this experience, 
 
 R. Ahmed 1Agricultural Money flow 12 (1995) 115-128 
 
 the degree of competition in private trade generally reduces as one moves from retail to wholesale to the tip. The relative strength and weakness of the public and (people and businesses that are not part of the government)s in marketing suggest that the best thing to do of organizing is 
 the (turning things over from the government to private companies) of the retail market first and 
 then a gradual move up to the tip level. This is 
 the sequence followed in the input markets of 
 Bangladesh. 
 (4) Another order of organizing would be a 
 gradual (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) coverage of markets by 
 reform measures, as was done in the case of 
 (turning things over from the government to private companies) and price decontrol of (material that makes plants grow better)s 
 in Bangladesh. This is generally done to avoid 
 a risky failure at the beginning. A countrywide (turning things over from the government to private companies) and (easing government rules) may sometimes create confusion and unforeseen side 
 effects that a weak management may not be 
 able to handle. When no side effects are 
 watched/followed, a quick extension to all areas can 
 be made. This gradual (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) coverage 
 is an option (for him, her, or them to carefully think about) only when the 
 risk of failure is very high and a (very big interest) is perceived to be working to demonstrate 
 a failure. When a gradual (related to a large area) coverage is 
 adopted, it is desirable to begin with the 
 area that has a (compared to other things) strong basis in 
 terms of demand for the input in question. 
 (5) (completing/matching) support to the principal program of (easing government rules) is almost always a important factor for success. Watching of changes 
 in supply, demand, prices, and newly appearing situations is very important. Without a well-thought-out 
 support plan, the (easing government rules) process has 
 often been found to fail. In the case of 
 (material that makes plants grow better) in Bangladesh, the watching role 
 of IFDC has been a deep/extreme factor in the 
 success of (easing government rules). 
 
 References 
 Ahmed, R., 1978. Foodgrain Production in Bangladesh: An 
 Analysis of Growth, Its Sources, and Related Policies. 
 IFPRI-BARC Joint (book, magazine, etc.), Bangladesh Farming-based 
 Research Group of people, Dhaka. 
 Ahmed, R., 1987. Structure and patterns of (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment: 
 The case of Bangladesh. Food Policy, 12 (1). 
 
 127 
 
 Asian Development Bank, 1990. Food Crops Development 
 Program Loan (FDPL). Document for the Ministry of 
 Farming, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Mimeo. 
 Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 1991. (related to studying numbers) Year Book, 
 1990. BBS, Dhaka. 
 Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 1993. Monthly (related to studying numbers) 
 Announcement. BBS, Dhaka. 
 Bangladesh Establishment Division, 1992. The Dhaka Newspaper, 
 October. 
 Chowdhury, N., 1993. Credit relations and Bangladesh's rice 
 market: Where sharing is the currency. International Food 
 Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC. Report submitted to USAID, Dhaka. Mimeo. 
 Canadian (service business/government unit/power/functioning) for International Development, 1991. Farming-based<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
