AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 Farming-based trade (easing government rules) and money-based development: 
 the role of downstream market power 
 Richard J. Church assistanta , Ian Sheldonb,aˆ-- , Steve McCorristonc , Humei Wangd 
 a Department 
 
 of Farming-based and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow and Giannini Foundation of Farming-based Money flow, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA 
 b Department of Farming-based, (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), and Development Money flow, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 
 c School of Business and Money flow, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4PU, UK 
 d California Department of Health Services, Sacramento, CA 95899, USA 
 Received 5 July 2005; received in changed form 14 April 2006; accepted 10 August 2006 
 
 Abstract 
 A model is developed to show the (up and down) linked and (mainly studied) nature of developed-country food markets. This model is then 
 limit/guidelineized and used to test out the effects of different food market structures on the benefits to developing-country exporters of farming-based 
 valuable things from trade (easing government rules) by developed countries. Results show that even small departures from perfect competition 
 can cause much of the benefits from trade (easing government rules) to flow to marketing firms instead of producers in the developing country. The distributional 
 effects under downstream market power differ significantly from the perfectly competitive case and may result, somewhat surprisingly, in 
 developing countries receiving a lower share of the total value added within the food chain as trade reform happens. 
 JEL Classification: F12, F13, O12 
 Keywords: Developing countries; Oligopoly; Oligopsony; Trade (easing government rules); Up-and-down market structure 
 
 1. Introduction 
 The Doha Round of trade (back-and-forth conversations to agree on something) in the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been labeled the "development round," 
 a important part of which will be increasing developing countries' 
 access to developed-country markets (Anderson and Martin, 
 2005). This process will involve the reduction of taxes/import taxes on farming-based valuable things, given that many developing countries 
 are still major farming-based exporters and that farming still 
 accounts for a large share of GDP, especially in the poorest 
 developing countries. However, in terms of the possible benefits to developing countries, there are two connected issues. 
 First, recognizing the (up and down) linked nature of the food chain 
 among farm-related, food processing and retailing, the increasing 
 combining of the food industry in developed countries may 
 influence the importance of the benefits that developing countries receive from increased market access. Second, in terms 
 of the total value of the product that reaches people, the 
 raw farming-based part usually represents a small share. 
 This has caused many in developing countries as well as in 
 aˆ-- Corresponding author. Tel.: (614)-292-2194. 
 E-mail address: sheldon.1@osu.edu (Ian Sheldon). 
 
 c 2007 International Association of Farming-based Money-flow experts 
 
 international institutions to fight for (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) in developing countries, involving the processing of and adding value to 
 the raw farming-based valuable thing (UNCTAD, 2002a). 
 These issues can be related clearly to the wider popular 
 debate about (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other). First, concerns have been expressed 
 that increasing concentration of the worldwide  food system harms 
 producers of export valuable things very important to many developing 
 countries. For example, African countries such as Burundi, 
 Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Uganda are highly dependent on exports of coffee, yet all have faced a significant decline in real 
 prices over the past few years. 1 At the same time, in key export 
 markets such as Europe and the United States, worldwide  coffee 
 buyers, roasters, and stores, who in total account for almost 
 60% of the share of final sales value of coffee, have benefited 
 from lower coffee bean prices (Oxfam, 2001). 2 Second, tax/import tax 
 1 Over the period 1998-2001, real coffee prices fell by 50%. As a result, for a 
 country such as Ethiopia, where coffee represented 67% of the value of exports 
 in 1998, the decline in world coffee prices cost Ethiopia US$_$ 300 million in 
 export money/money income, equal to 50% of its once-a-year export earnings (Oxfam, 2001). 
 2 All three parts/areas are ruled by a small number of firms. For example, in 
 1995, 10 firms accounted for 62% of worldwide  coffee bean trade, while in 1998, 
 five firms accounted for 58%of sales of roasted coffee in the (related to Europe) market 
 (Fitter and Kaplinsky, 2001). 
 
 254 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 reduction and market access go right to the heart of the debate 
 over whether smallholder farmers in developing countries will 
 truly benefit from (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other). On the one hand, development 
 (services businesses/government units) such as the World Bank (2003), and NGOs such as Oxfam, have argued a lot that removal of trade twisting/lying about 
 farming-based policies in both the developed and developing countries has the "potential to act as a powerful helper for poorness 
 reduction" (Oxfam, 2003, p. 7) in the developing countries. On 
 the other hand, people (who say bad things or give opinions) of (when lots of countries communicate and talk with each other) have argued that it may 
 create negative effects for developing-country farmers. 
 The Mozambique cashew nut part/area provides a good example 
 of this debate. In the early 1990s, Mozambique removed taxes 
 on the export of raw cashews in response to guidance from the 
 World Bank. The World Bank (1995) forecast that cashew nut 
 farmers' incomes would increase between US$_$ 17.4 and 27.9 
 million in the first 2 years of the reform. However, McMillan 
 et al. (2002) report that the actual gains to cashew nut farmers 
 were only US$_$ 5.3 million. At the same time, city-based  unemployment increased as labor released from cashew nut processing 
 did not move into other activities. This case became a "cause 
 cÂ´el`ebre" for the antiglobalization movement, and a focus for 
 attacking World Bank policies (McMillan et al., 2002, p. 1). 
 What the World Bank ignores in its guesses was that the 
 hit/effect of reform in the Mozambique cashew nut part/area was in 
 large part influenced by the (features/ qualities/ traits) of the downstream 
 part/area which cashew nut farmers supplied. As McMillan et al. 
 (2002) note, traders downstream from farmers are competitive 
 in selling cashews, but have buying (monopsony) power in the 
 (instance of buying something for money) of cashews. As a result, even though export prices 
 for raw cashew nuts did increase, as (stated or said earlier) by explanation, export traders (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) a (compared to other things) large share of the benefits 
 from removal of the export tax, reducing the income gains to 
 farmers. 3 
 Therefore, in carefully studying the hit/effect of trade (easing government rules) on 
 developing countries, it is necessary to understand the up-and-down linkages that describe food markets in many developed 
 countries. We argue in this article that the modern food marketing system in many businesses is most appropriately seen as a (one after the other) oligopoly/oligopsony structure, with 
 developing-country exporters of raw valuable things entering at 
 the first stage, and show that the hint/result/effect of reducing taxes/import taxes or export taxes under this structure may be much different 
 in importance from that suggested by models that assume perfect 
 competition. More than that, the distributional effects will also differ 
 relative to the perfectly competitive case and may result, somewhat surprisingly, in developing countries receiving a lower 
 share of the total value added within the food chain as trade 
 reform happens. 
 3 Another example is Ivory Coast cocoa market (easing government rules) (Wilcox and 
 Abbott, 2004). Before (easing government rules), para-statal marketing boards controlled 
 all levels of marketing of cocoa beans and also taxed cocoa bean exports. 
 (easing government rules) has resulted in backward integration by huge company cocoa 
 processor-exporters who now take (prisoner) by force a part of/amount of the rents (before that/before now) collected 
 as export taxes. 
 
 We develop this theme by first presenting some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on 
 the structure of the food chain in developed (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), focusing specifically upon the (related to Europe) Union (EU) and the United 
 States. We then develop, in Section 3, a model that describes the (up and down) linked nature of developed-country food 
 markets. The model is based on a market setting in which a 
 first (or most important) farming-based product such as coffee is exported from 
 a developing (process of people making, selling, and buying things), and is then processed and sold in a 
 developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 4 The market structure in the developed 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) features independent processing and retailing parts/areas, 
 both of which may show market power. Next, in Section 4, 
 we get the effects/results/suggestions of different combinations of market 
 structures in the processing and/or the retailing part/area on total 
 market extra, and the distribution of benefits from reducing 
 a per-unit tax/import tax among people in the developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things), 
 developing-country producers, and marketers (processors and 
 stores), given price-taking behavior by farm producers and 
 people but possible oligopoly and/or oligopsony power exercised by the marketing part/area. Some extensions are organized and listed 
 in Section 5, and in Section 6 we summarize and end/decide. 
 2. Market structure of the food part/area in developed 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 As noted, the food industry is usually highly (focused one's effort/increased/mainly studied) in 
 developed countries at both the retail and processing stages and, 
 further, concentration is rising over time. This is also becoming 
 a (feature/ quality/ trait) of the food part/area in some developing countries. 
 By way of illustration, we focus specifically on these parts/areas in 
 the United States and the EU. 
 2.1. Food processing 
 In the United States, the top-20 food-manufacturing firms 
 accounted for 37% of value added in 1997, while the top-20 
 drink- and tobacco-manufacturing firms accounted for 79% 
 of value added (U.S. (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  Bureau, 2001). Using more disaggregated data at the four-digit SITC level, the average four-firm 
 concentration ratio (CR4) in U.S. food manufacturing was about 
 76% in 1997, ranging from 62% in sugar cane mills to 98% in 
 cigarettes. 
 Average seller concentration in the EU is higher than in the 
 United States, ranging from an average CR3 of 55% in Germany to 89% in Ireland, with an average CR3 across nine EU 
 countries of 67% (Cotterill, 1999). As in the United States, 
 these averages hide some high levels of seller concentration for 
 clearly stated/particular products in each EU country, especially baby foods, 
 canned soup, pet food, and coffee. While seller concentration 
 at the product level is high in many individual EU country markets, there are few examples of firms that rule sales across 
 EU countries as a whole (Cotterill, 1999). 
 4 
 
 As the focus of this article is on gains to developing country exporters 
 from trade (easing government rules), we abstract from any hits/effects on developed country 
 farming-based parts/areas. 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 2.2. Food retailing 
 
 Table 1 
 Guesses of market power and Lerner indices 
 
 A few important differences are seen/obvious in the food retailing market structures in the United States and EU. Average 
 CR5 in food retailing at the national level in the EU is 65%, 
 much higher than in the United States, where the similar 
 figure is 35% (Cotterill, 1999; McCorriston, 2002). However, at 
 the EU-wide level, CR5 is much lower at 26% (Hughes, 2002). 
 Because retail markets are (only happening or existing in one small place) in (land-area-based/location) scope, it is 
 important in (thinking about/when one thinks about) store oligopoly power to examine 
 concentration at the local and (related to a large area) level. Related to this, Cotterill reports that in 1998, CR4 in the United States averaged 
 74% across the top-100 U.S. cities. 
 
 Study 
 
 Industry 
 
 Appelbaum (1982) 
 
 U.S. fabrics 
 U.S. tobacco 
 Canadian food processing 
 U.S. beef-packing 
 (1) oligopsony 
 (2) oligopoly 
 Rice export 
 U.S. meat (oligopoly) 
 U.S. animals (oligopsony) 
 U.S. (made up of different things) meat 
 processing 
 U.S. beefa 
 U.S. porka 
 Philippines coconut oil 
 
 2.3. Industry combining 
 An added feature of market structure in the food industry 
 over the last few years has been combining through mergers and 
 purchases, which has added/has given to increasing concentration. 
 Domestic mergers and purchases in the food part/area doubled 
 between 1990 and 2002 (McCorriston et al., 2004). More than that, 
 international mergers and purchases have also been increasing 
 significantly. For example, EU-based stores such as Royal 
 Ahold and Sainsbury have expanded into U.S. markets, and 
 Wal-Mart has expanded into the EU. As a result, food retailing 
 is becoming more and more huge company with three food stores 
 Wal-Mart, Carrefour, and Royal Ahold now appearing in the 
 world's top-100 huge company corporations (UNCTAD, 2002b). 
 Although the high and rising concentration in the food part/area 
 is not a doubtful point, evidence on the extent of 
 the actual exercise of manufacturer and store market power 
 in developed-country food parts/areas is rather mixed. Surveys of 
 the recent scientific work by Church assistant (2000), Church assistant and Lavoie 
 (2001), and Sheldon and Sperling (2003) show/tell about (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of 
 only modest departures from perfect competition for a wide 
 range of products in the food manufacturing/processing part/area. 
 Table 1 summarizes results of market power guesses for a 
 broad range of businesses. The possible range for the market 
 power limits/guidelines in the table is from 0 (perfect competition) to 
 1 ((one company that controls too much) or monopsony). Although a few guesses are in 
 the area of 0.5 (market power equal to that of a (group of things that are all pretty much the same) Cournot rule (by two people) or duopsony) or higher, most are much 
 lower--0.25 (the market power equal of a (group of things that are all pretty much the same) 
 four-firm Cournot oligopoly or oligopsony) or less. 
 3. Farming-based trade and importing country market 
 power 
 (even though there is the existence of) the (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) that the food part/area would appear 
 to be (in a way that is not totally pure or totally correct) competitive at many stages, departures 
 from the competitive-markets way of thinking have almost never been thought about/believed by money-flow experts managing and doing trade-policy analysis. Most 
 scientific studies assume perfect competition at a single stage, 
 e.g., the FAPRI (Devadoss et al., 1993) and AGLINK (OECD, 
 
 Lopez (1984) 
 Schroeter (1988) 
 
 Karp and Perloff (1989) 
 Azzam and Pagoulatos 
 (1990) 
 
 Schroeter and Azzam 
 (1990) 
 Buschena and Perloff 
 (1991) 
 Wann and Church assistant (1992) U.S. grade pack pearsa 
 U.S. fruit cocktaila 
 Deodhar and Sheldon 
 German bananas 
 (1995) 
 Deodhar and Sheldon 
 German bananas 
 (1996) 
 Bhuyan and Lopez 
 U.S. food businessesb 
 U.S. tobacco businesses 
 (1997) 
 Wilson (1997) 
 U.K. bread manufacturing 
 Genoseve and Mullin 
 U.S. sugar industry 
 (1998) 
 Steen and Salvanes 
 French fresh salmon 
 (1999) 
 Bettendorf and Verboven Dutch coffee roasting 
 (2000) 
 Gohin and Guyomard 
 French food retailing: 
 (2000) 
 (1) dairy productsa 
 (2) meat productsa 
 (3) other food productsa 
 Wilcox and Abbott 
 Ivory Coast cocoa exports: 
 (2004) 
 (1) government/exporters 
 (2) exporters 
 
 255 
 
 Market 
 Power 
 0.05aˆ-- 
 0.40aˆ-- 
 0.19aˆ-- 
 0.22aˆ-- 
 
 0.68ca€  
 0.22aˆ-- 
 0.18aˆ-- 
 
 Lerner 
 Indexa€ a€  
 0.07 
 0.65 
 0.50 
 0.01 
 0.04 
 0.11 
 0.46 
 1.10 
 0.74 
 
 0.05aˆ-- 
 0.06aˆ-- 
 0.58a€  
 
 0.55 
 0.47 
 0.89 
 
 0.08aˆ-- 
 0.48aˆ-- 
 0.29a€  
 
 0.15 
 1.41 
 0.26 
 
 0.20ca€  
 
 0.18 
 
 0.18aˆ-- 
 0.18aˆ-- 
 0.31 
 0.04a€  
 
 0.33 
 0.33 
 0.84 
 0.05 
 
 0.02-0.05da€  
 
 0.12-0.04 
 
 0.02-0.17eaˆ-- 0.07-0.54 
 
 aˆ'0.02aˆ-- 
 aˆ'0.03aˆ-- 
 0.01aˆ-- 
 
 0.20 
 0.17 
 0.12 
 
 0.47-0.77aaˆ-- 0.25--0.37 
 0.19-0.48aaˆ-- 0.09-0.20 
 
 This is a changed version of a table from Sheldon and Sperling (2003) 
 Guesses based on joint oligopsony/oligopoly power; b Bhuyan and Lopez 
 (1997) also calculated Lerner indices for 40 4-digit SIC food businesses, ranging 
 from 0.72 for cereal preparation to 0.08 for dried fruit and vegetables; c Guess 
 based on a closed loop energetic model; d Static and energetic estimate; e Quadratic 
 and logarithmic demand guesses; aˆ-- Guess-related ability to stretch and a€  guess-related difference/different version 
 -both limits/guidelines range from 0 for perfect competition to 1 for (one company that controls too much); a€ a€  The 
 Lerner index is defined as the guess-related ability to stretch divided by the ability to stretch of 
 supply (demand) 
 a 
 
 2005) policy forecasting models. Even the recent and widely 
 referred to work on the hit/effect of protectionism in the EU by Messerlin (2001) reports results that treat the farming-based part/area as 
 perfectly competitive, with the exception of the bananas subsector. 5 
 In fact, only over the last few years have papers begun to think about 
 the role of up-and-down market structure in thinking about best 
 trade policy. Spencer and Jones (1992), Ishikawa and Spencer 
 5 
 
 Messerlin (2001) does admit that a  few large traders in grains and 
 sugar could result in (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition in these subsectors, and that there 
 may be (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition at the food retailing level. 
 
 256 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 (1999), and Sheldon et al. (2001) are examples of possible 
 models that extend the Brander and Spencer (1985) result on 
 export payments to up-and-down markets, while McCorriston and 
 Sheldon (1996) examine the (number of times something happens) of reform of the EU banana government in a up-and-down market setting of (one after the other) oligopoly. 
 Given this background, it is useful to think about  a flexible 
 model setting that enables the hits/effects of a wide range of competitive results to be studied. Specifically, we think about/believe a 
 market setting in which a first (or most important) farming-based product such as 
 coffee, tea, or cocoa is exported from a developing (process of people making, selling, and buying things), 
 and it is processed and sold in a developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 6 The 
 market structure in the developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) features independent processing and retailing parts/areas, both of which may show 
 market power. 7 
 People' inverse excess demand in the developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) for the retail product is 
 
 quasifixed proportions in the sense that no substitution is permitted between the raw farm input and other inputs in producing 
 the finished product. However, substitution among other processing and retailing inputs (e.g., labor and energy) is permitted. 
 Also, we assume that stores' costs for the product under 
 (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) are separatable from the costs of other products sold 
 at retail. For convenience and without further loss of (statement that's not detailed), 
 we choose to measure units at the different stages in the market 
 so that Qf = Qw = Qr = Q, where the superscripts f, w, and 
 r represent the farm, wholesale or processing, and retail parts/areas, 
 (match up each pair of items in order). Given these ideas (you think are true), changes in market concentration have no cost-side effects, enabling the analysis to 
 focus only on the competition hits/effects. 10 
 Represent a representative processing firm's book of raw 
 product (instances of buying things for money) by qf . Given our ideas (you think are true), the representative firm's changeable cost function can be written as 
 
 P r = D(Qr | X), 
 
 C w = cw (Vw )q f + (P f + T )q f , 
 
 (1) 
 
 where Qr is the market amount of the retail product, Pr is 
 the market price, and X represents unknown demand shifters. 
 Farmers in the developing country are assumed to be price 
 takers in their output market. Inverse excess farm supply of the 
 raw valuable thing is expressed as 
 P f = S(Qf | Y), 
 
 (2) 
 
 where Pf is the price received at the farm, Qf is the total volume 
 of farm shipments, and Y represents unknown supply shifters. 
 The raw product is subject to a per-unit import tax/import tax of T. 8 
 To focus the model on the effects/results/suggestions of possible market 
 power in the marketing part/area of the developed (process of people making, selling, and buying things), we 
 make some simplifying ideas (you think are true) about the technologies for the processing and retailing parts/areas. Both food processors and stores are assumed to use a constant-returns 
 technology. 9 Further, we assume that these technologies are 
 6 The model need not be understood/explained narrowly in the big picture  of two-sided 
 trade. The excess demand function in (1) can refer to world demand for the 
 valuable thing produced in the developing (process of people making, selling, and buying things), in which case market power 
 could arise due to the behavior of huge company firms and also state trading 
 (services businesses/government units) (Church assistant and Lavoie, 2001). 
 7 This model is changed/ready from prior work by Huang and Church assistant (1996), Alston 
 et al. (1997), and Church assistant and Zhang (2001). 
 8 Our results, of course, also apply to the case of a per-unit export tax, and, 
 this way, to the debate (related to/looking at/thinking about) the hits/effects of openness vs. protectionism in trade 
 policies put into use by developing countries on their money-based growth (Edwards, 
 1993). 
 9 Assuming a constant returns technology very (much) simplifies the analysis 
 but is done at a cost in terms of (statement that's not detailed). If firms' technologies are not constant 
 returns but the firms are operating in the range of locally constant returns to scale 
 (i.e., they have mistreated the available (processes of people making, selling, and buying things)), our results are unaffected. 
 However, if firms are operating in the range of increasing returns to scale at the 
 balance with the tax/import tax in place, then its elimination would enable firms to 
 increase output and reduce costs, providing an added benefit to producers 
 from trade (easing government rules). One might further argue that watching/ noticing/ celebrating/ obeying firms operating 
 in the range of increasing returns to scale is more likely in businesses with high 
 concentration and market power. In this case, our results will miss a benefit to 
 tax/import tax reduction that might increase as a function of downstream firms' market 
 power. 
 
 (3) 
 
 where cw (Vw ) represents the constant processing costs per unit 
 of raw product processed, Vw is the vector of prices for changeable 
 processing inputs, and Pf is the raw product price received by 
 producers in the developing (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 Represent a representative store's volume of wholesale (instances of buying things for money) by qw . A representative store's changeable cost function 
 for selling the product is 
 C r = cr (Vr )q w + P w q w , 
 
 (4) 
 
 where Pw is the wholesale price, cr (Vr ) represents the constant 
 retailing costs per unit of wholesale product sold, and Vr is the 
 vector of prices for changeable retailing inputs. 
 We now get the effects/results/suggestions of different combinations of 
 oligopoly and oligopsony power in the processing and/or the 
 retailing part/area for total market extra, and the distribution 
 of extra among people, producers, and marketers (i.e., 
 processors and stores), given price-taking behavior by farm 
 producers in the developing country and by people in the 
 importing country. To simplify note, we drop further reference to the (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) X, Y, Vw , and Vr . 
 3.1. Manufacturers or stores may have both oligopsony and 
 oligopoly power 
 In this case we assume that either stores or manufacturers 
 are price takers, (in other words), given market power in one of the marketing parts/areas, the other part/area is competitive. Given the model 
 10 
 
 The recent possible books on trade, up-and-down markets and (not totally pure/not totally correct) 
 competition regularly assumes a fixed proportions technology, and for many 
 farming-based valuable things, e.g., coffee roasting (Bettendorf and Verboven, 2000) 
 the idea (you think is true) seems very reasonable. Also, studies appealing to a 
 variable-proportions technology usually use very group data, e.g., Reed 
 and Clark (2000), where substitution relates to portion of an farming-based 
 input among a few end uses, causing Church assistant (2000) to question whether this 
 approach is actually a very (connected/related) way to define either product markets or 
 technology. 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 structure, the output, farm price, personal price, and group 
 welfare effects are identical for a given degree of market power 
 (without any concern about/having nothing to do with) whether the power is held by food processors or 
 by food stores. To simplify the explaining/big show, we develop the 
 case in which food manufacturers may exercise market power 
 and stores are competitive. In this case, the retail price is 
 Pr = Pw + cr . 
 A representative processing firm's profit function can be expressed as 
 Ï€ = (D(Q ) aˆ' c )q aˆ' S Q q aˆ' (c + T )q, 
 w 
 
 w 
 
 r 
 
 f 
 
 w 
 
 (5) 
 
 where q = q = q is the firm's level of output and book of 
 farm product (instances of buying things for money). The first-order necessary condition for 
 making the most of Eq. (5) is 
 w 
 
 f 
 
 aˆ‚D(Qw ) aˆ‚Qw 
 aˆ‚Ï€ w 
 = Pw + 
 q aˆ' (P f + cw + T ) 
 aˆ‚q 
 aˆ‚Qw aˆ‚q 
 aˆ' 
 
 aˆ‚S(Qf ) aˆ‚Qf 
 q = 0. 
 aˆ‚Qf aˆ‚q 
 
 (6) 
 
 Eq. (6) can be written in ability to stretch form as 
 Pw 1 aˆ' 
 
 Î¾w 
 Î·1w 
 
 = Pf 1 + 
 
 Î¸f 
 Îµf 
 
 + (cw + T ), 
 
 (6Â´) 
 
 aˆ‚Qf P f 
 is the market price ability to stretch of supply of the 
 aˆ‚P f Qf 
 w 
 Pw 
 w 
 product, Î·1 = aˆ' aˆ‚Q 
 is the (value of a number, ignoring its sign) of the maraˆ‚P w Qw 
 
 where Îµf = 
 
 farm 
 ket price ability to stretch of received/made from demand for the processed prodf q 
 uct when the store behaves competitively, and Î¸ f = aˆ‚Q 
 , 
 aˆ‚q Qf 
 w 
 
 q 
 are market-power limits/guidelines. Here Î¸ f aˆˆ [0, 1] 
 Î¾ w = aˆ‚Q 
 aˆ‚q Qw 
 measures the processing firm's oligopsony market power in 
 getting the farm product and Î¾ w aˆˆ [0,1] measures the firm's 
 oligopoly power in selling the product to stores. The limit/guideline, Î¸ f (Î¾ w ) is either understood/explained as a "guess-related ability to stretch" or, 
 more simply, as a measure of the mark down (mark up) of the 
 input price (output price), relative to the not important value product (not important cost). 11 Î¸ f = 0 (Î¾ w = 0) goes along with perfect 
 competition, and Î¸ f = 1 (Î¾ w = 1) represents total/totally/with nothing else mixed in monopsony 
 ((one company that controls too much)). Intermediate values of Î¸ f (Î¾ w ) in the open period of time (or space) (0, 1) represent degrees of oligopsony (oligopoly) power, 
 with larger values of Î¸ f and Î¾ w pointing to/showing greater departures 
 from competition. By focusing directly on the end product of 
 oligopsony/oligopoly power, as measured by the limits/guidelines Î¸ f 
 and Î¾ w , we need not be concerned with particular market structures or oligopoly/oligopsony games. This makes the model a 
 very convenient tool for conducting tests of other choice 
 competitive pictures/situations. 
 Grouping from the firm to the industry is good 
 easily within this model (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). Because firms produce 
 11 Due to the standard game-theoretic criticism of modeling firm behavior as 
 guess-related differences/different versions, it has become common to understand/explain these limits/guidelines as 
 measuring the wedge between price and not important value product (not important cost) 
 (Sheldon and Sperling, 2003). 
 
 257 
 
 a (group of things that are all pretty much the same) product and have identical technologies, improving behavior forces that ex post all firms' guesses are 
 identical (Wann and Church assistant, 1992). Eq. (6 ) this way represents an 
 balance condition that along with the retail demand 
 and farm supply functions specified in (1) and (2), (match up each pair of items in order), 
 and the store cost function, (4), yields balance values for 
 Pr , Pw , Pf , and Q. 
 3.2. Market power at (one after the other) market stages 
 Now we think about/believe pictures/situations in which stores in the importing country may exercise oligopoly power over people 
 and domestic processors may exercise oligopsony power 
 over farmers in getting the raw product, and, also, 
 processor-store interactions may be seen as (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition. We think about/believe two other choice cases for 
 the processor-store interactions. The first involves processor oligopoly power and store price taking in the processor- 
 store interactions ((one after the other) oligopoly), and the second 
 involves store oligopsony power and processor price taking 
 ((one after the other) oligopsony) in the processor-store interactions. 
 The case in which both stores and processors attempt to exercise market power in their back and forth/equal between people interactions must be studied 
 within a (related to arriving at an agreement) (surrounding conditions), which is beyond the extent of/the range of 
 the present study. 12 
 It should be noted that the exercise of market power at (one after the other) up-and-down stages in a market chain represents a market 
 failure that may, in way of thinking/basic truth/rule, be corrected through up-and-down coordination across market stages. Especially, the solutions we 
 bring up show the well-known "double-(making something unimportant)" problem noted first by Spengler (1950). If firms can coordinate (up and down), they can eliminate the double-(making something unimportant) 
 problem and increase the total amount of (money made/good things received) to be shared 
 between them. Katz (1989) remains a good summary reference on the tools of up-and-down control. Our results in this 
 subsection should, this way, be understood/explained to apply in settings in 
 which instruments of up-and-down control are either unavailable, 
 (way too much) expensive to put into use, or illegal under winning/most common 
 (related to preventing one company from becoming too powerful) laws, e.g., Viscusi et al. (2000). If manufacturers 
 and stores with market power can solve their doublemarginalization problem, the results of the previous subsection 
 apply. 
 For the case of (one after the other) oligopoly power, a representative 
 store's profit function can be expressed as 
 Ï€ r = D(Q)q aˆ' P w q aˆ' cr q, 
 
 (7) 
 
 12 One reasonable result of processor-store bargaining is that they would 
 agree on the volume of trade that (made as big as possible) their back and forth/equal between people benefit, with (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) restricted to deciding/figuring out the division of extra between the bargainers. 
 This result is identical in terms of output, retail price, farm price, and welfare 
 distribution to the equilibria described in the previous subsection when only 
 processors or stores exercised market power. 
 
 258 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 The first-order condition for making the most of Eq. (7) with respect 
 to q is 
 P 
 
 r 
 
 Î¾r 
 1aˆ' r 
 Î· 
 
 =P +c . 
 w 
 
 r 
 
 (8) 
 
 Using the retail demand function, D(Q), to substitute for Pr in 
 (8), we can solve equation (8) for the store's inverse received/made from 
 demand function for the processed product: Pw = Dw (Q | Î¾ r , 
 cr ). 
 A representative processing firm's profit function can then be 
 expressed as 
 Ï€ w = D w (Q | Î¾ r , cr )q aˆ' S(Q)q aˆ' (cw + T )q. 
 
 (9) 
 
 The first-order condition for making the most of Eq. (9) with respect 
 to q is 
 Pw 1 aˆ' 
 
 Î¾w 
 Î·2w 
 
 = Pf 1 + 
 
 Î¸f 
 Îµf 
 
 + (cw + T ), 
 
 (10) 
 
 where Î¾ w represents the degree of the processors' oligopoly 
 power, and Î·w 
 2 is the ability to stretch of received/made from demand, given rew 
 tailer oligopoly power (in general, Î·w 
 1 = Î·2 ). Eqs. (1), (2), (8), 
 and (10) define the market balance for the case of (one after the other) oligopoly power, and, given functional forms for (1) and 
 (2), they can be solved for the endogenous (numbers that change/things that change), Pf , Pw , 
 Pr , and Q. 
 For the case of (one after the other) oligopsony power, a representative 
 processor's profit function can be expressed as 
 Ï€ w = P w q aˆ' S(Q)q aˆ' (cw + T )q. 
 
 (11) 
 
 The first-order condition for making the most of Eq. (11) with respect 
 to q is 
 Pw = Pf 1 + 
 
 Î¸f 
 Îµf 
 
 + (cw + T ). 
 
 (12) 
 
 Eq. (12) can be used along with the inverse farm supply 
 curve S(Q) to produce the inverse received/made from supply curve, Pw = 
 Sw (Q | Î¸ f , cw , T). 
 A representative store's profit function can be expressed as 
 Ï€ r = D(Q)q aˆ' S w (Q | Î¸ f , cw , T )q aˆ' cr q. 
 
 (13) 
 
 The first-order condition for making the most of Eq. (13) with respect 
 to q is 
 Pr 1 aˆ' 
 
 Î¾r 
 Î·r 
 
 = Pw 1 + 
 
 Î¸w 
 Îµw 
 
 + cr . 
 
 (14) 
 
 Market balance for this case is defined by Eqs. (1), (2), (12), 
 and (14). 
 
 4. (testing out) analysis 
 To conduct tests, it is necessary to assign specific 
 functional forms for the retail excess demand and farm excess 
 supply functions specified in general form in equations (1) and 
 (2). We chose linear models for this purpose: 13 
 Qr = a aˆ' Î±P r , importing country excess demand at retail, 
 (1 ) 
 P f = b + Î²Qf , exporting country inverse farm excess supply. 
 (2 ) 
 Also, we call for/use the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)izations that are available 
 without loss of (statement that's not detailed) by choosing units so that the amount 
 and retail price in the competitive, no-tax/import tax balance, (Q c , 
 P rc ), are each togetherness: 
 r 
 f 
 Q c = 1, P rc = 1, in which case P w 
 c = 1 aˆ' c , and P c = 
 r 
 w 
 1 aˆ' c aˆ' c = f where f is farmers' money/money income share under 
 the no-tax/import tax competitive balance, and, this way f measures the 
 built-in importance of the farm product in producing the final 
 product. Given the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)izations, the following relationships 
 among the model's limits/guidelines are easily received/made from: 
 Î± = Î·cr , Î² = 
 
 f 
 , a = 1 + Î±, b = f aˆ' Î², 
 Îµcf 
 
 (15) 
 
 where Î·rc is the (value of a number, ignoring its sign) of retail price ability to stretch of demand 
 and Îµfc is the price ability to stretch of farm supply, each tested at 
 the no-tax/import tax, competitive balance. 
 Introducing a per-unit tax/import tax, T, charged to the farm product causes supply of the farm product to the domestic-country 
 processing part/area to become: 
 P f + T = b + Î²Qf + T . 
 
 (2 ) 
 
 4.1. Balance under processor oligopoly and/or 
 oligopsony power 
 We think about/believe first the case in which either the processing 
 part/area or the retailing part/area may exercise oligopoly and/or 
 oligopsony power, but the other downstream part/area is competitive. Given the structure of the model, balance output, farm 
 13 Our (testing out) results are, of course, sensitive to the choice of a linear 
 functional form. For example, with (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition and linear inverse 
 demand, there will be under-moving/changing of any reduction in the tax/import tax. However, 
 it is well known from the public finance books that the (number of times something happens) of tax/import tax 
 reduction will be a function of both the degree of (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition and 
 the curviness/concavity of the inverse demand function (Hindriks and Myles, 
 2006). Curviness of inverse demand results in under-moving/changing of changes in the 
 tax/import tax, (good) enough curviness results in over-moving/changing, while over-shifting always 
 happens with a constant ability to stretch of demand function. Given that functional 
 form choices must be made, we chose to go ahead with linear functions because 
 they are both weakly curved and weakly curving out and so represent a "middle 
 ground" choice. 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 price, retail price, and distribution of welfare among producers, 
 marketers (i.e., processors and stores), and people are 
 identical if the same high levels of market power are exercised 
 by either the retail part/area or the manufacturing part/area. The same 
 results also hold for the rather reasonable case in which processors exercise oligopsony power over farmers and stores 
 exercise oligopoly power over people, but the interactions 
 between processors and stores are managed and did/done under conditions of perfect competition. 
 For (state of always working or appearing the same way) with the prior section, we develop the case 
 in which stores behave competitively, and processors may 
 exercise market power. So, Pr = Pw + cr , and we can solve 
 (1 ), (2 ), and (6 ) (at the same time) to get the following balance solutions for the linear model: 
 1 + Î±(Î² aˆ' T ) 
 
 Q1 = 
 
 1 
 
 P1r 
 
 = 
 
 +c , 
 
 P1w 
 
 r 
 
 , 
 
 P1w = 
 
 a aˆ' Q1 
 aˆ' cr , 
 Î± 
 
 P1f = b + Î²Q1 , 
 
 (16) 
 
 where 1 = (1 + Î¾ w ) + (1 + Î¸ f )Î±Î² = (1 + Î¾ w ) + (1 + 
 Î¸ f )f Î·rc /Îµfc . The expression 1 measures the total distortion due 
 to oligopoly and oligopsony power in the linear model, and 
 Q 1 &amp;lt; 1 = Q c whenever either Î¸ f or Î¾ w is positive. 
 Fig. 1 illustrates the model. It depends on Melnick and Shalit's 
 (1985) (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) that an industry with oligopoly power acts 
 as if it faces a perceived not important money/money income (PMR) curve that 
 consists of a linear combination of the (one company that controls too much) not important money/money income curve, MR (Q) = aˆ‚[D(Q)Q]/aˆ‚Q, and the what people want to buy 
 curve, D(Q), with Î¾ representing the weight attributed to the 
 not important money/money income curve and (1 aˆ' Î¾ ) representing the weight 
 attributed to the demand curve: PMR(Q) = Î¾ MR(Q) + (1 aˆ' 
 Î¾ ) D(Q). (in almost the same way), for an industry with oligopsony power, the 
 perceived not important factor cost curve is PMC(Q) = Î¸ MC(Q) + 
 (1 aˆ' Î¸ ) S(Q), where MC = aˆ‚[S(Q) Q]/aˆ‚Q represents the (one company that controls too much) 
 not important factor cost curve. Industry balance output, Q 1 , is 
 found in Fig. 1 at the intersection of the PMRw and PMCw 
 curves. The competitive balance, output Q c in Fig. 1, is the 
 special case where Î¾ w = Î¸ f = 0. 
 Money-based extra (ES) under processor market power is distributed as follows: 
 CS1 = 
 
 a/Î± 
 
 (a aˆ' Î±P )dP = 
 
 P1r 
 
 (a aˆ' Î±P1r )2 
 2Î± 
 
 consumer extra, 
 (17) 
 
 P1f 
 
 PS1 = 
 b 
 1 
 
 = 
 
 w 
 1 
 
 P aˆ'b 
 (P f aˆ' b)2 
 dP = 1 
 Î² 
 2Î² 
 
 + 
 
 r 
 1 
 
 producer extra, 
 
 Given the constant-cost description of the marketing part/area (processing and retailing), the part/area earns zero (money made/good things received) in 
 competitive balance: c1 = 0. 
 In the linear version of the model, the market balance 
 prices, output, and distribution of money-based welfare are figured out by/decided by six limits/guidelines: Î¾ w (seller oligopoly power), Î¸ f 
 (buyer oligopsony power), Î·rc (price ability to stretch of retail demand 
 f 
 tested at the no-tax/import tax competitive balance), Îµc (price 
 ability to stretch of farm supply tested at the no-tax/import tax competitive 
 balance, f (farm money/money income share in the no-tax/import tax competitive 
 balance), and T (importance of the per-unit tax/import tax). In this 
 model, the per-unit tax/import tax functions identically to the constant 
 per-unit costs, cr and cw , got/caused by stores and processors, 
 (match up each pair of items in order). The larger is T, ceteris paribus, the less important is processor oligopsony power as a factor in deciding/figuring out 
 the market balance. Obviously, T represents an added 
 wedge (along with processor and store costs) between people and farm producers. When the farm input price is a 
 small part of retail value, the structure of the market for 
 purchase of the input does not matter much in deciding/figuring out 
 the market balance at retail. 
 4.2. Market power at (one after the other) up-and-down stages 
 We focus on the case of (one after the other) oligopoly power. For 
 the linear version of the model, the market balance under 
 (one after the other) oligopoly power is defined by Eqs. (1 ), (2 ), (8), 
 and (10): 
 Q2 = 
 
 1 + Î±(Î² aˆ' T ) 
 2 
 
 P2r = 
 
 a aˆ' Q2 
 , 
 Î± 
 
 , 
 
 P2w = b + Î²Q2 + cw , 
 
 P2f = b + Î²Q2 , 
 
 (21) 
 
 where 2 = (1 + Î¾ r )(1 + Î¾ w ) + (1 + Î¸ f )Î±Î² = (1 + Î¾ r )(1 + 
 Î¾ w ) + (1 + Î¸ f )f Î·rc /Îµfc . In this case the market balance and 
 welfare distribution are figured out by/decided by seven limits/guidelines: Î¾ r , Î¾ w , 
 f 
 Î¸ f , Î·rc , Îµc , f, and T. In addition to the limits/guidelines contained in the 
 previous/coming before case, a second Î¾ limit/guideline reflects the degree of seller 
 market power at (one after the other) stages of the market chain. Fig. 2 
 illustrates this picture/situation. The curve Pw = PMRr - cr represents 
 the retail part/area's received/made from demand for the farm product at the 
 wholesale level, given the stores' oligopoly power, Î¾ r , where 
 PMR r = Î¾ r MR (Q) + (1 aˆ' Î¾ r )D(Q). Processors then recognize 
 a PMR curve, PMRw , based on Pw , given their oligopoly power, 
 Î¾ w . The reduction in output from Q 1 to Q 2 in Fig. 2 represents 
 the (in small steps up) distortion to output from (one after the other) oligopoly 
 power. 14 
 
 = [P1r aˆ' P1f aˆ' 1 + f aˆ' T ]Q1 
 
 processor/retailer (money made/good thing received), 
 R1 = TQ1 
 
 (18) 
 
 259 
 
 (money from taxes), 
 
 ES1 = CS1 + PS1 + P1 + R1 
 
 (19) 
 (20) 
 
 total extra. 
 
 (21) 
 
 14 
 
 The formal derivation of the (one after the other) oligopsony case is a plain/honest/easy 
 helpful change of the (one after the other) oligopoly case and, this way, is left-out. The linear 
 version of the (one after the other) oligopsony model is represented by Eqs. (1 ), (2 ), 
 (12), and (14), and the model solution is seen as seven limits/guidelines, 
 with the added/more limit/guideline in this case reflecting the possible exercise of 
 oligopsony power by processors in the market for the farm product, Î¸ f , and by 
 stores in the wholesaler market, Î¸ w . 
 
 260 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 PMCw = Î¸fMCf + (1 - Î¸f)Pf + cw + T 
 Pf + cw + T 
 P1r 
 
 Pf(Q) 
 
 Pcr 
 P1w 
 
 Pcw 
 Pcf 
 
 Pr(Q) 
 
 P1f 
 Pw = Pr - cr 
 
 PMRw =Î¾wMRw + (1 - Î¾w)Pw 
 
 Q1 
 
 Qc 
 
 Fig. 1. Market balance under processor oligopoly and oligopsony power (Î¾ w = Î¸ w = 0.5). 
 
 In structuring tests for these different competition pictures/situations, we have chosen base limit/guideline values to look like 
 some key developing-country export pictures/situations. The limit/guideline f, the farm share of money/money income under the no-tax/import tax competitive balance, was fixed at f = 1 aˆ' cw aˆ' cr = 0.2. For 
 example, farm share for coffee and bananas is about 10% 
 (FAO, 2004) and for cocoa about 5% (Oxfam, 2002). In the 
 market power and tax/import tax pictures/situations contained in the tests, the farm share drops well below the 0.2 competitivebenchmark share, so setting the test result at 0.2 enables 
 the tests to show the even lower shares watched/followed in 
 reality. 15 
 The first (or most important) effect of f in the model is to influence the importance of oligopsony power in deciding/figuring out output and welfare 
 in the market. When f is small, the farm input is not important as a (thing that decides something) of the final product value relative to the 
 costs got/caused by processors and stores, and, this way, oligopsony power in the farm part/area has only a minor hit/effect on total 
 market output and personal welfare. The presence of a tax/import tax 
 reduces the farm share of the total retail expense under 
 any form of competition, and, this way, also reduces the relative 
 15 
 
 To provide just one illustration of this point, the farm share of the personal 
 food dollar for the case of modest (one after the other) market power represented by 
 Î¾ w = Î¾ r = Î¸ f = 0.2 is 0.071%, given the base competitive markets share 
 of f = 0.2, exactly in the range pointed to/showed for key developing-country export 
 valuable things. 
 
 importance of processor oligopsony power in deciding/figuring out the 
 market balance. 
 f 
 We think about/believe Î·rc = Îµc = 0.6 as base cases for the retaildemand and farm-supply elasticities, (match up each pair of items in order), each tested at the no-tax/import tax competitive balance. 16 The choices 
 reflect the inelasticity of both personal demand and farm supply that is carefully thought about/believed typical for farming-based valuable things. 17 
 For example, Bhuyan and Lopez (1997) report price elasticities of demand for roasted coffee and chocolate and cocoa in 
 the U.S. of 0.53 and 0.52, (match up each pair of items in order). Abbott et al. (2005) 
 report an group price ability to stretch of demand of 0.24 for 
 bulk cocoa and 0.53 for fair-trade cocoa products. The former number compares closely to the guess of 0.19 reported 
 by Gilbert and Varangis (2003). In terms of supply elasticities, 
 Abbott, et al. report short-run price elasticities of supply in the 
 range of 0.3-0.5 for cocoa, a range that behaves well with 
 the point guess of 0.45 reported by Gilbert and Varangis 
 (2003). 
 16 The distortion from a given degree of market power is always (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) 
 to the ability to stretch of the demand curve (in the case of oligopoly power) or supply 
 f 
 curve (in the case of oligopsony power) that is being mistreated. Setting Î·rc = Îµ c 
 has the good qualities/the advantage that the relative importance of oligopoly vs. oligopsony power 
 is not twisted/partially untrue/lied about by differences in the hidden (under) elasticities of retail demand or 
 farm supply. 
 17 Given Îµ f = 0.6 and f = 0.2, the retail supply ability to stretch tested at the 
 c 
 competitive balance is Îµrc = 3.0. 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 261 
 
 PMCw = Î¸fMCf + (1 - Î¸f)Pf + cw + T 
 Pf + cw + T 
 r 
 2 
 
 P 
 
 Pf(Q) 
 
 Pcr 
 
 P2w 
 Pcw 
 
 Pr(Q) 
 
 Pcf 
 
 P2f 
 Pr - cr 
 Pw = PMRr - cr 
 
 PMRw = Î¾wMRw + (1 - Î¾w)Pw 
 Q2 Q1 
 
 Qc 
 
 Fig. 2. (one after the other) oligopoly power with processor oligopsony power (Î¾ w = Î¾ r = Î¸ f = 0.5). 
 
 Given the linear retail supply and farm demand curves, the 
 elasticities change as output changes along the curves to reflect other choice forms of (in a way that is not totally pure or totally correct) competitive equilibria. 
 However, the relative high levels of different ability to stretch (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) are the same across the different (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition 
 equilibria, and, this way, it is enough to fix the elasticities at a particular point, such as the competitive balance, to test out the 
 effects of different ability to stretch (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required). 
 The most important limits/guidelines for the purposes of the (testing out) analysis are the market power limits/guidelines, Î¸ and Î¾ . As 
 noted and illustrated in Table 1 most scientific guesses have 
 showed/told about rather modest departures from competition, with point 
 guesses of Î¸ and/or Î¾ falling usually in the range of 0.25 
 or less (Sheldon and Sperling, 2003). However, Bhuyan and 
 Lopez (1997) received/got guesses of Î¾ that were much 
 higher for some businesses in their high-reaching study of oligopoly 
 power for all U.S. four-digit SIC food and drink businesses. For example, 2043 cereal preparation, 2041 flour &amp; grain 
 mills, 2075 soybean oil mills cooperated with/produced/gave up guesses of Î¾ of about 
 0.5. 
 Given the recent increases in combining of food manufacturing and food retailing in many countries, the past studies may 
 understate current levels of market power. Also, Church assistant 
 (2000) has argued that the limits of the existing scientific 
 books probably serve on balance to understate the extent 
 of market power. For example, this end/end result would apply 
 to (i) analysis of inappropriately broad product markets, (ii) 
 
 failure to account for the possibility of market power upstream 
 or downstream from the stage being carefully studied, and (iii) failure 
 to account properly for technical change and/or (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 scale in costs. 
 So, to gain a broad (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) of the effects of market 
 power on the hits/effects of tax/import tax reduction, we conduct tests over the period of time (or space) Î¸ , Î¾ aˆˆ [0, 0.5]. 18 However, to help 
 a graphical presentation of results, we always think about/believe equal 
 relative departures from competition for each part/area that is exercising market power in the (testing out). For example, in testing out market behavior under (one after the other) oligopsony and store 
 oligopoly, we will always set Î¸ f = Î¸ w = Î¾ r . 
 4.3. (testing out) results 
 It is first useful to gain a (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) as to how market power, 
 including market power at (one after the other) up-and-down stages, can affect market performance. Fig. 3 shows the effect of market 
 power on producer welfare as the% change in producer welfare relative to perfect competition as a function of the degree 
 of downstream market power. Five market power pictures/situations are 
 carefully thought about/believed: (i) oligopsony only, (ii) both oligopoly, and oligopsony, (iii) (one after the other) oligopsony and store oligopsony, and 
 (iv) (one after the other) oligopoly and processor oligopsony. 
 18 Values of 0.5 for Î¾ and Î¸ point to/show the market power received/got in a matching 
 firm rule (by two people) and duopsony, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 262 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 0 
 
 -10 
 
 Producer Extra Change (%) 
 
 -20 
 
 -30 
 
 -40 
 
 -50 
 
 -60 
 
 -70 
 
 -80 
 
 -90 
 0 
 
 0.1 
 
 0.2 
 
 0.3 
 
 0.4 
 
 0.5 
 
 Market Power Index 
 Oligopsony 
 
 Oligopsony &amp; Oligopoly 
 
 (one after the other) Oligopsony with Oligopoly 
 
 (one after the other) Oligopoly with Oligopsony 
 
 Fig. 3. The effect of market power on producer welfare. 
 0 
 
 Total Welfare Change (%) 
 
 -5 
 
 -10 
 
 -15 
 
 -20 
 
 -25 
 
 -30 
 0 
 
 0.1 
 
 0.2 
 
 0.3 
 
 0.4 
 
 0.5 
 
 Market Power Index 
 Oligopsony 
 
 Oligopsony &amp; Oligopoly 
 
 (one after the other) Oligopsony with Oligopoly 
 
 (one after the other) Oligopoly with Oligopsony 
 
 Fig. 4. The effect of market power on total welfare. 
 
 A given degree of downstream oligopoly power is always 
 more damaging to producer welfare than the same degree of 
 downstream oligopsony power because the oligopoly power 
 affects the whole final product, whereas the oligopsony power 
 applies only to the raw product input. 19 So, ceteris paribus, 
 a given degree of oligopoly power will always reduce market 
 output more than will a given degree of oligopsony power. 
 Fig. 3 makes clear that, even modest levels of market power, 
 such as have been found in the scientific books, can in 
 19 In the base (testing out), the farm share of the final product value under perfect competition is 0.2, and, this way, the other inputs used by the marketing part/area 
 to produce the final product make up/be equal to 80% of the retail value under perfect 
 competition. These inputs completely/in a hinting way are assumed to be gotten competitively. 
 
 combination have a very damaging hit/effect upon the welfare of 
 producers in the developing (process of people making, selling, and buying things). For example, (one after the other) 
 oligopoly power combined with processor oligopsony power of 
 0.2 (Î¾ r = Î¾ w = Î¸ f = 0.2) combine to reduce producer extra 
 by about 49% relative to perfect competition in all downstream 
 parts/areas. 
 Fig. 4 illustrates the effect of downstream market power on 
 total ES (the sum of producer extra, person extra, and 
 marketer (money made/good things received)) in the market. Fig. 5 illustrates the distribution 
 of ES among producers, people and marketers for the case 
 of processor oligopsony combined with store oligopoly (but 
 no (one after the other) market power). Figs. 4 and 5 combine to illustrate 
 some important points (related to/looking at/thinking about) the (wasting very little while working or producing something) and distributional hits/effects of market power in a up-and-down market chain. First, 
 
 R. J. Church assistant et al. / Farming-based Money flow 36 (2007) 253-270 
 
 263 
 
 90 
 
 80 
 
 70 
 
 Share (%) 
 
 60 
 
 50 
 
 40 
 
 30 
 
 20 
 
 10 
 
 0 
 0 
 
 0.1 
 
 0.2 
 
 0.3 
 
 0.4 
 
 0.5 
 
 Market Power Index 
 Person 
 
 Producer 
 
 Marketer 
 
 Fig. 5. The effect of market power on the distribution of welfare: processor oligopsony and retail oligopoly. 
 
 modest levels of market power have small (wasting very little while working or producing something) effects. 
 Fig. 4 shows that even (one after the other) oligopoly plus oligopsony or 
 (one after the other) oligopsony plus oligopoly create (wasting very little while working or producing something) losses 
 relative to perfect competition of 10% or less for modest levels 
 of market power--Î¸ and Î¾ values of 0.2 or less, results agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with prior work, dating back to the original work by 
 Harberger (1954). However, Fig. 4 also illustrates that markets 
 with large departures from competition that are repeated across 
 multiple up-and-down stages can have large (wasting very little while working or producing something) losses. For example, the case of (one after the other) oligopoly plus oligopsony where 
 Î¾ r = Î¾ w = Î¸ f = 0.5 (i.e., Cournot rules (by two people) and duopsony) 
 reduces the total ES in the market by about 28%. 
 Fig. 5, however, shows that the distributional effects of market power are large even for modest departures from competition. Perfectly competitive marketers earn only (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) (money made/good things received) 
 in this model, but Î¾ r = Î¸ f = 0.2 or more enables the marketing 
 part/area's extra to go beyond the extra earned by the producing 
 part/area, and Î¾ r = Î¸ f = 0.4 or more enables marketers' extra to 
 go beyond people' extra. 
 Now think about/believe trade (easing government rules) in terms of eliminating the 
 per-unit tax/import tax T = 0.2 (a 20% tax/import tax at the competitive balance). Fig. 6 shows the total change in farm price from 
 removing the tax/import tax for different competition pictures/situations. Given 
 Îµrc = 3 &amp;gt; Î·rc = 0.6, producers bear only one sixth of the (number of times something happens) of the tax/import tax in competitive balance. So, permanently stopping 
 the tax/import tax raises the farm price by Pf = 0.2/6 = 0.033 in the 
 competitive balance. Pf is a decreasing function of the 
 degree of downstream market power because an (in a way that is not totally pure or totally correct) 
 competitive marketing part/area always takes by force/takes control of a share of the 
 benefits of an (coming from the outside of something) shock of this type. For example, in 
 the case of (one after the other) oligopoly power plus processor oligopsony, modest market power represented by Î¾ r = Î¾ w = Î¸ f = 0.2 
 
 reduces the farm price increase from tax/import tax removal by 29%, 
 while the more extreme picture/situation of<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
