World Developmenr, Vol. 22, No. 11, pp. 1613-1625, 
 
 1994 
 Copyright 0 1994 Elsevier Science Ltd 
 Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved 
 0305-750x/94 
 $7.00 + 0.00 
 
 Pergamon 
 
 0305-750x(94)00075-1 
 
 Markets in Tradable Water Rights: (possibility of/possible happening of) 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) Gains in Developing Country Water 
 Useful thing/valuable supply Portion 
 
 International 
 
 MARK W. ROSEGRANT 
 Food Policy Research Institute, Washington DC, U.S.A. 
 and 
 HANS P. BINSWANGER" 
 The World Bank, Washington DC, U.S.A. 
 
 Summary. - Establishment of tradable water rights could play an important role in improving the (wasting very little while working or producing something), equity, and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of water use in developing countries. Well-defined tradable rights for- 
 
 malize and secure the existing water rights held by water users; spend less on transactions costs; cause 
 water users to think about  the full opportunity cost of water; and provide (rewards or reasons for doing something) for water users to (make a part of you) and reduce many of the negative externalities built into crop-watering/rinsing with water. The institutional needed things, 
 (possible greatness or power) and (ability to be done) of developing markets in tradable water rights should receive increased attention 
 from (people who work to find information) 
 
 and policy makers. 
 
 1. INTRODUCTION 
 
 Over the past ten years, the cost of new crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 investment has been quickly increasing. Existing systems have often (did/done/completed) poorly and have insulted/got worse 
 through waterlogging, 
 salinization, and mining of 
 (underground water that supplies wells) underground waters. Growth in crop working well in 
 watered areas has slowed, and competition for water 
 for nonagricultural uses has increased. These developments create strong demands to develop water 
 useful thing/valuable supply policies to maintain growth in watered farming-based production, help (producing a lot with very little waste) portion of 
 water across parts/areas and final demands, and reverse 
 the (happening now) worsening of the water useful thing/valuable supply base. 
 What water policies can lead to (producing a lot with very little waste) increases in 
 watered production while reducing useful thing/valuable supply worsening in the watered areas in developing countries and 
 releasing water for growing nonagricultural demands? 
 Four big groups of policy prescriptions have 
 been employed: (related to computers and science) solutions, reform of 
 public management of crop-watering/rinsing with water systems, shared 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water management, and (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) tradable property rights in water and development of markets in these rights. The first three broad prescriptions 
 have been widely used by international lenders and 
 national governments. The design and (putting into) use of policies to encourage (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) tradable property rights and markets in water have not, 
 however, been chased after energetically. 
 
 This paper explores the reasons why portion of 
 water rights through markets has not been a well-known/obvious 
 solution in developing countries. We argue that, with 
 the fast money-based growth and increasing competition 
 for water in many developing countries, policies to 
 encourage development of markets in tradable water 
 rights should receive increasing focus from policy 
 makers and (people who work to find information). What's more, reform of water 
 rights would in many cases improve the effectiveness 
 of the more traditional water policy efforts. In the 
 rest of this paper, recent (popular things/general ways things are going) in (related to computers and science) 
 solutions, reform of public management, and shared crop-watering/rinsing with water management will be briefly reviewed, a 
 more described/explained presentation of issues related to water 
 market development will then be given, and ends/end results will be summarized. 
 
 2. POLICY OPTIONS FOR ARRESTING 
 DEGRADATION AND IMPROVING 
 PRODUCTIVITY IN IRRIGATED AREAS 
 (a) (related to computers and science) solutions 
 (related to computers and science) approaches to expanded watered 
 crop production and reduced worsening include con- 
 
 *Final rewriting/redoing accepted: June 7, 1994. 
 
 1613 
 
 1614 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 struction of new crop-watering/rinsing with water systems, healing/fixing and 
 modernization of existing systems, narrow waterway lining and 
 drainage, and field drainage. Investment in new construction and healing/fixing, while still big, has 
 declined very much, over the past ten years. Recent 
 projections of world valuable thing prices point to/show continued declines in the real world prices of cereals, the 
 main users of crop-watering/rinsing with water water in developing countries 
 (Mitchell and Ingco, 1994; Rosegrant and Agcaoli, 
 1994). These projected price (popular things/general ways things are going), combined with 
 continued increase of the capital costs of new crop-watering/rinsing with water, make a return to the investment levels of the 
 1970s unlikely. 
 Review of the record of healing/fixing projects 
 shows highly (number or thing that changes) net benefits (Rosegrant and 
 Svendsen, 1993). Maybe the only plain/honest/easy 
 end/end result is the importance of selectivity. Many 
 healings/fixings have been large-scale, capital-intensive 
 projects which aim at a thorough remake of the system. These investments are subject to the same type 
 of rent-looking (for), delays, and cost overruns that describe much construction of new systems. Greater 
 selectivity in investment in crop-watering/rinsing with water healing/fixing, 
 modernization, and other (related to computers and science) helping actions 
 is needed to improve the (wasting very little while working or producing something) and performance 
 of crop-watering/rinsing with water systems. The future success of (related to computers and science) investments could be very much improved by 
 reform of water rights. It is argued below that establishment of tradable water rights provides (rewards or reasons for doing something) 
 to involve water users in investment decisions, which 
 could greatly improve selection of investments in 
 technology. Investments in improved crop-watering/rinsing with water technology will in turn improve the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of markets 
 in water rights. 
 
 (b) Reform of public management of crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 systems 
 Policies begun/tried in this area (often along with (related to computers and science) helping actions) include change of water distribution methods (such as shifting 
 from continuous flow to rotational flow water portion); (putting into) use of water pricing policies; and 
 institutional reform of public crop-watering/rinsing with water slow-working people. 
 Almost the same as  the case for healing/fixing, reform of water 
 management methods within existing systems has 
 shown mixed results, with some helping actions having 
 high rates of return (Aluwihare dry Kikuchi, 1990) 
 while others 
 have been much less effective 
 (Rosegrant, 1990; Rosegrant and Svendsen, 1993). 
 Tries to put into use (wasting very little while working or producing something) pricing of water, 
 where all users are charged the social opportunity cost 
 of water, have been (compared to other things) rare (Sampath, 1992). 
 Different forms of not important cost pricing of water under 
 (controlled by one central place) management, however, have been proposed, increased/added 
 by taxes and/or payments to 
 account for externalities. 
 For surface water, they 
 
 include direct pricing based on (total space occupied by something) of water: 
 almost-direct pricing based on delivery "turns" or length of time of delivery; and indirect pricing through working well-based taxes on land. For (underground water that supplies wells). they 
 include direct pricing through charges on water 
 pumped; almost-direct pricing through charges on the 
 time the pump is in operation; and indirect pricing, 
 through taxes or payments on electricity or fuel used 
 by pumps. (wasting very little while working or producing something) pricing of water is discussed in 
 more detail below along with water markets. 
 Institutional reform of public crop-watering/rinsing with water (services businesses/government units) 
 has received increasing attention over the last few years, and 
 holds (large/relatively large) promise for long-term progress in 
 improving system performance. Just as changes in 
 available technology alone are not enough to create 
 big improvements in crop-watering/rinsing with water performance, it 
 is also becoming more and more clear that management inventions of new things, by themselves, will not be good enough for 
 the job. Attention is moving/changing to the part/areaal policies 
 and institutional forms which shape the operation of 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water (services businesses/government units). Examination of the personal and 
 institutional rewards and (rewards or reasons for doing something) which operate 
 within public crop-watering/rinsing with water slow-working people suggest that 
 more basic changes in policies and institutions 
 are needed to permit "the will to manage" to come out 
 (Uphoff, Ramamurthy, and Steiner, 1991; Small and 
 Carruthers, 1991; Svendsen, Adriano, and Martin 
 1990). Possible changes include moving/changing from a line 
 department to a semi-independent 
 or public utility 
 mode, applying (money-related) ability to be done judging requirements to crop-watering/rinsing with water (services businesses/government units), franchising rights to operate publicly 
 built crop-watering/rinsing with water facilities, and strengthening 
 responsibility 
 (machines/methods/ways) such as providing for 
 farmer oversight of operating (services businesses/government units). Many of these 
 changes can be seen as introducing almost-market 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) into the management of public crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 systems. We argue below that establishment of tradable water rights, by strengthening the security and 
 (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) power of water users, is highly (completing/matching) with improved management of main systems. 
 
 (c) Shared water management 
 The practice of involving farmers more directly in 
 both the processes of system management and system 
 improvement 
 has received increasing importance 
 over the past twenty years. "Farmer participation" has 
 by now become almost its own control/field of study, and 
 created a large volume of idea-based papers and case 
 studies. It is applied both as a means of directly 
 improving third/(related to three)-level water management and maintenance of system facilities. It is also used along with activities aimed at main system managers. as 
 a way of building a basic structure which can link 
 with the crop-watering/rinsing with water slow-working department to help improved 
 management 
 of whole systems (Rosegrant 
 and 
 Svendsen, 1993). Noted examples of this approach 
 
 MARKETS 
 
 IN TRADABLE 
 
 come from the Philippines (Korten and Siy, 1988; de 
 10s Reyes and Jopillo, 1986), but experience now 
 exists in some countries in Asia, Africa, and 
 Latin America. Uphoff (1986) reviewed 50 case studies of farmer participation in crop-watering/rinsing with water management 
 and found that farmers were willing and able to discharge greater responsibility in crop-watering/rinsing with water management 
 than is usually/(in the past) believed and their involvement to 
 be highly helpful. Anyway, it has been hard 
 to establish that shared approaches to water management have actually increased farm production and 
 income. 
 Water rights approaches should be highly (completing/matching) 
 with group management. 
 In practice, 
 turnover of crop-watering/rinsing with water systems has (made legal/made acceptable) the 
 move (from one place to another) of the responsibilities for operations and management to farmers, by that/in that way reducing the costs of 
 (related to money) 
 strapped 
 public slow-working people, 
 The 
 turnover of costs and responsibilities, however, has 
 not been with improved access to water 
 through the establishment and granting of tradable 
 water rights, nor has it been with a clear 
 border/limit of duties between the government crop-watering/rinsing with water slow-working department and the private water user groups. As 
 a result, there has been no change in the basic 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) controlling/ruling water use. If (clearly visible/clearly understood) tradable water rights are granted, water user groups would 
 have the (reward or reason for doing something) to spend less on water use, and 
 would have the legal standing to (arrive at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) forcefully 
 with the water travel-related slow-working department for good and 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) service. 
 
 (d) Establishment of tradable property rights in 
 water and development of markets in water rights 
 For most valuable things and inputs, portion by 
 means of markets has been the favorite solution of 
 money-flow experts. Coase (1960) (agreed to--and promised to follow--certain rules, procedures, etc.) this argument, 
 showing that market portion will be (producing a lot with very little waste), given 
 (clearly visible/clearly understood) and nonattenuated initial property rights 
 and zero transactions costs. Well-defined and nonattenuated property rights are completely specified, 
 exclusive, move (from one place to another)able, and (able to be backed up with punishment if a rule is broken). 
 Obviously, the idea (you think is true) of zero transactions 
 costs does not hold true in markets for water rights, 
 where information, transportation, 
 and enforcement 
 costs may in fact be higher than in most input markets. 
 Even in a world of transactions costs, however, markets in tradable water rights may lead to a lot of 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) gains and other benefits. 
 The first benefit is permission of water users by 
 needing/ordering their permission to any (giving out things in a different way) of water 
 and payment for any water moved (from one place to another). The second is to provide security of water rights (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) to the 
 water users. If (clearly visible/clearly understood) rights are established, the 
 water users could invest in water-saving technology 
 knowing that they would benefit from the investment. 
 
 WATER 
 
 RIGHTS 
 
 1615 
 
 Third, a system of marketable rights to water would 
 cause water users to think about  the full opportunity 
 cost of water, including its value in other choice uses, 
 this way providing (rewards or reasons for doing something) to (in a way that produces a lot with very little waste) use water and 
 to gain added/more income through the sale of saved 
 water. Fourth, a system of tradable water rights would 
 provide (rewards or reasons for doing something) for water users to take account of 
 the external costs (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) by their water use, reducing 
 the pressure to insult/worsen useful things/valuable supplies. Fifth, compared to 
 the often-recommended 
 volumetric pricing of crop-watering/rinsing with water water, the rights-based approach would be more 
 acceptable to farmers. (something forced on people/an inconvenient situation) of volumetric pricing would be seen by farmers as stealing of traditional water rights, which would create capital 
 losses in established watered farms. Establishment of 
 move (from one place to another)able water rights would instead (agree to--and promise to follow--certain rules, procedures, etc.) 
 existing rights to water. Finally, portion of water 
 through tradable rights provides maximum flexibility 
 in responding to changes in crop prices and water values as demand patterns and (serving to compare two or more things) advantage 
 change and (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) of cropping go aheads. The 
 market-based system is more (able to reply or react/quick to respond) than (controlled by one central place) portion of water. 
 Given that markets may have significant advantages over other choice allocative (machines/methods/ways), why has 
 (controlled by one central place) portion of crop-watering/rinsing with water water been most 
 commonly used? Why has (compared to other things) little attention 
 been given to tradable property rights and markets in 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water water? Is there a (possibility of/possible happening of)  gains in working well and reduced useful thing/valuable supply worsening through 
 development of markets in move (from one place to another)able water rights? 
 Much of the basic research to understand these issues 
 in a developing country big picture  has yet to be done, but 
 a important review of issues and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) can provide 
 some ideas. 
 
 3. WATER MARKETS: 
 CONCEPTS AND ISSUES 
 First, it must be stressed that usufructuary rights 
 to water already exist in most developing countries, 
 either completely/in a hinting way (through custom) or clearly 
 (through bodies of law and rules). Establishment of move (from one place to another)able property rights is a matter of 
 reforming or changing existing water rights systems. 
 Water rights are usually based on one of three systems: riparian rights, public portion, and prior 
 (appropriative) rights (Sampath, 1992): riparian rights 
 link ownership of or reasonable use of water to ownership of the (next-to) or overlying lands; public portion involves given/gave distribution of water; and 
 prior rights are based on the taking idea/belief, 
 under which the water right is gotten/purchased by actual use 
 over time. 
 None of these systems of rights satisfies the conditions for (clearly visible/clearly understood) 
 property rights to water. 
 Riparian rights are the most (serving to severely limit or control) of moves (from one place to another), 
 
 1616 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 because they limit use of water to (next to) or overlying lands, but even appropriative rights can be highly 
 (serving to severely limit or control), building in a bias toward maintaining 
 existing, possibly inefficient uses of water. Under 
 many appropriative rights systems, selling of water is 
 risky because the move (from one place to another) may be (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of nonbeneficial use and therefore be grounds for cancellation of 
 water rights (Frederick, 1986). 
 The basic case against beginning and building on markets in tradable water rights is that the transactions and equity 
 costs go beyond the social benefits. The transactions costs 
 include not only the charges in physical hardware to 
 bring across the traded water, but also the (related to careful studying or deep thinking), legal, 
 and institutional (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) to promise both buyer and 
 seller the exact amounts moved (from one place to another), and to confirm 
 the (not being there; not being present) of externalities (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) on third parties 
 due to the trade. Jt is also argued that equity could 
 worsen within the watered part/area or across parts/areas. 
 The social benefits include the net income gains created through water trade and caused (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 gains, taking account of positive and negative externalities. For developing countries, Sampath (I 992), 
 OECD (I 987), and Young ( 1986) have further described this basic criticism. 
 First, transactions costs are especially high in 
 developing-country 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water, which is showed 
 by large systems serving many small farmers. The 
 changeable nature of water how makes it especially difticult and expensive to (accomplish or gain with effort) the necessary sure feeling in 
 move (from one place to another)able rights, which must be well defined in 
 terms of amount, quality, location, and time of use. 
 (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) tradable property rights in water 
 therefore would require high investment costs in tcchnology and management to put into use improved transportation for on-demand delivery of water, water 
 metering and enforcement of contracts. Second, the 
 high costs of investment needed to develop water markcts are worsened by the (compared to other things) low value of 
 water due to the low value of the principal watered 
 crops in developing countries, rice and wheat. Third, 
 the presence of significant externalities (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) on 
 third parties, (in other words) spillover effects on other people's 
 welfare from water trades, makes it difhcult to enforce 
 and control trade in water. Fourth, tradability of 
 water to nonagricultural uses lead to an too much/too many 
 move (from one place to another) of water out of farming, reducing food production and farm income. Fifth, the process of setting apart water rights and of operating water markets favor 
 the rich over the poor and be seen as (one company that controls too much) rents, leading to worsening of the income or 
 wealth distribution. 
 We will address these criticisms and related issues 
 by making the following points: (i) as a result 
 of increasing lack of water, the benefits from reallocating it to the highest valued uses are increasing 
 quickly. (ii) Three other choice processes for reahocating water exist (portion by water management 
 people in charge through (related to managing and running a company or organization) and/or (back-and-forth conversation to agree on something) 
 
 processes, opportunity cost pricing of water, and 
 water markets). Each of these processes has its own 
 transactions costs, but the (things that are almost the same as other things) are more striking than the differences in institutional needed things. 
 (iii) The key difference between tradable water rights 
 and opportunity cost pricing is in who gets the 
 (not enough of something) rents of water, and this influences the political 
 (ability to be done) of the two options. (iv) Tradable property 
 rights may reduce, rather than increase externalities. 
 (v) If farms are very small, property rights to water 
 may be set apart and given out to associations or communities of 
 receivers of money rather than to people, and communities may be given the right for internal water portion 
 and external trading. (vi) Tradable water rights will 
 lead to greater involvement of users in investment 
 decisions than the other approaches, increasing the 
 efticiency of investment. (vii) (quality of changing over time or at different places) in water 
 supply does not prevent clear definition of rights or 
 hold back the usefulness of water markets. (viii) 
 Tradable water rights should not lead to large reductions in farming-based production or income due to 
 diversions of water from farming to nonagricultural 
 uses. (ix) Newly appearing water markets in developing 
 countries are seen as a great deal of competition among sellers, rather than (related to one company having too much power) power. 
 
 (a) Inueasing 
 
 henejts,fiom 
 
 reallocating water 
 
 As (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) grow, and competition for water and 
 the value of water increase, the benefits from reallocating water increase significantly. Randalt (1983) 
 argues that, as "water (processes of people making, selling, and buying things)" move from the 
 expansion-related phase to the mature phase, conditions 
 for establishment of property rights come out: the longrun supply of (took and held) or (changed to flow or route differently) water becomes 
 inelastic; the demand for delivered water increases 
 quickly; competition for water among farming-based, 
 industrial, and city-based, and instream uses increases; 
 externality problems, including rising water tables, 
 land salinization, and (underground water that supplies wells) salinization and 
 (everything is gone) become more and more important. All of these 
 factors increase the value of water and therefore the 
 benetits from (producing a lot with very little waste) portion of water. 
 Does the increasing value and lack of water 
 cause water trading and establishment of water markets? The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the western United States 
 clearly points to/shows that this process is happening, (even though there is the existence of) 
 water laws (see above) that often discourage (creation and construction/ group of objects) of water markets. Young (1986) Fisher and 
 Fisher (19X4), Gardner and Miller (1983) Martin 
 (1986) and Saliba, Martin and Bush (1985) document 
 the fast increase in water trading and market development in a few western states. 
 More important, (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from developing countries points to/shows that, to an increasing extent, the value of 
 water is no longer figured out by/decided by its value in IOWvalued crop production, but by its value in high- 
 
 MARKETS 
 
 IN TRADABLE 
 
 valued crops and city-based  and industrial uses. In Jordan, 
 water sold to high-valued (glass building where plants are grown) (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 fetches prices to the water seller of $O.lS/cubic 
 meter (m3) (Shatanawi, Al-Jayousi and Orabi, 1994). 
 (underground water that supplies wells) earlier used for paddy production in 
 Tamil Nadu, India, is (bought) from the well owner 
 at an average of $0.08/m3 for city-based  household consumption (Palanisami, 1994). In Mexico, recent water 
 sales from farming to city-based  uses have received 
 prices of $0.05-0.08/m 
 (Rosegrant and Gazmuri, 
 1994). These prices can be compared to the price of 
 $0.10/m) paid for farming-based water by the California 
 Drought Emergency Water Bank in 1991. In Chile, 
 permanent sales from farming-based to city-based  users of a 
 water share of one liter/second (enough to irrigate 
 about 0.5 ha every year) are sold at prices in the range of 
 $1,000 to $2,000, depending on location and demand 
 pressure (Gazmuri and Rosegrant, 1994). 
 So, as development go aheads and the value of 
 water increases, conditions are becoming more good to establishment of water markets. The first country with a complete water law that established a 
 system of tradable property rights, beginning in 1976, 
 was Chile. In December 1992, Mexico also passed a 
 water law recognizing the move (from one place to another)ability of water, and 
 Peru is in the process of reforming water law to permit 
 tradability. 
 In other developing countries, formal tradable 
 rights have not been established, but, as in the Jordan 
 and Tamil Nadu cases noted above, there has been 
 (large/relatively large) (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in informal water trading and 
 water markets. Market development appears to be 
 highest in (underground water that supplies wells): Shah (1991) guesses that as 
 much as one-half of the gross area watered by tubewells in India belongs to buyers of water; MeinzenDick (1992) and Chaudhry (1990) document the fast 
 development of markets for (underground water that supplies wells) in Pakistan. 
 Water trading within surface water systems is also 
 expanding. A recent survey in Pakistan found active 
 water markets (trading or buying of water) in 70% 
 of watercourses studied (Pakistan Water and Power 
 Development 
 Authority, 1990). Also, there 
 appears to be cooperation in market development when 
 conjunctive use of ground and surface water is possible. The availability of additional/helping water supply 
 from (underground water that supplies wells) reduces the doubt of trade in 
 surface water, encouraging development of markets in 
 surface water (Renfro and Sparling, 1986). 
 
 (b) Transactions costs and institutional 
 needed things of other choice (machines/methods/ways) of 
 reallocating water 
 Even if water values are rising quickly with 
 increasing (not enough of something), high transactions costs could 
 greatly limit the gains from trading. The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 above shows that markets are developing even where 
 
 WATER 
 
 RIGHTS 
 
 1617 
 
 not sanctioned by law, so transaction costs are not way too high. Are transactions anyway 
 higher for 
 water markets than for other portion (machines/methods/ways)? 
 Water can possibly 
 be (gave/given out things in a different way) 
 via three 
 processes. Under (related to managing and running a company or organization) portion, a public or 
 almost-public water authority (e.g. a river (bowl/area drained by a river)  commission, or a national or (related to a large area) water authority) 
 would identify water demands or other choice uses and 
 simply (give out things in a different way) existing water portions or rights 
 to higher valued uses. Since the losers will definitely protest, the authority will have to (work to reach agreement/get through) with 
 the users and find some way of paying/making up for the 
 losers. Opportunity-cost pricing of water and tradable 
 water rights, on the other hand, use the price response 
 of users to (give out things in a different way) water. With rising prices all users 
 have an (reward or reason for doing something) to increase their water use (wasting very little while working or producing something), and low-valued uses will give up water to 
 higher valued uses in a (without having one central area of command) decision-making 
 process involving the individual users. 
 Transaction costs arise whatever the process by 
 which water is (gave/given out things in a different way). Transaction costs include: 
 the cost of identifying money-making opportunities for 
 moving (from one place to another) water; the costs of (workingto reach agreement/getting through) or (related to managers) deciding on the water move (from one place to another); the cost of 
 watching possible third-party effects and other 
 externalities; the (set of machines) cost of actually bringing across the water and watching the moves (from one place to another); and the 
 (set of machines) and institutional cost of watching, 
 lessening, or eliminating possible third-party effects 
 and externalities. 
 No scientific research exists comparing these cost 
 elements under other choice systems. It is possible, 
 however, to discuss the first (number of times something happens) of these costs, 
 (in other words) who will carry/hold the  costs, as is done in Table 1. 
 Under (related to managing and running a company or organization) portions, all processes are 
 carried out by the authority or the utilities which operate within thejurisdiction of an authority. Other actors 
 become involved in some of the parts/pieces. For 
 example, the users would share in the cost of (back-and-forth conversation to agree on something) and conflict (agreement that ends an argument), and the courts would 
 likely play a role in conflict (agreement that ends an argument). 
 With tradable rights users would carry/hold the  costs of 
 identifying opportunities and (workingto reach agreement/getting through) the moves (from one place to another). The costs of transportation of water and of lessening third-party effects would fall on the buyers. The 
 authority would carry/hold the  cost of watching thirdparty effects and would be involved in conflict (agreement that ends an argument), maybe along with the courts. 
 Under opportunity cost pricing, moves (from one place to another) are not 
 (worked to reach agreement/got through). Therefore it is not clear how third-party 
 effects would be handled. Suppose a farmer decides to 
 stop buying water whose price increases. Who would 
 pay the downstream user for reduced return 
 flows is not clear. On the other hand, travel-related costs 
 would in the first instance be carried by the authority or 
 the utilities, who would recover the costs through the 
 water charges. 
 
 1618 
 
 WORLD 
 
 DEVELOPMENT 
 
 Portion 
 
 Costs of 
 Identifying 
 opportunities 
 (workingto reach agreement/getting through) 
 move (from one place to another).\ 
 
 (related to managing and running a company or organization) 
 
 Opportunity 
 cost pricing 
 
 Tradable 
 rights 
 
 Authority 
 
 Users 
 
 Users 
 
 N0ne 
 
 None 
 
 Authority. 
 
 Watching thirdparty effects 
 
 Authority 
 
 Transportation 
 
 Authority 
 
 Lessening of 
 third-party 
 effects 
 
 Authority 
 
 Resolving 
 conflict 
 
 Process 
 
 users 
 
 Authority, courts. 
 "Set-5 
 
 Based on (I priori thinking some statements about 
 the costs can be made. With tradable rights, since buyers will carry/hold the  costs of transportation and lessening, 
 they would attempt to find those trades which (make small) the total of purchase price, transportation, and 
 lessening costs. (related to managing and running a company or organization) 
 portion, on the 
 other hand, may be subject to political pressures, and 
 people in charge may not have the same (reward or reason for doing something) to (make small) the total cost of the move (from one place to another) as a buyer would. On 
 the other hand an authority may face lower transportation costs than a buyer if transportation needs/demands 
 large-scale construction and the authority has the right 
 of (taking over property) to get the right of way for the 
 structures. 
 It should also be stressed that, when comparing the 
 transactions costs of water markets with different 
 portion (machines/methods/ways), 
 the "hidden" transactions 
 costs of the last thing just mentioned must also be taken into account. 
 Wade (1982) shows the very high costs of private rentseeking by the managers of publicly given irrgation systems in India. Portion of water through 
 markets in well-detined property rights in water will 
 spend less on rent-looking (for) costs. 
 We have seen that establishment of a system of 
 tradable rights needs/demands an organizational and physical 
 structure to bring across and deliver crop-watering/rinsing with water water; and a 
 legal/law-based structure to enforce contracts, protect thirdparty interests, and stop argumentss. Arc highly 
 fancy (or smart) crop-watering/rinsing with water and travel-related technology 
 needed/demanded to make water markets work? In Chile, markets in tradable water rights have been operating 
 effectively 
 with (compared to other things) 
 simple 
 travel-related technology. Water is usually measured only 
 in the main channels. and after that, simple (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) division devices are used, which divide the 
 water into the assigned shares in proportion to narrow waterway 
 flow. The question of technology is more a matter of 
 
 ') 
 Authority 
 
 'F 
 Authority. courts. 
 users 
 
 Authority 
 Buyer 
 
 Buyer 
 Authoriiy. 
 courts, 
 users 
 
 degree than an either/or situation: better technology 
 will improve the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of water markets, and 
 increase the benefits of markets by reducing the transactions costs of trading, but significant gains from 
 trade can happen/be made real without highly fancy (or smart) 
 technology. More than that, there is cooperation between markets and (related to computers and science) improvement in transportation: 
 (related to computers and science) 
 inventions of new things 
 in water delivery and 
 metering will reduce transactions cost and encourage 
 market-oriented 
 reform in allocative (machines/methods/ways), 
 while markets in turn can cause (related to computers and science) change 
 by increasing the returns to investments (Young. 
 1986). 
 Public institutions must also protect the poor 
 against the development of market power, protect 
 against third-party weakness from water trades, and 
 stop argumentss arising from water trades. In Chile. 
 any move (from one place to another) of rights of use needs/demands prior approval, with trades watched/supervised at two Icvels, the local 
 water-user 
 association, 
 and the National Water 
 Authority. Issues of third-party weakness and conflicts over water trades can be settled at either level. 
 If agreement is not reached at these levels, conflicts 
 arc moved to the court systcrn (Gazmuri and 
 Rosegrant, 1994). (in almost the same way). in Mexico, water trades 
 must first be approved by the water-user association 
 and/or crop-watering/rinsing with water district, with (taking court cases to a higher court for review) to the Comision 
 National del Agua (CNA-National 
 Water Commission), and linal access to help to the courts (Roscgrant and 
 Gazmuri, 1994). 
 Are institutional failures in developing countries a 
 way too high (blocking thing) to enforcement of tradable propcrty 
 rights in water? As shown in the Table I, any water 
 portion government needs/demands an institutional support system to handle transactions costs. and it is not clear that 
 resolution of equity issues and conflicts is harder to (accomplish or gain with effort) under a tradable property rights government. 
 
 MARKETS 
 
 IN TRADABLE 
 
 Existing water portion governments in developing 
 countries have in many cases been ineffective at protecting the rights of poor farmers or protecting against 
 third-party weakness (Bymes, 1992; Maass and 
 Anderson, 1978). In fact, establishment 
 of welldefined tradable property rights may ease the institutional load of conflict (agreement that ends an argument) by reducing doubt in rights. Gazmuri (1992) reports that the 
 establishment 
 of the system of move (from one place to another)able water 
 rights in Chile has greatly reduced the number of 
 water conflicts reaching courts, with a large share of 
 conflicts being resolved at the level of the water-user 
 associations. 
 A continuing debate remains over the transactions 
 costs and third-party effects of the definition of water 
 rights as either sick use or full diversion 
 rights. In most western US states, water rights are 
 based on sick use, with protection of thirdparty rights to return fows (Johnson, Gisser, and 
 Werner, 1981). This system protects prior rights to 
 return flows, but increases (a lot) the transactions costs of water trading, because of the difficulty 
 in measuring sick use and return flows. In 
 practice, farmers often must (show or prove) unplanteding of 
 land to release sick water use for sale. In 
 the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District 
 (NCWCD), however, rights are (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) streamflow and rights to return flow are kept/held by the 
 district. Return flows are made available to water users 
 at no charge, but no rights are established to these 
 flows. Changes in patterns of return flows due to trades 
 are therefore not lawsuit-worthy. By defining away thirdparty rights to return flows, the NCWCD has greatly 
 reduced transactions costs to trades, resulting in a very 
 active water market (Howe, Schurmeier and Shaw, 
 1986; Cummings and Nercissiantz, 1992). 
 Chile and Mexico have in effect followed the 
 NCWCD model by defining rights as full diversion 
 rights which are (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) stream or narrow waterway flow. 
 Rights to return flow do not exist. In Chile, return 
 flows to close-by areas may be used by the receivers without the need to establish a right of use. Use of 
 this water, however, is dependent upon the flow of the 
 main rivers and usage rates of the rights holder. 
 There is no (responsibility/duty) to supply return flows and such 
 flows are this way not permanent (Gazmuri and Rosegrant, 
 1994). In Mexico, the first giveback of water 
 rights is based on the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) previous consumption of 
 water by the individual or group. It is clear in the law, 
 however, that this "consumption" is not the "sick use" rights with (responsibility/duty) to maintain a clearly stated amount of return flow which are common in the 
 western United States, but rather is the full diversion 
 right (Rosegrant and Gazmuri, 1994). If initial water 
 rights can be set apart and given out fairly (see discussion 
 below), (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) rights with no rights to return 
 flow should help (producing a lot with very little waste) portion without reducing or interfering with equity. 
 
 WATER 
 
 RIGHTS 
 
 1619 
 
 (c) Markets in water rights vs. water pricing 
 The establishment 
 of given/gave 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something)based pricing of water is often (fought for/pleaded for) as an (middle-position) policy between managed amount portion 
 and water markets. (producing a lot with very little waste) portion of useful things/valuable supplies 
 usually needs/demands that not important units of water are priced 
 at their not important cost. Although difficulties arise 
 due to (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) and lumpiness of investment in crop-watering/rinsing with water, it is possibly possible to design 
 and put into use a system of given 
 prices 
 which would lead to (producing a lot with very little waste) portion of water 
 (Chakravorty and Roumasset, 1991). The information 
 needed things for an (producing a lot with very little waste) system of given 
 prices are demanding, however, and much of this 
 information would necessarily be gathered by trialand-error 
 (trying new things out/testing ideas scientifically) 
 (Phelps, 
 Moore and 
 Graubard, 1978). Information is expensive and mistakes made in the trial-and-error process may be 
 expensive. If prices are set too low, demand for water 
 would be too much/too many, and if prices are set too high, 
 water would be wasted to drainage. 
 Maybe even more important, in existing crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 systems, the value of winning/most common usufructuary water 
 rights (formal or informal) has already been capitalized into the value of watered land. (something forced on people/an inconvenient situation) of 
 given pricing is correctly perceived by rights 
 holders as stealing of those rights, which would 
 create (when things become less valuable) in established crop-watering/rinsing with water farms. 
 Tries to establish given (wasting very little while working or producing something) prices 
 are this way met with strong (fighting force/bad feelings) from established 
 irrigators, which makes it hard to institute and 
 maintain an (wasting very little while working or producing something)-oriented 
 system of given prices (Randall, 1983). 
 Markets in tradable water rights this way have two 
 major advantages compared to giveed efticiency pricing. First, as noted above, information 
 costs would be reduced, because the market, composed of water users with expert knowledge of the 
 value of water as an input in the production process, 
 would carry/hold the  costs and create the necessary 
 information on the value of not important product and 
 opportunity costs of water. Second, establishment of 
 move (from one place to another)able property rights would (agree to--and promise to follow--certain rules, procedures, etc.) existing 
 rights to water, rather than being seen as an stealing of these rights, and is therefore politically 
 more (able to be done). 
 
 (d) Property rights and externalities 
 As noted above, a key argument against the property rights approach is the existence of externalities in 
 the use of water, which may interfere with the possible 
 argument that markets are (producing a lot with very little waste). But appropriately 
 defined property rights will in many events cause 
 farmers to (make a part of you) and in that way eliminate extemalities. For example, one of the first (or most important) externalities 
 
 1620 
 
 WORLD DEVELOPMENT 
 
 arising from the use of surface water is the overuse of 
 unpriced or underpriced crop-watering/rinsing with water water by farmers 
 near the head of the system, which leads to waterlogging and salinization, and to (not having something wanted or needed) of downstream farmers. This externality will be lessened by 
 establishment 
 of tradable property rights in water, 
 which will cause the "overuse? 
 to think about  the 
 opportunity cost of water to other water users when 
 deciding/figuring out his own use of water. The upstream 
 farmer can increase his income by spending less 
 on his use of water and trading the excess (lowproductivity) water to downstream farmers, who will 
 be willing to pay a price higher than the not important 
 value of added/more water computer program at the head of 
 the system. 
 Another classic externality in crop-watering/rinsing with water happens 
 with abuse of (underground water that supplies wells). Individual pump 
 irrigators have no (reward or reason for doing something) to improve long-run 
 extraction rates, because the value of water left in the 
 ground can be (taken/took control of) by other irrigators or potential 
 future irrigators. The resulting habit/desire for overdraft 
 or mining of (underground water that supplies wells) at a rate higher than 
 recharge can cause a few externalities. including 
 increased pumping lifts and costs for other irrigators 
 due to the lowered water table, land lessening. 
 worsening of water quality, and (when something is kept out or not included) of other 
 possible irrigators from access to water. 
 Well-defined tradable property rights in stocks and 
 flows of (underground water that supplies wells). 
 however, would (help increase/show in a good way) 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). because users would have an inccntivc lo 
 compare the opportunity costs of both different types 
 of water use and current vs. future uses of water. A 
 holder of a title to a stock of water could still face 
 increasing extraction costs (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) by the usage rates 
 of other pumpers, but these effects could bc rcduccd 
 a (based on a written agreement) 
 arrangement 
 that 
 with unitization, 
 changed in oil recovery to lessen common-pool 
 problems. With unitization. all pumpers contract to 
 use agreed-upon methods of extraction and delivery 
 and to share the costs. Each pumper's share of the lift 
 costs would be based on his usage rate, so unitization 
 might involve higher delivery costs, but it would also 
 provide (rewards or reasons for doing something) for increased water conservation 
 and so lower lift costs (Anderson and Leal, 1991). 
 Wider protection of (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) can also be 
 incorporated in a system of markets in tradable water 
 rights. In Mexico, the new water law establishes 
 clear protection of (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) for the first 
 time. The quality of discharge for nonagricultural uses 
 must be specified in the granting of the water right, 
 and the CNA can call for/use restrictions over water use in 
 the event of extreme water shortages, damage to communities, overexploitation of underground waters, and other (effects on the surrounding conditions or on the health of the Earth). In Chile, general (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 protection beyond direct third-party effects is missing 
 in the water law, but the (not very long ago) passed (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Protection Law should very much improve 
 the situation. In neither case, however, has the institu- 
 
 tional commitment 
 tion been tested. 
 
 to wider (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 
 protec- 
 
 (e) Individual L'S,cwnmunal propert&#126;&#126; rights 
 
 It has been argued that establishment of tradable 
 property rights in water is somehow opposite to traditional community values, and harmful to shared 
 management of water (Young, 1986; Mummc and 
 Ingram, 198.5). Tradable property rights can, however. 
 be assigned to shared groups or water-user associations as well as to people. Assignment of tradable property rights to shared groups should in 
 fact improve the control of these groups over water 
 useful things/valuable supplies. insuring better access to water than is often 
 the case with existing water user groups. Assignment 
 of tradable property rights in water to shared 
 groups may be more cost effective than assigning 
 rights to people in events where (making a part of you) 
 (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) within the group reduces the infonnation. 
 (based on a written agreement). and enforcement costs relative to pairwise (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) by people. To prevent rule of groups by powerful people would require 
 the establishment 
 of clear/open and honest decision-making 
 (machines/methods/ways) within the community. It is very important in 
 either case that the assignment of property rights is 
 matching with the structure of decision making with 
 respect to portion of water. 
 In both Chile and Mexico, strong water-user associations play a big part in portion of water. In 
 Chile, user associations manage the physical (set of machines). monitor the portion of water, approve 
 water moves (from one place to another), and provide the first (and usually 
 final) forum for conflict (agreement that ends an argument) (Gazmuri and 
 Rosegrant, 1994). In Mexico, the turnover of crop-watering/rinsing with water districts to newly organized water-user associations is basic to (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) water 
 rights. Under law, water rights can be given to people or groups, but there appears to be a strong preference for givebacks to be made to groups, with the 
 groups then granting less important thing/small company water rights to their 
 mcmbcrs through internal processes to be approved 
 by the CNA (Rosegrant and Gazmuri. 1994). 
 
 (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) in tinancing of large-scale 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water systems suggest that the organization of 
 financing and construction of such systems will likely 
 remain the responsibility of governments in developing countries. The ways of thinking/basic truths/rules for (producing a lot with very little waste) and fair financing and recovery of the capital cost of 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water systems extend beyond the issue of tradable 
 property rights to include identification of direct and 
 indirect receivers of money and the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of taxation 
 
 MARKETS 
 
 IN TRADABLE 
 
 and useful thing/valuable supply getting (something) ready for action (Small and Carruthers, 
 1991; Sampath, 1992, 1983). 
 Small and Carruthers (1991) point out, however, 
 the importance of involving possible water users in 
 the new crop-watering/rinsing with water system investment decision and 
 financing process, in order to (help increase/show in a good way) (money-related) control/field of study and realistic money-based evaluations. Establishment 
 of tradable property rights to water leads to 
 farmer input into the investment process: creation of 
 water rights before construction of an crop-watering/rinsing with water system, and needed thing of discussion and approval for 
 construction plans, together with participation in the 
 capital cost by possible/likely rights holders, establishes 
 strong (rewards or reasons for doing something) for (producing a lot for a given amount of money) investments in crop-watering/rinsing with water. The water law in Chile orders this type of 
 participation by possible/likely water rights holders. 
 Publicly paid-for crop-watering/rinsing with water construction needs/demands active 
 participation by possible users, commitment of at 
 least one-third of possible/likely users for project development, and commitment by one-half of possible/likely 
 users to get the (set of machines) before the start of 
 construction (Gazmuri and Rosegrant, 1994). 
 For the case of existing crop-watering/rinsing with water systems, Randall 
 (198 1) hints that fixed costs should be written off, 
 with no attempt to take (prisoner) by force fixed costs through 
 increases in charges to irrigators upon establishment 
 of tradable water rights. Tries to take (prisoner) by force sunk 
 costs through increased water transportation charges 
 would likely lead to the same type of political (fighting force/bad feelings) which has met the tries to put into use full cost 
 recovery or (wasting very little while working or producing something) pricing. If a properly given system of tradable property rights is established, 
 however, that secures/makes sure of that farmers will get the full 
 opportunity cost of their water, then the changeable costs 
 of operations and maintenance, including full travel-related cost, should be paid by the irrigators. To preserve the not important rules for (wasting very little while working or producing something), the final user of 
 the water should pay the full transportation charges to 
 his farm, so that when a trade of water is made, the 
 purchaser of the water will be responsible to the water 
 authority for transportation charges to his farm. 
 
 WATER 
 
 RIGHTS 
 
 1621 
 
 technically specified in volumetric terms, rather than 
 in proportion to streamflow; but the crop-watering/rinsing with water districts 
 and water-user associations are charged with developing procedures to set apart extra and shortage water 
 within their edges. Indications are that (more than what's needed) 
 and shortages will simply be set apart and given out (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else)ly 
 across all existing rights, so that, for example if 
 streamflow is 20% below (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy), each rights holder 
 will get 20% less water. This procedure effectively converts the volumetric right to a proportion of 
 streamflow right. In Chile, water rights are also 
 expressed in terms of water volume per unit of time, 
 but are (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) if water is not enough to make happy 
 all rights. 
 The commonly practiced prior rights systems in 
 developing countries are completely dependent on changeable streamflow, offer no (machines/methods/ways) for sharing risk 
 through trades, and usually (force (on people)/cause an inconvenient situation) greater risk on 
 farmers farther from the source of water, since nearby 
 farmers often increase their share of water flow during 
 periods of low streamflow. Assigning tradable property rights in terms of proportions of flows should 
 therefore be at least as secure as existing formal and 
 informal prior rights systems in surface crop-watering/rinsing with water in 
 developing countries. 
 To preserve the flexibility of the government to 
 protect people-related interests, both the Mexican and 
 Chilean laws also permit suspension of tradability and 
 (something forced on people/an inconvenient situation) of (controlled by one central place) water portion in the event 
 of extreme droughts. Under the Mexican law, the CNA 
 may control the extraction and use of water, 
 and establish restricted areas or reserves by reasons of 
 public interest: to prevent overexploitation of underground waters, 
 to protect or restore an community, to preserve sources 
 of drinkable water or protect them against pollution, to 
 preserve and control water quality and in case of 
 unusual water shortages or drought. Under these (legal rules/food and supplies), the CNA has full control over extraction, discharge, and move (from one place to another) of water in affected areas, so the 
 government keeps/holds strong authority to manage water 
 for the public interest under situations of extreme 
 drought (Rosegrant and Gazmuri, 1994). 
 
 (g) (quality of changing over time or at different places) in water supply and the design of 
 water rights 
 While distributions of water over time are a continuous function, for idea-based purposes two main types 
 of (quality of changing over time or at different places) in water can be identified: (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) 
 seasonal and year-to-year ups and downs, and extreme 
 events such as extended droughts. The water 
 laws in Mexico and Chile show how the definition of 
 tradable water rights can deal with both of these problems. To handle (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) (quality of changing over time or at different places), rights are at least 
 de,fucto defined as (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) streamflow or narrow waterway 
 flow in both countries. This system is more flexible in 
 setting apart water, and especially shortages, than a 
 straight volumetric right. In Mexico, water rights are 
 
 (h) Competition between farming-based and 
 nonagricultural demandfor water 
 A further opinion of tradable property rights in 
 water is that this portion system will lead to an 
 too much/too many move (from one place to another) of water out of farming and into 
 industrial, power, and city-based uses. Bumess and 
 Strange quality (1979) point out that this opinion is completely/in a hinting way 
 deeply set within  water laws of the western United States, 
 as limits on moves (from one place to another) of a water right from crop-watering/rinsing with water to industrial or power use tend to be much stricter 
 than limits on moves (from one place to another) within the farming-based 
 part/area. 
 
 1622 
 
 WORLD 
 
 DEVELOPMENT 
 
 It is not clear in what sense moves (from one place to another) out of farming are expected to be too much/too many: 
 there appears to be 
 an almost Jeffersonian 
 argument 
 that water used in 
 farming 
 is (related to what's right and wrong) 
 superior 
 to water used clsewhere, combined 
 with a concern that wealth and social 
 power differences 
 between large private firms or public utilities in the nonagricultural 
 part/area and widely 
 broke up 
 small farmers will allow the former to take 
 advantage 
 of the last thing just mentioned. (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 from Chile, where 
 active markets exist, however, 
 shows that this has not 
 happened. 
 Offers to buy 
 water and prices for 
 water are (told to people) 
 in newspapers, 
 and water-user 
 associations 
 and farmers' 
 (communities of people) 
 maintain 
 up-todate information 
 on water prices in recent transactions 
 (Gazmuri and Roscgrant, 
 1994). 
 The actual hit/effect on the overall availability 
 and 
 working well 
 of water in farming 
 if trades to nonagriculture 
 are permitted 
 is not well known, 
 especially 
 in developing 
 countries. 
 In most countries. 
 however, farming-based 
 use accounts for 80% or more of 
 sick 
 use, so (compared to other things) 
 modest 
 moves (from one place to another) 
 of 
 water from farming-based 
 could meet growing city-based  and 
 industrial 
 demands. 
 More than that, 
 there is large amounts of 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 of price (quality of quickly responding to things) 
 in both city-based 
 and industrial 
 demand for water. Higher water prices 
 cause conservation 
 and recycling of water in industry 
 and conservation 
 in domestic 
 demand (El-Ashry 
 and 
 Gibbons, 
 1986). In developing 
 countries, 
 wastage 
 from industrial 
 and city-based 
 uses of cheap water is 
 very high (Keller, 
 1992), pointing to/showing 
 the potential 
 for 
 (large/relatively large) 
 reductions 
 in losses if users must pay the 
 full opportunity 
 cost of tradable 
 water. With signiticant savings possible in both nonagricultural 
 uses, and 
 in farming 
 through the use of more eflicient crop-watering/rinsing with water methods, and through moves/changes to higher valued, less 
 water-intensive 
 crops as the true (not enough of something) 
 value of 
 water is (felt inside of you), 
 there may be no net reduction 
 in 
 effective availability 
 of crop-watering/rinsing with water water and no decline 
 in the value of watered production 
 or farmer income 
 as a result of establishment 
 of tradable water rights. 
 Vaux and Howitt (I 984) test out a (easing government rules) 
 of interregional 
 water trading in California, 
 and find a 
 sharp increase 
 in the value of farming-based 
 water, a 
 reduction 
 in total water use. and large increases in net 
 welfare in both farming 
 and nonagriculture 
 due to 
 gains from trade of water from the farming-based 
 part/area 
 to city-based 
 and industrial 
 parts/areas. Dinar and Letey 
 ( I99 I ), using a micro-level 
 production 
 model applied 
 to conditions 
 in the San Joaquin Valley<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
