AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 How to define and study farmers' management ability (to hold or do something): 
 explanation and use in farming-based money flow/money-based studies 
 Carin W. Rougoora,b,*, Ger Tripb, Ruud B.M. Huimeb, Jan A. Renkemab 
 -Research Station for (cows, bulls, etc.), Sheep and Horse Farming/managing money, Lelystad, Netherlands 
 bDepartment of Money flow and Management, Wageningen Farming-based University, Hollandseweg 1, 6706 KN Wageningen, Netherlands 
 
 Accepted 14 November 1997 
 
 Abstract 
 Textbooks and articles on farm management stress the importance of the management ability (to hold or do something) of the fanner with respect to 
 his farm results. However, clear definitions together with an description of this idea  are hard to find. In this article, 
 parts of management ability (to hold or do something) are grouped into: (1) personal aspects, consisting of fanner's drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things), fanner's 
 abilities and abilities and his (related to a life story) facts such as age and education; and (2) parts of the decision-making process, 
 consisting of practices and procedures with respect to planning, putting into use and control of decisions at the farm. 
 Scientific studies on the role of management ability (to hold or do something) in relation to farm results are reviewed. Edge of something/unexplored area production functions 
 are widely used in recent books to guess technical and money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farms. However, in explaining differences 
 in (wasting very little while working or producing something) most studies do not go further than adding a (related to a life story) (number or thing that changes) (e.g., level of education). This study ends/decides 
 that a next step would be to include parts of the decision-making process. (related to studying things over a long time) on-farm (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements), which give 
 possibilities for studying the energetic parts of the decision-making, are suggested to further carefully study the idea  of 
 management ability (to hold or do something). © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Review study; Management ability (to hold or do something); Decision-making process; Edge of something/unexplored area production function; (wasting very little while working or producing something); Fann performance 
 
 1. Introduction 
 It is a (done or used by many people) fact that money-based performance can differ much between farms, even if 
 they are operating under more or less almost the same  production conditions. Differences in money-based results are 
 usually attributed to differences in the management of 
 the farmer (e.g., Boehlje and Eidman, 1984). Management ability (to hold or do something) can be seen as a separate, fourth factor 
 of production, in addition to the usual factors 
 
 *Corresponding author. 
 0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Pll S0169-5150(98)00021-8 
 
 land, labour and capital (e.g., Case and Johnston, 
 1953). Then, what makes up/is equal to this special production 
 factor? (even though there is the existence of) many books and articles in the field of 
 farm management and decision explanation, the management process itself mostly remains a black box, and 
 management ability (to hold or do something) is rarely clearly defined and 
 measured. The aim of this article is: (1) to give an 
 summary of main parts of management ability (to hold or do something); (2) 
 to discuss the problems and opportunities with respect 
 to measuring and collecting data of management 
 ability (to hold or do something); (3) to review the scientific studies that relate 
 management ability to farm results; and (4) to detect 
 weak spots and give suggestions for improvements. 
 
 262 
 
 C. W. Rougoor et al.!Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 The outline of this article follows these four 
 points. All parts/areas of farming are included, so farms 
 and farmers also refer to (glass buildings where plants are grown) and growers. For 
 the benefit of/the purpose of (the ease of reading something), we write 'he' instead of 'he or 
 she' when referring to a farmer or a manager in 
 general. 
 
 ENVIRONMENT 
 
 Institutional 
 
 I 
 
 Social 
 
 Personal aspects manager - Drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things) 
 
 I 
 
 f 
 
 -Abilities and abilities 
 
 - 
 
 Life story 
 
 Decision-making process - Planning 
 
 I 
 
 ' 
 
 -Putting into use 
 -Control 
 
 Teclmical and (related to the body function of living things) processes 
 
 &#126; 
 
 2. Parts of management ability (to hold or do something) 
 
 Farm results 
 
 Well-said definitions such as "farm management is 
 concerned with the decisions that affect the money-making ability of the farm business" (Castle et al., 1987: p. 3) 
 or "using what you have to get what you want most" 
 (Kadlec, 1985: p. 3) make clear that farm management 
 is concerned with useful things/valuable supplies, decisions and results. 
 Kay and Edwards (199): p. 7) list some phrases often 
 used in definitions of management and show three 
 common elements: (1) the need to establish goals; (2) 
 the existence of useful things/valuable supplies to use in order to meet the 
 goals; and (3) the possibility to use useful things/valuable supplies in 
 different ways, changing/different in degree of effectiveness 
 and (wasting very little while working or producing something), to produce a few farming-based products. This description is rather broad and looks like 
 common definitions of money flow/money-based studies as a science that 
 studies the ways in which limited amounts of useful things/valuable supplies 
 are set apart and given out to an (without limits or an end) number of wishes. 
 A major part of any textbook on farm management 
 is loyal to/is dedicated to money-based ideas and (numbers-based) 
 ways of doing things for calculating best levels of inputs 
 (useful things/valuable supplies) and outputs (products) under (clearly visible/clearly understood) 
 restrictions, (in other words), managing useful things/valuable supplies in order to get the 
 best results. A factor which may be (ignored/didn't notice/looked at) when 
 farm management is treated in a formal, more or less 
 mathematical way is the role of the farm manager in 
 the decision-making. His management ability (to hold or do something) is the 
 (thing that causes a decision) when it comes to applying sound 
 theoretic ways of thinking/basic truths/rules in practice. Johnson et al. 
 (1961) described a large study where this problem 
 is paid attention to: the Interstate Managerial Study. 
 Goals of this study were, for instance, to describe 
 the role of information and decision-making. A survey 
 was managed and did/done among 1075 farm managers. This 
 study was not the first on this subject, but due to its 
 completeness it can be seen as a (sudden progress past an old problem) 
 in research on management in farming. Harling 
 and Bird (1990) developed a simplified general 
 management model, containing five elements: 
 
 Physical 
 
 - Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 - Price (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 - Money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Money-based 
 
 Fig. 1. Management capacltles in relation to (surrounding conditions), 
 (related to the body function of living things) processes and farm results. 
 
 plan, (surrounding conditions), useful things/valuable supplies, managerial preferences and organization, which must be brought in 
 balance. 
 Management ability (to hold or do something) is defined here as having the 
 appropriate personal (features/ qualities/ traits) and skills to deal 
 with the right problems and opportunities in the right 
 moment and in the right way. Starting point is the 
 manager who has certain qualities. By means of his 
 decision-making he will try to improve (or at least 
 influence) the technical and (related to the body function of living things) processes at the 
 farm (see Fig. 1). These processes, controllable to 
 only a certain extent, decide/figure out the technical and 
 money-based results of the farm. (random/including random data points) elements, 
 such as the weather, the (number of times something happens) of pests and sicknesses and ups and downs in the market (prices) also play 
 their part. Farm managers (do/complete) their job  in an 
 (surrounding conditions) which changes over time in a hardly 
 (expected/able to be known beforehand) way and therefore causes risk and doubt in the decision-making. Boehlje and Eidman 
 (198): p. 670) distinguish four major dimensions: (1) 
 the institutional (surrounding conditions) (e.g., rules on 
 water, land and air pollution); (2) the social (surrounding conditions) (e.g., the family of the farmer); (3) the physical 
 (surrounding conditions) (including the weather and the state of 
 the technology); and (4) the money-based (surrounding conditions) 
 (which decides/figures out prices of inputs and products). 
 Personal (features/ qualities/ traits) and skills, which are an 
 important aspect of managerial ability (to hold or do something) can be 
 divided into: (1) drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things), e.g., farmers' 
 goals and risk (point of view/way of behaving); (2) abilities and abilities, 
 
 C. W Rougoor et al.lAgricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 e.g., thinking-related and thinking-related skills; and (3) story-related, e.g., background and experience (e.g., Muggen, 
 1969). Such personal (features/ qualities/ traits) and skills 
 of the farmer are often assumed to be important in 
 explaining differences with respect to the success 
 of the farm. 
 A farmer who is argued with with good/willing external conditions and who also has high personal skillsone might say good/willing internal conditions-is 
 likely to have good results. But still, it can go wrong 
 when the decision-making process is poor. Following 
 the steps of a (clearly visible/clearly understood) process helps a decision 
 maker to make a decision in a logical and organized 
 manner and will on average lead to better results. 
 Simon (1977) distinguishes four phases: intelligence, 
 design, choice and review. Another well-known division of the decision-making process is: planning, 
 putting into use and control. Further subdividing the process lead Kay and Edwards (199): p. 13) to the 
 following steps, assuming that goals (step 0) have 
 already been established: (1) identify and define the 
 problem; (2) collect data and information; (3) identify 
 and carefully study different solutions; (4) make the decision-select the best other choice; (5) put into use the 
 decision; (6) monitor and test the results; and (7) 
 accept the responsibility for the decision. Following 
 such a process can help to (easily) explain and permit a 
 decision, a judging requirement used for its quality by Slovic et al. 
 (1977). 
 An important idea, in connection with the previous, is that in testing the quality of a decision, one 
 can use not only result-oriented judging requirements (the final 
 results), but also process-oriented judging requirements. In other 
 words, one can judge whether a decision is right before 
 the result is seen/obvious by looking at the process that 
 led to the decision. Simon (1977) and Simon (198): p. 
 426) used the term (related to the usual step-by-step way of doing things) clear thinking. One hundred percent clear thinking is usually not (understood/made real/achieved) or even 
 wanted. Human decision-making can be showed 
 by uncontrolled responses, happiness-causing rather than improving behaviour and by bounded clear thinking rather 
 than complete clear thinking. Summarizing this (what people commonly call a/not really a) 
 model of bounded clear thinking (Simon, 1982): a decision maker is not likely to change, and make new 
 decisions, unless a certain level of (unhappy disappointment) 
 about the current situation is reached. Then, in making 
 a decision he is bounded by his limited thinking-related 
 skills, e.g., with respect to the amount of information 
 
 263 
 
 that he can process. However, given these edges, 
 he will try to act clear. He will use his skills and try 
 to make reasonable-instead of best-decisions. 
 At every step of the decision-making process, part 
 of the clear thinking can be lost. In order to be effective it 
 is a basic condition that (things that are important) are set and time is 
 divided in the same way/in that way. Otherwise, the decision-maker 
 might get tangled up in smaller details of (compared to other things) 
 unimportant decisions and forget to deal with the real 
 important problems and opportunities (e.g., Group (of people or birds), 
 1989). A manager can make an summary of the areas 
 he should deal with and then choose which factors are 
 most important for being successful (Rockart, 1979). 
 This can be called the meta-decision, deciding which 
 decisions are most valuable to put an (thinking-related) 
 effort into, (in other words), where and how to spend the time as a 
 manager. Setting (things that are important) and dividing time is an 
 important aspect of the decision-making process. The 
 choice of some critical processes, out of the 
 complete picture of tasks, helps a farmer to (focus mental and physical effort) on the right problems and to set apart his limited 
 time in the right way. A complete picture of the farm 
 could be made using fields of management (e.g., 
 finance, production, personnel and marketing), functions of management (e.g., planning, putting into use 
 and control) and/or level of management (e.g., (related to a plan to reach a goal), strategical and operational) as entries; see, e.g., 
 Boehlje and Eidman (198): p. 15) who gave a list of 
 major activities for each function of management. An 
 example of an summary of the organization of the farm 
 is the 'Dutch information model', that describes all 
 functions, processes, information flows and data of the 
 farm (De Hoop, 1988; Poppe, 1991). 
 
 3. Measuring management ability (to hold or do something) 
 3.1. Personal aspects and decision-making processes 
 Some of the personal aspects (age, education, 
 experience on the farm) of the farmer can be measured 
 (compared to other things) well. Other personal aspects which lie in the 
 area of drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things), or abilities and abilities are much harder to detect and number. They 
 can be (many different kinds of people or things), unclear and hidden. Hedges (196): p. 
 30) listed 19 of the more important qualities and (features/ qualities/ traits) connected with capable management, such 
 as desire to learn, clearness and self-confi- 
 
 264 
 
 C. W. Rougoor et al.lAgricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 GROUP 1 
 
 ANALYZING EXISTING FARM DATA 
 
 1. 
 
 First (or most important) source: written plans, calculations, calenders, records kept, etc. 
 
 2. 
 
 Secondary source: tax data, accounting data, etc. 
 
 GROUP 2 
 
 SINGLE ON-FARM INVESTIGATIONS 
 
 3. 
 
 Interviews 
 
 4. 
 
 Lists of questions 
 
 GROUP 3 
 
 LONGITUDINAL ON-FARM OBSERVATIONS 
 
 5. 
 
 (without rules, schedules, etc.) (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) (participation) 
 
 6. 
 
 Structured (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 7. 
 
 Records kept by farmer on request (panel data) 
 
 GROUP 4 
 8. 
 
 OFF-FARM EXPERIMENTS 
 
 Tests 
 
 9. 
 
 Role-playing, gaming, (testing out) 
 
 10. 
 
 (Computer) experiments 
 
 Fig. 2. Forms of data collection to study management ability (to hold or do something) of farmers. 
 
 dence. But, he says that, "we are not able to 
 measure such a complex successfully, nor to test 
 its exact importance". Yet some progress has been 
 made. A direct way to ask for drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things) 
 was performed by Huime et al. (1997). They asked 
 farmers to point out the goals they had for their farms. 
 They used a few worksheets, consisting of open 
 questions and closed questions and they also used 
 small tasks. 
 Decision-making processes, as part of the management idea, are hard to study in practice. Books from the Business School shows how complex 
 management can be. For instance, Mintzberg (197): 
 pp. 10-11) refers to two studies (Carlson, 1951; Davis, 
 1957) on managerial work in order to make clear that a 
 manager is not working according to the classical 
 functions of management, such as planning and controlling. A manager does not neatly divide his time in 
 planning, putting into use and controlling. This means 
 that these ideas need to be translated into clear, 
 (agreed-upon) actions and procedures that can be distinguished and measured. Such actions may be the 
 frequency of consultants visiting the farm, the time 
 spent on reading and processing farm results, or the 
 time spent on meetings with personnel. Rather than 
 measuring time and frequency of these actions, one 
 could watch/notice the (physical) results, showing (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 
 of a high quality with respect to planning and control. 
 For instance, does the farmer have written plans-and 
 if so, to what degree of detail and how far reaching in 
 time-and how much does he know about facts and 
 figures on his farm in relation to other farms? By 
 distinguishing phases of the decision-making process 
 and by defining clear actions related to these phases, 
 an opening is created to measure and number part of 
 the management ability (to hold or do something). 
 3.2. Data collection 
 
 A few data sources can be used to study management ability (to hold or do something). Mintzberg (197): pp. 221-229) gives a 
 review of methods used to gather data on managers. 
 To study the management ability (to hold or do something) of a farmer, 
 being the executive of a small company, one can 
 use either existing data or create new data. A few 
 options are listed in Fig. 2. These options are grouped 
 into four main categories: (1) carefully studying existing 
 farm data; (2) single on-farm (acts of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something); (3) 
 (related to studying things over a long time) on-farm (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements); and (4) off-farm 
 experiments. 
 Each data source has its advantages and disadvantages. The first group (1) of data sources makes use of 
 already existing material, either produced by the 
 farmer himself, as a first (or most important) source, or by others as 
 
 C. W. Rougoor et al. I Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 a secondary source. Also data can be used from 
 existing study groups where farmers compare their 
 results. A big advantage of these data sources 
 are the low costs connected to them. A disadvantage 
 is that they usually do not cover the research 
 question completely. The data methods in group (2), 
 interviews and lists of questions can be made up so 
 that they completely cover the research question and 
 they can be (sang, danced, acted, etc., in front of people) at (compared to other things) low cost. However, 
 one may question the reliability and (quality of being very close to the truth or true number) of 
 interviews and lists of questions: the person who responded may 
 have forgotten (connected/related) details or (in a carefully-planned way) give 
 'socially desired' answers or answers that avoid 
 thinking-related disagreement. Also, answers may be (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 by the manager's perception of his own job (Mintzberg, 1973: p. 222). 
 Data sources (3) and (4) give more possibility for 
 checking and for in-depth research, but are (compared to other things) 
 expensive. (related to studying things over a long time) on-farm (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) (group 
 3) are based on repeating data collection throughout a 
 period of time. These (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) are more expensive, but are more likely to create more reliable and 
 correct data. Another advantage is that these methods 
 are better compatible with decision-making processes, 
 which are also continuous and energetic by nature. The 
 (person who works to find information) will be visiting the farm on a regular basis 
 to make (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) and to ask questions (e.g., about 
 his plans) and, also, the farmer may be 
 requested to keep certain records during the periods of time (or space) 
 between the visits. A problem with this kind of studies 
 is spoken by Dillon and Hardaker (199): p. 43) 
 who wrote, "the presence of the (person who watches something) can 
 lead the person being studied to change her or his 
 behaviour". 
 Finally, in group (4 ), one can take the farmer away 
 from his farm, take him to a 'laboratory', which can be 
 a room prepared with computers, and study his management ability (to hold or do something) through (personality) tests or (computer) experiments under controlled conditions. An 
 example of this kind of research can be found in the 
 work of Cross et al. (1994) who described workshops 
 held with groups of farmers in order to (ask lots of questions about something to try to find the truth), 
 among other things, the strengths and weaknesses of 
 their information system. 
 In Section 4, scientific studies are reviewed with 
 respect to the parts of management ability (to hold or do something) they 
 think about/believe and the way of doing things(s) they use for data collection and analysis. 
 
 265 
 
 4. Review of scientific studies 
 4.1. Way(s) of doing things 
 
 This section focuses on scientific studies that clearly deal with management ability (to hold or do something) of farmers in 
 relation to technical and/or (money-related) results at the farm 
 level. Scientific studies have been selected on the 
 basis of the following judging requirements: ( 1) one or more aspects 
 of management ability (to hold or do something) of the farmer has been measured; (2) technical and/or (money-related) results have been 
 measured; (3) a relationship between management 
 ability (to hold or do something) and results has been carefully studied; and (4) the 
 research has been published in scientific farming-based 
 money flow/money-based studies and related English-language journals in 
 1980 or later. Table 1 gives an summary of studies that 
 meet these judging requirements. 
 The (numbers that change/things that change) carefully studied are (examined closely) and compared with the aspects in Fig. 1 (see Section 2). 
 Besides these (numbers that change/things that change) measuring management ability (to hold or do something), Table 1 contains farm results. Studies are divided 
 into those using the production edge of something/unexplored area approach and 
 those using other approaches. Battese (1992) reviews 
 the methods that can be used to guess the production edge of something/unexplored area: pre-decided edges of something/unexplored areas, (random/including random data points) edges of something/unexplored areas and panel data models. The current study is 
 focusing on types of (wasting very little while working or producing something) that can be measured. 
 The production edge of something/unexplored area approach distinguishes technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) (TE), price (wasting very little while working or producing something) (PE) (also called 
 allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something)), and money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) (EE). 
 Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is the ability to avoid waste by 
 producing as much output as input usage allows, or by 
 using as little input as output production allows. Price 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) is the ability to combine inputs and outputs 
 in best proportions because of winning/most common prices 
 (Fried et al., 1993). Money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) is a measure 
 of overall performance and is equal to technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) times price (wasting very little while working or producing something) (i.e., EE=TE*PE) 
 (Bravo-Ureta and Pinheiro, 1993). The studies which 
 do not use the production edge of something/unexplored area approach use 
 plain/honest/easy technical results (T) or (money-related) 
 results (F). In total, 23 studies will be discussed here, 
 of which the majority is dealing with dairy farming, 
 but also crop, (glass building where plants are grown), swine and mixed farming 
 are dealt with. First, the methods and ways of doing things used 
 to measure farm results will be discussed. After that 
 the methods to study management ability (to hold or do something) will be 
 worked out. 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Table I 
 (numbers that change/things that change) describing management ability (to hold or do something) included in scientific studies 
 Management Ability (to hold or do something)" 
 
 Production edge of something/unexplored area approach 
 Moock (1981) 
 Jamison and Moock (1984) 
 Kalirajan and Shand (1985) 
 Stefanou and Saxena (1988) 
 Ali and Flinn (1989) 
 Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1991) 
 Kumbhakar and Heshmati (1995) 
 Parikh et a!. ( 1995) 
 Adesina and Djato (1996) 
 Battese et a!. (1996) 
 Wang eta!. (1996a, b) 
 Other approaches 
 Achten et a!. (1983) 
 Goodger eta!. (1984), Goodger and Kushman (1984-1985), Goodger eta!. (1988) 
 Bigras-Poulin eta!. (1984-1985a, 1984-1985b) 
 Sharma and Patel (1988) 
 Cowen et a!. (1989) 
 J ofre-Giraudo et a!. ( 1990) 
 Rosenberg and Cowen (1990) 
 Tarabla and Dodd (1990) 
 Jose and Crumly (1993) 
 Humik eta!. (1994a, b) 
 Kiernan and Heinrichs (1994) 
 Dewey et a!. (1995) 
 
 Personal aspects 
 
 Decision-making 
 
 B 
 B,A 
 B,A 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 
 p 
 p 
 P,C 
 p 
 
 p 
 - 
 
 Resultsb 
 
 No. of farms included 
 
 TE 
 TE 
 TE 
 PE 
 EE 
 EE 
 TE 
 EE 
 EE 
 TE 
 EE 
 
 152 
 683 
 91 
 131 
 120 
 511 
 250/430 
 436 
 410 
 499 
 786/1889 
 
 r'l 
 
 &#126; 
 ::tl 
 
 " 
 li: 
 
 """... 
 " 
 &#126; 
 
 "',..... 
 &#126; 
 ""&#126;li: 
 
 if 
 &#126; 
 &#126; 
 
 "" 
 ::1 
 
 B,D 
 B,D,A 
 B,D,A 
 B 
 B,D 
 A 
 B,D 
 D 
 
 P,C 
 P,C 
 
 c 
 P,C 
 P,C 
 P,C 
 
 c 
 - 
 
 c 
 c 
 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 F 
 T 
 T 
 T 
 
 "B=biography; D=drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things); A=abilities and abilities; P=planning; !=implementation; and C=control. 
 &#126;=technical (wasting very little while working or producing something); PE=price (wasting very little while working or producing something) (=allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something)); EE=economic (wasting very little while working or producing something); F=financial limit/guideline; T=technical limit/guideline. 
 
 71 
 20/50 
 110 
 176 
 218 
 50 
 87 
 123 
 120 
 69 
 329 
 76 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126;- 
 
 ..... 
 Oo 
 -;:::: 
 
 &#126; 
 ""&#126; 
 
 tl, 
 &#126; 
 
 C. W. Rougoor et al. I Farming-based Money flow 18 ( 1998) 261-272 
 
 Management ability (to hold or do something) in these scientific studies has 
 been related to the farm results. What (numbers that change/things that change) are 
 used as indicator(s) for farm results? In Table 1 it can 
 be found that nine studies compare management 
 ability (to hold or do something) with (money-related) farm results (pointed to/showed by F, 
 PE or EE in Table 1). Especially in the latest years, the 
 production edge of something/unexplored area approach has been used more and 
 more to decide/figure out farm results. Stefanou and Saxena 
 (1988) calculated the price, or allocative, (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Ali and Flinn (1989), Parikh et al. (1995), Bravo-Ureta 
 and Rieger (1991), Adesina and Djato (1996) and 
 Wang et al. (1996a, b) calculated the money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something). In other studies plain (money-related) limits/guidelines are 
 used as an indicator for farm results. Achten et al. 
 (1983) used the money value of the real yield in 
 (the study of plants). Jofre-Giraudo et al. (1990) tested 
 the influence of management ability (to hold or do something) on money-based 
 benefit, however, in a (not definite) way. The manager is 
 asked whether or not the benefits of their management 
 changes had paid/made up for the costs. Jose and Crumly 
 (1993) used a few (money owed)  and income indicators. 
 Other studies focus on technical aspects only, for 
 instance milk production (Sharma and Patel, 1988; 
 Tarabla and Dodd, 1990), or breathing and lung related disease in 
 swine (Humik et al., 1994a, b). Some studies relate 
 the management ability to more than one technical 
 limit/guideline (Goodger et al., 1984; Goodger and 
 Kushman, 1984--1985; Goodger et al., 1988; BigrasPoulin et al., 1984--1985b; Cowen et al., 1989; 
 Rosenberg and Cowen, 1990), ranging from the 
 number of repeat people (who help animals have babies) to body-related cell count (as 
 an indicator for quality of milk), disease rates and 
 picking rate. Overall, it can be decided that all kinds 
 of different methods are used as an indicator for farm 
 results. The studies which use the money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 judging requirements, are the only ones that (can) combine technical 
 and money-based results. 
 Although many different methods to measure management ability (to hold or do something) are available (see Fig. 2) it turns out 
 that in practice, single on-farm (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) are most 
 often used. Kumbhakar and Heshmati (1995), Ali 
 and Flinn (1989), Battese et al. (1996) and Wang et al. 
 (1996a, b) used panel data. However, these data lack 
 information on the decision-making process: only the 
 farm results over time are measured. (related to studying things over a long time) onfarm (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) are likely to create more reliable 
 and correct data. However, they are more expensive 
 and time-using/eating. 
 
 267 
 
 Almost all studies use lists of questions or interviews 
 except for Goodger et al. (1984, 1988), Goodger and 
 Kushman (1984--1985). They make (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) and 
 perform measurements on the farm. This method of 
 research is much more time using/eating, as reflected in 
 the number of farms included in the research: Goodger 
 and Kushman (1984--1985) used 20 farms. The only 
 off-farm experiment in which the relation between 
 management ability (to hold or do something) and farm results was measured 
 is found in Jose and Crumly (1993), who used a 
 mental test. 
 4.2. Personal aspects 
 Quite some work has been done on the relationship 
 between education and farm (wasting very little while working or producing something). From different 
 studies it can be decided that education has a 
 positive influence on farm results, especially in developing countries. Lockheed et al. (1980), Bravo-Ureta 
 and Pinheiro (1993), and Phillips (1994) reviewed 
 papers that measure the effect of a farmer's educational level and exposure to extension services on 
 his working well. They focused on studies performed 
 in poor areas. Overall, they found confirmation for the guess that education, as a part of 
 the farmers' life story, will have a positive effect 
 on farmers' (wasting very little while working or producing something). Other studies (see Table 1) 
 also pointed to/showed that education is positively related 
 with farm results (Moock, 1981; Achten et al., 1983; 
 Jamison and Moock, 1984; Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b; Stefanou and Saxena, 1988; Ali and Flinn, 
 1989; Parikh et al., 1995; Battese et al., 1996; Wang 
 et al., 1996a, b). However, no significant effect of 
 education on farm results was found by Kalirajan 
 and Shand (1985), Tarabla and Dodd (1990), Adesina 
 and Djato (1996). 
 Another personal aspect quite often looked at, is the 
 experience and/or the age of the farmer. The influence 
 on farm results is not plain/honest/easy. Some studies 
 found a positive effect of experience (Kalirajan and 
 Shand, 1985; Stefanou and Saxena, 1988), while 
 others did not find any effect at all (Sharma and Patel, 
 1988; Humik et al., 1994a, b). A negative influence of 
 age on farm results was found by Parikh et al. (1995), 
 but no effect by Jamison and Moock (1984), Tarabla 
 and Dodd (1990). Battese et al. (1996) found effects of 
 age on technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). However, the direction 
 of the effect differs between districts of Pakistan. 
 
 268 
 
 C.W Rougoor et al.!Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1991) found opposite effects 
 of age (also called experience) on TE, PE and EE. To 
 summarize, (related to a life story) aspects can affect farm 
 results, technically as well as (related to money), but the 
 results are thinly spread; sometimes an effect is found, 
 sometimes it is not. 
 Drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things) that are (examined closely) change/differ 
 from goals of the farmer, (point of view/way of behaving) towards paperwork, 
 openness to new ideas, level of desire-related, happiness 
 with farming, to most preferred job at the farm. 
 Milk produce and fat produce are positively related to 
 level of desire (Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b). 
 Happiness with farming is usually found not to 
 be of any influence on farm results (Tarabla and 
 Dodd, 1990; Humik et al., 1994a, b), only BigrasPoulin et al. (1984-1985b) found an influence of 
 happiness with farming on farm results, in terms 
 of rate of picking and fat and milk yield. Dewey et al. 
 (1995) found that (related to trash or other things on the ground) size can be influenced by the 
 most preferred job of the farmer. Almost all these 
 studies show that farm results are dependent upon 
 some parts of drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things) of the farmer, 
 but these aspects and the resulting effects are 
 measured in a lot of different ways, which complicates 
 the making of comparisons. 
 Table 1 points to/shows that ability and ability 
 (numbers that change/things that change) (as part of the personal parts of the farmer) 
 are rarely carefully studied. Besides that, these (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are (many different kinds of people or things), making it hard to draw an overall 
 end/end result on their effect on farm results. (numbers that change/things that change) 
 talked about/said in the studies change/differ  from knowledge of 
 cow behaviour, knowledge of technical recommendations and prices, understanding of technology, to 
 strength and personality. No influence of 
 level of strength on farm results was found 
 (Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b). Goodger et al. 
 (1984), Goodger and Kushman (1984-1985) calculated an overall management index. They put the 
 same weight on all kind of aspects, to calculate an 
 overall score. Knowledge of cow behaviour is one 
 aspect of this index. They found a positive relation 
 between the overall management index and farm 
 results, but the separate effect of knowledge has not 
 been serious and stubborn. Understanding of technology, measured by asking the farmer to describe the different 
 recommendations of new technologies, was found to 
 have a significant (positive) effect on the yield of rice 
 (Kalirajan and Shand, 1985). Jamison and Moock 
 
 (1984) measured numeracy, reading and writing ability and an farming-based knowledge test score. These aspects were taken 
 as (numbers that change/things that change) in different production function (moving backwards). Sometimes a positive effect is found on production, sometimes no effect could be serious and stubborn. Jose 
 and Crumly (1993) compared the personality factors 
 with (money-related) measurements. They found that 'thinking people' have higher total valuable things than 'feeling 
 people', and 'extrovert people' have higher (money owed) than 
 'introvert people'. From this small summary on relations between abilities and abilities of the farmer 
 and farm results, it can be decided that the knowledge in this area is still rather limited in farming-based 
 books. It can be decided that the influence of 
 education is often studied, while other personal 
 aspects are under-exposed. 
 4.3. Decision-making processes 
 With respect to decision-making, a honor/difference is 
 made between planning (P), putting into use (I) and 
 control (C). Studies on planning can be divided into 
 two groups. The first group measures parts of the 
 decision-making process itself (e.g., the length of the 
 planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  and the degree of detail), the other 
 group focuses on aids that are used for the decisionmaking (e.g., use of computer records, extension 
 services, and other information processing devices). 
 Studies looking at the decision-making process itself 
 usually find a positive effect of planning on farm 
 results. The (numbers that change/things that change) used, however, are very thinly spread. 
 Achten et al. (1983) (examined closely) to what degree of 
 detail plans are made, concerning production, labour 
 needed thing, etcetera. Planning of (for only a short time) decisions and activities proved to be an important factor 
 which influences the yield level of (glass building where plants are grown) vegetable producers. Decision-making procedures in staff 
 matters were (examined closely) by Goodger et al. (1984), 
 Goodger and Kushman ( 1984-1985) as an indicator of 
 management effectiveness. A judgement on the quality of the decision-making process of the farmer was 
 made during an open interview on how the farmer 
 makes his decisions. They found a positive relationship between an overall management score (the decision-making process being a part of it) and milk yield, 
 days in milk, and days open. Cowen et al. (1989) 
 (examined closely) the effect of data processing devices: 
 whether the farmer made use of computer records, 
 
 C. W. Rougoor et al./Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 or lists of things to do (e.g., cows to breed). They 
 found that use of computer records or lists of things to 
 do results in (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) of problems in an earlier 
 stage. Rosenberg and Cowen (1990) decided/figured out the 
 level of clear thinking in the decision-making process of 
 the farmer, by asking the farmer to describe the 
 process (e.g., how milkers were chosen). They did 
 not find a relation with farm results. 
 Studies focusing on aids that are used for decisionmaking are mostly focusing on the use of external 
 advisors. Jofre-Giraudo et al. (1990) are the only ones 
 who measured other aspects also. They (examined closely) 
 what sources of information for planning purposes are 
 used (e.g., records from the dairy herd improvement 
 association (DlllA), own group records, etc.). However, 
 the collected data were not (good) enough to relate this 
 to the results of the farm. The findings with respect 
 to the influence of external advisors is mixed for 
 the different kinds of (wasting very little while working or producing something). Adesina and Djato 
 (1996) did not find a big influence of extension 
 on money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something). Moock (1981), Kalirajan and 
 Shand (1985), found a positive effect of the number 
 of extension visits, as a source of information, on 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Bravo-Ureta and Rieger (1991) 
 found an effect of extension on (wasting very little while working or producing something). However, 
 the effect on technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is positive, but the 
 effect on price (wasting very little while working or producing something) and money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) is 
 negative. This shows that focusing on technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) alone may have a negative influence on 
 the overall money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something). The risk of producing 
 beyond the best money-based level of production 
 is present. 
 None of the studies reported findings on the quality 
 of the (putting into) use of decisions. However, putting into use is closely related to time portion: how is 
 a farmer using his time? Time portion, is included 
 in five studies and, again, the description of it is rather 
 blended. Time portion (numbers that change/things that change) change/differ  from 
 the time available for cleaning, time spent at keeping 
 health records, time spent on heat detection, time spent 
 on management and hours of continuing education, to 
 (happening over and over again in a predictable way) of communication with milkers about job 
 performance. Time spent at keeping health records 
 turns out to decrease the (number of times something happens) of (related to the process of making children) 
 sicknesses (Bigras-Poulin et al., 1984-1985b). (happening over and over again in a predictable way) of communication with milkers about their job 
 performance has a positive influence on milk yield 
 (Rosenberg and Cowen, 1990). Dewey et al. (1995) 
 
 269 
 
 found a positive effect of the time spent on heat 
 detection and breeding on the average (related to a group of newborn animals) size. They 
 also asked farmers whether or not they spent enough 
 time on insemination of pigs and heat detection. Here, 
 no relationship was found with the farm results. JofreGiraudo et al. ( 1990) asked farmers to guess the 
 time they spent on management. Farmers with an 
 information system spent more time on management 
 than farmers without. However, no clear relation was 
 found with the (money-related) results of the farm. Although 
 different studies focused on time portion of the 
 farmer, none of the studies measured the complete 
 distribution of time of the farmer over all kinds of 
 different activities. This would be interesting and 
 clearing up, yet hard to carry out. 
 Studies focusing on the control part of the decisionmaking process are divided into two groups: studies 
 focusing on parts of the decision-making itself (e.g., 
 judging requirements used for test of farm results), and 
 studies that (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) side-line aspects. The use of 
 information-as a side-line aspect-seems to have a 
 positive effect on the results. Cowen et al. (1989), 
 Kiernan and Heinrichs ( 1994) (examined closely) whether or 
 not external data are used as a source of information. 
 Both found a positive influence of using this external 
 data on farm results. Jofre-Giraudo et al. (1990) also 
 (examined closely) the use of external data, but did not relate 
 this to farm results. Tarabla and Dodd (1990) found 
 that the number of times the milking machine is tested 
 per year is positively related to the quality of 
 milk. Rosenberg and Cowen (1990) found that use of 
 written records in the group decision-making, has a 
 positive influence on the quality of milk, the average 
 days open and leads to a smaller number of services 
 per conception. They also had a look at the decisionmaking process itself: the judging requirements used in the test of farm results were studied. The guess was 
 that the unemotional judging requirements combined with regular communication with milkers about their job performance 
 would lead to higher results. But they did not find 
 support for this guess. Both aspects did not seem 
 to influence the farm results. So, no study was found 
 where an effect of the quality of the control itself-as 
 part of the decision-making process-on the farm 
 result could be serious and stubborn. 
 To summarize the above, two (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) can be 
 made. First, studies which use the production edge of something/unexplored area 
 approach usually look at age/experience and educa- 
 
 270 
 
 C. W Rougoor et al./ Farming-based Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 tion of the farmer and to the use of extension services 
 (as part of the planning), yet ignore other personal 
 parts of the farmer and his decision-making process. 
 Other studies take into account more aspects, but none 
 includes all parts of management ability (to hold or do something) (B, D, A, 
 P, I and C; see Table 1). Second, when an aspect is 
 taken into account, the description of it differs greatly 
 between studies, leading to a wide range of (numbers that change/things that change) 
 measured. 
 
 5. Discussion and ends/end results 
 This article reviewed scientific studies that relate 
 farm results to management (numbers that change/things that change). First, the idea  of management ability (to hold or do something) was described. Management ability (to hold or do something) was defined as having the 
 appropriate personal (features/ qualities/ traits) and skills (including drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things), abilities and abilities 
 and life story), to deal with the right problems and 
 opportunities in the right moment and in the right way. 
 The way problems and opportunities are dealt with by 
 the farmer/manager is reflected in the decision-making processes (split into planning, putting into use and 
 control), meant to influence the technical and (related to the body function of living things) processes on the farm, which in tum decides/figures out 
 the farm results. Each of these steps can be controlled 
 only partly, (random/including random data points) elements from (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) 
 also play their part. 
 Scientific studies show an influence of management 
 ability (to hold or do something) on farm results. For instance, Jose and 
 Crumly (1993) who found a relation between personal 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) and money-based results. Overall, the 
 proportion of variance in the dependent (result) (numbers that change/things that change) that is explained by the independent (management) (numbers that change/things that change) is different from 7 to 40% between the 
 studies reviewed. However, these values are hard to 
 compare, due to differences in the way management 
 ability (to hold or do something) is defined in these studies, differences in 
 (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) that are included, and differences in definition of farm results. 
 Recent studies often used the production edge of something/unexplored area approach to guess technical and/or money-based 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) at farms. Elements of management ability (to hold or do something) 
 can be added to the list (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) in this 
 approach. Most often education and experience are 
 taken into account. The method has met opinion on the 
 (ability to be used for something) of the rules of neoclassical money flow/money-based studies to 
 
 traditional farming (e.g., Torkamani and Hardaker, 
 1996). What's more, for the purpose of relating farm 
 results to management ability (to hold or do something), the production edge of something/unexplored area approach must be compared to other methods. The 
 path model approach, for instance, gives the opportunity to set up a stepwise analysis, as shown in Fig. 1 
 (where personal aspects influence the decision-making process, which, in tum, influences the farm 
 results). So, whether to use the production edge of something/unexplored area 
 approach or an different approach, needs attention 
 on forehand, taking into account the pros and cons of 
 the different other choice ways of doing things. 
 Most scientific studies on management ability (to hold or do something) of 
 farmers, in relation to farm results, use lists of questions 
 and interviews for data collection. These are usually 
 executed without repetition, leading to single 
 measurements. To effectively carefully study the role of all 
 parts of management ability (to hold or do something), other methods 
 can be useful. On-farm (acts of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something), with regular 
 repetition, are more appropriate to study management 
 ability (to hold or do something) of farmers. Such (related to studying things over a long time) (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 are more in line with the energetic nature of decisionmaking processes. Also, they give opportunities 
 for checking (for truth) and are, therefore, likely to give a 
 more realistic picture. Off-farm experiments with 
 farmers, e.g., in a computer laboratory, can be used 
 to test out decision-making processes, to test 
 certain abilities and abilities of the farmers and 
 to find out about their drives and (desires to do things/reasons to do things) and 
 their (point of view/way of behaving) toward risk. However, there is (a lot of information that proves something) to suggest that the external 
 truth/trueness of decision-making research that depends on 
 laboratory tests of real-world decision 
 problems is low (Ungson and Braunstein, 1982: 
 p. 39). To provide (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on truth/trueness of different 
 methods, the need for multimethod approaches is 
 generally admitted/recognized. 
 The last goal of this study was to detect weak 
 spots and to give suggestions for improvements for 
 studying management ability (to hold or do something) in relation to farm 
 results. It can be decided that the decision-making 
 process is under-exposed. This is especially the case 
 for the studies using the production edge of something/unexplored area approach. 
 The decision-making process can only be measured by 
 (related to studying things over a long time) data, for instance, structured farm (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements)/visits in time, to follow the planning, putting into use and control on the farm. This kind of studies 
 can lead to a better understanding of differences in 
 
 C. W Rougoor et al.lAgricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 success between farmers and can serve as a basis for 
 support and improvement of their farm results. 
 
 References 
 Achten, J.M.F.H., Nienhuis, J.K., Alleblas, J.T.W., 1983. A 
 (numbers-based) model for measuring management level. Acta 
 Horticulturae 135, 39-61. 
 Adesina, A.A., Djato, K.K., 1996. Farm size, relative (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 and land-related policy in Cote d'Ivoire: profit function analysis of 
 rice farms. Agric. Econ. 14, 93-102. 
 Ali, M., Flinn, J.C., 1989. Profit (wasting very little while working or producing something) among Basmati rice 
 producers in Pakistan Punjab. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 71, 303-310. 
 Battese, G.E., 1992. Edge of something/unexplored area production functions and technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something): a survey of scientific applications in farming-based 
 money flow/money-based studies. Agric. Econ. 7, 185-208. 
 Battese, G.E., Malik, S.J., Gill, M.A., 1996. An (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) of 
 technical inefficiencies of production of wheat farmers in four 
 districts of Pakistan. J. Agric. Econ. 47, 37-49. 
 Bigras-Poulin, M., Weak, A.H., Blackburn, D.J., Martin, S.W., 
 1984-1985a. Attitudes, management practices, and herd 
 performance-a study of Ontario dairy farm managers: I. 
 Descriptive aspects. Prev. Vet. Med. 3, 227-240. 
 Bigras-Poulin, M., Weak, A.H., Martin, S.W., 1984-1985b. 
 Attitudes, management practices, and herd performance-a 
 study of Ontario dairy farm managers: II. Associations. Prev. 
 Vet. Med. 3, 241-250. 
 Boehlje, M.D., Eidman, V.R., 1984. Farm Management. Wiley, 
 New York, 806 pp. 
 Bravo-Ureta, B.E., Pinheiro, A.E., 1993. (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis of 
 developing country farming: a review of the edge of something/unexplored area function 
 books. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 22, 88-101. 
 Bravo-Ureta, B.E., Rieger, L., 1991. Dairy farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 measurement using (random/including random data points) edges of something/unexplored areas and neoclassical 
 (two things existing together). Am. J. Agric. Econ. 73, 421-428. 
 Carlson, S., 1951. Executive Behaviour: A Study of the Work Load 
 and the Working Methods of Managing Directors. Striimbergs, 
 Stockholm. 
 Case, H.C.M., Johnston, P.E., 1953. Rules/basic truths of Farm Management. J.B. Lippincott, Chicago, 466 pp. 
 Castle, E.N., Becker, M.H., Nelson, A.G., 1987. Farm Business 
 Management: The Decision-making Process, 3rd edn. Macmillan, New York. 
 Group (of people or birds), S.R., 1989. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. 
 Simon &amp; Schuster, London, 280 pp. 
 Cowen, P., Schwabe, C.W., Rosenberg, H.R., Bondurant, R.H., 
 Franti, C.E., Goodger, W.J., 1989. (related to the process of making children) management 
 practices among Tulare, California, dairy groups: I. (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  and 
 descriptive aspects. Prev. Vet. Med. 7, 83-100. 
 Cross, T.L., King, R.P., Dobbins, C.L., Fuller, E.l., 1994. 
 Information management for your farm: helper/planner's guide. 
 Station Announcement 604-1994, Minnesota Farming-based Experiment 
 Station, University of Minnesota. 
 Davis, R.T., 1957. Performance and Development of Field Sales 
 Managers. Harvard Business School, Boston. 
 
 271 
 
 De Hoop, D.W., 1988. Management processes in dairy and 
 pig farming and the construction of systems. In: Korver, S., 
 van Arendonk, J.A.M. (Eds.), Modelling of Animals 
 Production Systems. EC (school) course, 7-9 April 1987, Brussels, 
 pp. 77-85. 
 Dewey, C.E., Martin, S.W., Friendship, R.M., Kennedy, B.W., 
 Wilson, M.R., 1995. Associations between (related to trash or other things on the ground) size and 
 specific herd level management factors in Ontario swine. Prev. 
 Vet. Med. 22, 89-102. 
 Dillon, J.L., Hardaker, J.B., 1993. Farm management research for 
 small farmer development, 2nd edn. FAO Farm Systems 
 Management Series, Rome, 302 pp. 
 Fried, H.O., Lovell, C.A.K., Schmidt, S.S. (Eds.), 1993. The 
 Measurement of Productive (wasting very little while working or producing something). Oxford Univ. Press, 
 New York, 426 pp. 
 Goodger, W.J., Kushman, J.E., 1984-1985. Measuring the hit/effect 
 of different veterinary service programs on dairy herd health 
 and milk production. Prev. Vet. Med. 3, 211-225. 
 Goodger, W.J., Ruppanner, R., Slenning, B.D., Kushman, J.E., 
 1984. An approach to scoring management on large-scale 
 dairies. J. Dairy Sci. 67, 675-685. 
 Goodger, W.J., Galland, J.C., Christiansen, V.E., 1988. Survey of 
 milking management practices on large dairies and their 
 relationship to udder health and production (numbers that change/things that change). J. Dairy 
 Sci. 71, 2535-2542. 
 Harling, K.F., Bird, Ph., 1990. Exploring a general management 
 approach to farm management. Farming 6, 425-441. 
 Hedges, T.R., 1963. Farm Management Decisions. Prentice-Hall, 
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 628 pp. 
 Huime, R.B.M., Harsh, S.B., Dijkhuizen, A.A., 1997. Critical 
 success factors and information needs on dairy farms: the 
 farmer's opinion. Animals Poke/encourage. Sci. 48, 229-238. 
 Humik, D., Dohoo,I.R., Donald, A., Robinson, N.P., 1994a. Factor 
 analysis of swine farm management practices on Prince Edward 
 Island. Prev. Vet. Med. 20, 135-146. 
 Humik, D., Dohoo, I.R., Bate, L.A., 1994b. Types of farm 
 management as (disease danger sign) for swine breathing and lung related disease. Prev. 
 Vet. This. 20, 147-157. 
 Jamison, D.T., Moock, P.R., 1984. Farmer education and farm 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in Nepal: the role of schooling, extension services, 
 and thinking-related skills. World Dev. 12, 67-86. 
 Jofre-Giraudo, E., Streeter, D.H., Lazarus, W., 1990. The hit/effect of 
 computer infomation systems on dairy farm management 
 decisions. Farming 6(5), 463-474. 
 Johnson, G.L., Halter, A.N., Jensen, H.R., Thomas, D.W. (Eds.), 
 1961. A Study of Managerial Processes of Midwestern 
 Farmers. Iowa State Univ. Press, Ames, 221 pp. 
 Jose, D., Crumly, J.A., 1993. Mental type of farm/ranch 
 operators: relationship to (money-related) measures. Rev. Agric. Econ. 
 15(1), 121-132. 
 Kadlec, J.E., 1985. Farm Management: Decisions, Operation, 
 Control. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 429 pp. 
 Kalirajan, K.P., Shand, R.T., 1985. Types of education and 
 farming-based working well: a (numbers-based) analysis of Tamil Nadu 
 rice farming. J. Dev. Studies 21, 232-243. 
 Kay, R.D., Edwards, W.M., 1994. Farm Management, 3rd edn., 
 McGraw-Hill, New York, 458 pp. 
 
 272 
 
 C. W. Rougoor et al./Agricultural Money flow 18 (1998) 261-272 
 
 Kiernan, N.E., Heinrichs, A.J., 1994. Identification of farm 
 manager types through group-related analysis of calf and cow 
 management practices. Prev. Vet. Med. 18, 225-236. 
 Kumbhakar, S.C., Heshmati, A., 1995. (wasting very little while working or producing something) measurement in 
 Swedish dairy farms: an application of rotating panel data, 
 1976-1988. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77, 660-674. 
 Lockheed, M.E., Jamison, D.T., Lau, L.J., 1980. Farmer education and 
 farm (wasting very little while working or producing something): a survey. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 29, 37-76. 
 Mintzberg, H., 1973. The Nature of Managerial Work. Harper &amp; 
 Row, New York, 298 pp. 
 Moock, P.R., 1981. Education and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in smallfarm production. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 29, 723-739. 
 Muggen, G., 1969. Human factors and farm management: a review of 
 the book-related. World Agric. Econ. (away from cities) Social. Abstr. 11(2), 1-11. 
 Parikh, A., Ali, F., Shah, M.K., 1995. Measurement of money-based 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in Pakistani farming. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77, 
 675-685. 
 Phillips, J.M., 1994. Farmer education and farmer (wasting very little while working or producing something): a 
 analysis. Econ. Dev. Cultural Change 43, 149-165. 
 Poppe, K.J., 1991. Information needs and accounting in farming. 
 Mededeling 444, LEI, The Hague. 
 Rockart, J.P., 1979. Chief executives define their own data needs. 
 Harv. Business Rev. 57, 81-93. 
 Rosenberg, H.R., Cowen, P., 1990. Management differences and 
 dairy results. Farming 6, 267-279. 
 Sharma, K.N.S., Patel, R.K., 1988. (putting into numbers) of management 
 input in milk production. Indian J. Anim. Sci. 58(2), 253-259. 
 
 Simon, H.A., 1977. The New Science of Management Decision, 
 changed edn. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 175 pp. 
 Simon, H.A., 1982. From (enough to be meaningful) to (related to the usual step-by-step way of doing things) clear thinking. 
 Models of Bounded Clear thinking, Vol. 2. The MIT Press, 
 Cambridge, pp. 424--443. First published in: Latsis, S.J. (Ed.), 
 1976. Method and Evaluation in Money flow. Cambridge Univ. 
 Press, Cambridge, pp. 129-148. 
 Slavic, P., Fischhoff, B., Lichtenstein, S., 1977. Thinking-related 
 processes and people-related taking. In: Jungermann, H., De Zeeuw, 
 G. (Eds.), Decision-making and Change in Human Affairs. 
 Dordrecht, Reidel. 
 Stefanou, S.E., Saxena, S., 1988. Education, experience, and 
 allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something): a dual approach. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 70, 
 338-345. 
 Tarabla, H.D., Dodd, K., 1990. Associations between farmers' 
 personal (features/ qualities/ traits). Br. Vet. J. 146, 157-164. 
 Torkamani, J., Hardaker, J.B., 1996. A study of money-based 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of Iranian farmers in Ramjerd district: an application 
 of (random/including random data points) programming. Agric. Econ. 14, 73-83. 
 Ungson, G.R., Braunstein, D.N., 1982. Decision-making: An 
 Combined Question (or investigation). Kent Publishing, 376 pp. 
 Wang, J., Cramer, G.L., Wailes, E.J., 1996a. Production (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 of Chinese farm-related: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from (away from cities) household survey 
 data. Agric. Econ. 15, 17-28. 
 Wang, J., Wailes, E.J., Cramer, G.L., 1996b. A shadow-price 
 edge of something/unexplored area measurement of profit (wasting very little while working or producing something) in Chinese farming. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78, 146-156. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
