Causes of (away from cities) Money-based Development 
 by 
 
 Bruce Gardner 
 WP 03-09 
 
 Department of Farming-based and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow 
 The University of Maryland, College Park 
 
 CAUSES OF RURAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
 
 Bruce Gardner 
 Department of Farming-based and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow 
 2200 Symons Hall 
 University of Maryland 
 College Park, MD 20742-5535 
 bgardner@arec.umd.edu 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper (asks lots of questions about/tries to find the truth about) the sources of growth in farming-based value-added (GDP) and (away from cities) 
 household incomes using a sample of developing countries. The main factors are: (i) 
 providing macroeconomic and political (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength); (ii) institutions beginning and building on property rights 
 and (rewards or reasons for doing something); (iii) access to competitive input markets and moneymaking output markets; 
 and (iv) adoption of working well-improving technology, and (v) real income growth in the 
 non-farming-based (process of people making, selling, and buying things). The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) points to/shows a surprisingly large role of the fifth of 
 these. 
 
 Working Paper 03-09 
 Copyright Â© 2003 by Bruce L. Gardner. 
 All rights reserved. Readers may make word for word copies of this document for non-commercial purposes by any means, 
 gave/given that this copyright (see/hear/become aware of) appears on all such copies. 
 
 Causes of (away from cities) Money-based Development* 
 Bruce L. Gardner 
 University of Maryland 
 We can be most helpful in locating the bottlenecks and restrictions to 
 growth and suggest means to their help. In this, we sometimes 
 have to operate at the edge of something/unexplored area of professional knowledge, and often 
 against the smart knowledge of governments, but this is where the 
 progress is to be made. (Mundlak, 1999, p. 46) 
 Introduction 
 My aim is to follow Yair Mundlak's recommendation in ending/deciding his Elmhirst Lecture 
 to identify sources of and restrictions upon money-based growth in farming. I come to the 
 subject not as a long-time (person who works to find information) on international farming-based development, but rather 
 to follow up studies of the development of U.S. farming. The story of U.S. farming 
 led me, as many before, to think about  possible lessons for countries where (growth over time) 
 in the real incomes of (away from cities) people has not yet happened. More than that, my U.S. research led 
 into questions of how the (compared to other things) poorest farm people have done in the growth process 
 (Gardner, 2000), a topic which fits well with the focus of President von Braun's 
 address. 
 I begin by revisiting some issues in farming-based development money flow/money-based studies and data 
 measurement. In the second major section, evidence is reviewed on the growth 
 of farming as an industry. The third section turns to welfare results of 
 farming-based growth as measured by real household incomes. The final section tries to 
 summarize our knowledge of the causes of part/area growth and real income growth. 
 Models of Growth 
 Since World War II, a huge books has come out on money-based growth with special 
 attention to agriculture. Since that time most of the poor countries of the world have 
 become less poor, and farm-related in practically all of them has become more productive 
 (in terms of output per worker, output per area of land, or multifactor working well growth). But 
 the success has varied widely from country to country, from one time period to another, 
 and across areas within countries. How well does the saved books enable us 
 to understand these differences/different versions, and what might have been done improve the performance 
 of the worst-performing countries? The central (related to careful studying or deep thinking) job  is to identify the causes of 
 growth. 
 
 * 
 
 Elmhirst Lecture at the 25th Conference of the International Association of Farming-based Money-flow experts, 
 August 17, 2003, Durban, South Africa. For their comments on earlier drafts and in discussions of this 
 topic I would like to thank, without involving, Julian Alston, Chris Barrett, Uma Lele, Erik Lichtenberg, 
 Marc Nerlove, Isabelle Tsakok, Alberto Valdes, and Joachim von Braun. 
 
 2 
 One might have expected the most helpful writings to be those which cover the 
 complex difficulty and range of the (communities of people) being studied, and so finding a variety of 
 causes, each having different weights in different countries and at different times. But to 
 date no such complete approach has proven productive. Instead, money-flow experts' 
 (things that are given/work that's done) have usually went ahead by over-simplification, either by a model fixing 
 on only a few key (proof that one thing definitely causes another) factors, which are taken to be related over a range of 
 countries and facts or conditions (that surround someone), or by focusing on a single country and cutting apart events 
 through (related to careful studying or deep thinking) description (as against econometric guess testing). 
 Many of the key idea-based (things that are given/work that's done) can be classified according to two polarities of 
 approach: microeconomic against/compared to/or macroeconomic, and possible against/compared to/or scientific. No 
 money-flow expert is purely in any of the four camps that these polarities create - microtheoretical, micro-scientific, macro-possible, and macro-scientific. But many have 
 (importance and focus) that place their main (things that are given/work that's done) in one or another area. The macrotheoretical approach got a big initial boost in the 1950s from growth models treating 
 output in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as created by a neoclassical production function, with capital as 
 an input created by savings. Farming as a part/area in a general balance big picture  was 
 treated in two-part/area models that in both (serving to compare two or more things) static versions (famously Simon 
 1947) and the many dual (process of people making, selling, and buying things) models that followed.1 
 Macro-scientific (things that are given/work that's done) until the last few years have had a case-study flavor, 
 piling up (related to careful studying or deep thinking) description without a formal model. Mancur Olson (1982) is a 
 good example. More (not very long ago) the creation of panel data covering countries over time has 
 made possible econometric macro-scientific research, e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin 
 (1995). This books has plain but productive possible supports/supporting details, leading to ideas 
 of "coming together" that have not yet been mistreated (good or well enough) in (asking lots of questions about/trying to find the truth about) 
 farming-based growth. An outstanding example of the micro-scientific approach is T.W. 
 Schultz (1964). Many recent papers on household behavior in poor countries are heavier 
 on micro-explanation. But in Schultz and, for example Singh, Squire, and Strauss (1986), 
 there is an intimate (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of explanation and scientific (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement).2 
 All the approaches have created guesses about causes of growth that will be 
 discussed below in the big picture  of (away from cities) money-based development. 
 Measures of Growth 
 One of the services of models is to provide a idea-based basis for our choices of (numbers that change/things that change) 
 to measure in (numbers-based) terms and test econometrically. Farming-based output growth is a 
 measure that comes up naturally from guess of a production function. But output can 
 grow for reasons that provide little or no support for a rising standard of living - for 
 1 
 
 "(serving to compare two or more things) static" models (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) money-based change through one-time shocks in (coming from the outside of something) 
 (numbers that change/things that change), instead of energetic models that (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) time paths of investment or other growthgenerating endogenous (numbers that change/things that change). 
 2 
 Of course, many money-flow experts' works don't fall so easily into any of these categories. Hayami and Ruttan 
 (1985), Mundlak (1999), and Timmer (2002), for example, draw on all the approaches. 
 
 3 
 example output could rise under population pressure simply as a result of a larger farm 
 labor force or clearing of added/more land. For many purposes a better indicator of growth 
 is farming-based GDP (value added) per worker - what the part/area creates for each 
 productively engaged person over and above the cost of inputs from outside of 
 farming. Farming-based GDP per worker easily translates to a potential living-standard 
 measure, namely real income per household. With respect to causes of growth, 
 hidden (under) production explanation says that either output or value added per worker can grow 
 for the same two main reasons: investment (including investment in workers) 
 and (related to computers and science) progress. The question then becomes why investment and 
 (related to computers and science) progress happen, or do not. 
 Matters get more interesting (in a way when you carefully examine something) as well as better aware of actual situations 
 when the link between farming-based value added and (away from cities) household incomes is broken. 
 Farms produce non-farming-based products and farm household members earn incomes 
 from nonfarm sources. Then the causes of growth may well be different for farming-based 
 growth and (away from cities) income growth. Anyway, a growing/healthy/showing and waving farming-based part/area can still 
 be important instrumentally as a means of (accomplishing or gaining) (away from cities) income growth. One of the key 
 scientific questions about money-based growth in areas away from cities is how important farming-based 
 part/area growth is in the process. 
 While measures of both farming-based part/area growth and (away from cities) income growth are (full of spots/sometimes good and sometimes not good) in 
 availability and (possibly not true, good, or honest) in quality, some useful indicators exist for many countries 
 over a big period of time. A promising way to learn about causes of growth is to 
 compare the record of such indicators across countries as connected with (numbers that change/things that change) 
 guessed to be causes of growth. In order to carry out such comparisons 
 meaningfully, completely built cross-country data are needed. The huge 
 difficult project of building such a data set for farming has been taken on mostly 
 by the Food and Farming Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The World 
 Bank's World Development Indicators (available on-line) combines the FAO data with 
 other part/areaal and macroeconomic information for the years 1961-2001. These data are 
 the main source of (related to studying numbers) information in this paper. Measures of farming-based part/area 
 growth include cereal yields, crop and animals output indexes, and agriculture's 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) to GDP (part/areaal value added). 
 Farming-based Part/area Growth 
 "Getting farming moving" is a saying that represents the problem as it has appeared 
 to farming-based money-flow experts early in the after-World War II period as population pressures 
 were seen as needing/ordering faster (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of food production than looked likely to happen in 
 many poor countries, where traditional farming is the rule. Traditional 
 farming is seen as poorness or survival/income-level living standards, with hunger 
 an ever-present threat, and hope of change to a higher standard of living for the 
 (away from cities) population as a whole remote. What has to happen for a country's farming to 
 break out of that situation? In the early 1960s, T.W. Schultz created his answer, 
 beginning with what is NOT likely to work: improved (wasting very little while working or producing something) within existing useful thing/valuable supply 
 and (related to computers and science) restrictions is not the answer, nor is investing more, given those 
 
 4 
 restrictions. Clearing more land is an investment that tends to be too expensive for the returns 
 to create (growth over time) and "added/more crop-watering/rinsing with water is on about the same 
 footing as land" (Schultz, 1965, p. 45). The high-payoff sources of growth are to be 
 found in other places, famously in "improvements in the quality of farming-based inputs," 
 almost all of which must come from outside of farming rather than being created 
 within it (p. 46). Here Schultz has in mind not only (material that makes plants grow better), tractors, and improved crop 
 (the study of tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things), but also education and other means to improve the skills of farm people.3 
 The thinking of all who take an interest in farming-based development has to be influenced 
 by the high returns to farming-based research in many countries, famously in the "Green 
 Revolution." We have interesting/smart cases where farming has grew/showed/waved as a result. What 
 is the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of success from these developments? Three indicators are: cereal yields, 
 multifactor working well, and farming-based GDP per worker.4 Increasing speed in yield is an 
 indicator that a technology/investment shock is creating streams of output from given 
 land inputs; but it is partial in that yield increases themselves do not suggest improved 
 money-based returns because the land-increasing inputs may cost too much. Multifactor 
 working well takes into account all the measured inputs and so is mentally a far better 
 indicator of what a country gets from a given set of useful things/valuable supplies committed to 
 agriculture. But (even though there is the existence of) recent progress, getting correct cross-country comparisons of 
 many inputs and because of this of multifactor working well over time remains a major problem; 
 and anyway multifactor working well is not a (good) enough indicator of the returns to farmorigin land, labor, and invested capital that make up/be equal to the basis for farm household 
 income growth (because, for example, product buyers may collect  most of working well 
 gains through lower product prices). Farming-based GDP subtracts out the costs of 
 (bought) inputs from outside farming, and points to/shows the net gains available for 
 purposes of improved incomes of farm people. But the data are (with less of something) and require oftendubious ideas (you think are true) (for example in guessing capital service flows) for multifactor 
 working well and farming-based GDP. 
 Cereal Yields 
 Table 1 provides data on growth rates of cereal yields (kilograms per hectare) for 85 
 countries during two time periods, 1961-80 and 1981-2001.5 The two periods are 
 referred to as "Early Green Revolution" and "Late Green Revolution" by Evenson and 
 Gollin (2003). The yield data are (teaches things) in showing that progress in fact has 
 happened worldwide. Yields increased during 1961-2001 in all but 9 of the 85 countries 
 covered; 8 of these were in Sub-Saharan Africa (Angola, Botswana, Chad, Congo, 
 3 
 
 But education is expected to be productive by improving the basic skills of people, not by changing their 
 outlook to be less traditional or via other cultural changes. In fact, Timmer attributes to Schultz "the 
 death in the late 1960s of community-action programs," which focused on cultural/institutional 
 change (Timmer, 2002, p. 1516). 
 4 
 For purposes of testing investments in research that create (related to computers and science) change, a more appropriate 
 bottom line is the rate of return to that investment. It is guesses of these rates being amazingly high 
 that have sealed the case for the benefits of international farming-based research. (See Alston et al., 2000 and 
 Evenson 2001 for complete reviews.) 
 5 
 The rates are calculated from linear (popular thing/general way things are going) (moving backwards) on the log of yield (so as not to be unnecessarily influenced 
 by the end-points of the periods chosen). 
 
 5 
 Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Sudan). The sub-periods show a slowdown in yield 
 growth over the last few years, a thing/event that some have viewed with alarm (see for 
 example, International Fund for Farming-based Development, 2001, Ch. 4). However, the 
 slowdown is not huge, and does not happen in many countries. Yields in 15 of the 31 SubSaharan African countries of Table 1, and in 10 of 18 Latin American ones, grew faster in 
 1981-2001 than in 1961-80. The countries that fit best the idea of yield slowdown 
 were the industrial country (OECD) group.6 
 Table 1 ranks countries within each (related to a large area) group by the rate of yield growth in 196181. It is important/famous that countries with the highest yield growth in 1961-81 are usually 
 watched/followed to have slower yield growth in 1981-2001, while the departures from this 
 (big statement based on very little information) tended to be countries with lower growth rates in 1961-80. However, the 
 relationship-related coefficient between the growth rates in the earlier and later periods is only 
 -.06, not (meaningful numbers), for the whole sample of 85 countries. Figure 1 shows 
 the time series of yield growth for countries that had especially high or low rates in 
 1961-80. China and India are examples where yields grew at a high rate and then 
 continued to do so; while yields in Belize and Swaziland grew at a high rate and then 
 spoiled. In Angola and Mozambique yields (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) sharply and then rebounded. 
 There are no cases where yields (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) at a high rate and then continued to (lower in number/get worse). The 
 closest guess is Haiti where a 0.4 percent rate of yield decline in 1961-81 was 
 followed by a 0.7 percent rate of decline in 1980-2001. 
 Figure 1 points to/shows a big separation of yields over time. This is partly a matter of 
 the small sample selected, but a figure that includes all the 85 countries covered (not 
 shown) also shows separation of yields over time. This separation of produces /gives up across 
 countries is a surprise from the viewpoint that underlies a lot of recent work in the explanation 
 of money-based growth. The basic idea is that any (process of people making, selling, and buying things)'s output is created by 
 technology and money-based actors following neoclassical ways of thinking/basic truths/rules. The application to 
 crop yields is that with the same technology available everywhere, countries with lower 
 yields will have a higher not important return to added/more inputs under neoclassical 
 production. Therefore use of such inputs is expected to increase at a higher rate in loweryield countries and to increase their yields faster than those of at first high-yield 
 countries. So stated, this idea is unattractive for the historical (change over time) of most of world 
 farming because of differences in climate and other valuable things from nature and because the 
 same technology is not in use everywhere. 
 6 
 
 The World Bank (2002) states that "the yield growth experienced since the 1970s has slowed sharply in 
 the 1990s due to (being worth less) to further input use, the rising cost of expanding crop-watering/rinsing with water, a 
 slowdown in investment in (set of machines) and research (in part caused by (lowering in number/getting worse) valuable thing prices), 
 and useful thing/valuable supply and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) restrictions" (p. 47). This story is generally reasonable but not supported 
 with (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), and what seems most basically doubtful is the first claim of a sharp slowdown in 
 yield growth. Of the 31 Sub-Saharan African countries of Table 1, in 16 yields increased more quickly in 
 the 1990s as compared to the 1980s than in the 1980s compared to the 1970s; and (in almost the same way) the trend rate of 
 growth during the 1990s was greater than the trend rate during 1970-89 for 16 of the 31 (different 
 comparisons than shown in Table 1 but with generally the same story). The 11 Asian countries in the sample are (in almost the same way) split. But China and India, the two biggest, do obey the idea of a yield 
 slowdown in the 1990s. While these large countries rule the worldwide picture, we have about as 
 many countries where produces /gives up accelerated in the 1990s as where yields slowed down. 
 
 6 
 
 The issue then rises of the international move (from one place to another) of technology. On this subject we do 
 have reasonable dating of at least one important element of the cross-country story: the 
 international (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of farming-based research under the Advice-giving Group on 
 International Farming-based Research (CGIAR) in about 1970. We can guess that, if 
 farming-based research is an important element of the story, we should see more 
 coming together in years following 1970 than before. A more complex version of this story 
 is what Evenson and Gollin call "wider and deeper hits/effects" of CGIAR research on 
 more crops in more countries after the mid-1970s (2003, p. 758). Yet the yield data of 
 Table 1 give no indications of yield coming together, even in the 1990s. 
 Farming-based GDP per Worker 
 The coming together guess might be more likely to apply to real farming-based GDP per 
 worker. The idea is that, at an initial point in time, countries with a lower farming-based 
 GDP per worker will have a higher not important return to money-giving under the 
 classical laws of production. Therefore more investment will happen in lower-GDP 
 countries and their agricultures will grow faster than those of at first high-GDP 
 countries. Not prevented by/not part of the issue questions of correct measurement, the FAO/World Bank 
 indicator series provide a big, regularly built panel of cross-country 
 comparisons over time. Table 2 shows the 1980-2001 growth rates of farming-based GDP 
 per worker for the 79 countries that have (good) enough data for this purpose. These rates, as 
 was also the case for the cereal yield growth rates discussed above, are not calculated 
 from changes between the 1980 and 2001 endpoints on the grounds that random year-toyear difference/different version makes the calculated rate too sensitive to the choice of endpoint years (and 
 for some countries the data available do not begin until after 1980 and end before 2001). 
 Instead, log-linear (popular thing/general way things are going) (moving backwards) were guessed and the slope for each country is the 
 "trend growth rate" for that country. Time series for a few groups of countries are 
 shown in Figures 2a to 2d. In none of these charts is coming together obvious, nor is there 
 coming together between groups. The African countries started lowest and grew slowest, 
 and the OECD countries started highest and grew fastest. But there are big 
 differences among the growth experiences of countries within each group and across all 
 groups, and we may learn about the causes of growth by finding out which "growth 
 conditioning (numbers that change/things that change)" explain those differences. 
 The importance of growth-conditioning (numbers that change/things that change) became seen/obvious to smart people  of both 
 farming-based and general money-based growth as interfered with/prevented expectations of technology-led 
 (away from cities) richness mounted. T.W. Schultz noted that while advances in technology and 
 availability of capital for financing new inputs had become ever more (existing all over a large area), "it has 
 become more and more obvious that adoption of the research (things that are given/work that's done) and (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 portion of the added/more capital are being seriously interfered with/prevented by the distortion of 
 farming-based (rewards or reasons for doing something)" (Schultz, 1978, p. vii). The World Bank (2002) summarizes a 
 range of recent opinion about restrictions to growth, noting the number of problems 
 created by micro and macro policy (unfair treatment based on skin color, age, etc.) against farming, inefficient and 
 uncompetitive marketing institutions, (not well developed) labor and (money-related) markets, weak 
 
 7 
 political and property-right institutions, and world price-depressing policies of the OECD 
 countries (p. 47). 
 But which (numbers that change/things that change) are the most important ones? Are there some that do not matter 
 much in fact even though in way of thinking/basic truth/rule they might have been expected to? Are there some 
 conditions that are so important that, if they win, they are (good) enough for real income 
 growth? Two quite different approaches to answering such questions are well-known/obvious. The 
 first is econometric, combining data on almost the same  (numbers that change/things that change) for as many countries as possible 
 and trying to explain the differences in growth (related to numbers) through association with 
 candidate (proof that one thing definitely causes another) (numbers that change/things that change). The second is (not numbers-based) and story, mostly the 
 collection of case studies by smart people  with wide experience in farming across a 
 variety of countries. 
 Cross-country (moving backwards) 
 Explanation and Coming together. An econometric approach that has immediate attraction as a 
 method of explaining differences in growth rates among countries is to use time series 
 (moving backwards), combined across countries, in which changes in candidate (numbers that change/things that change) as causes of 
 growth are related to rates of growth in real farming-based GDP per worker, or other 
 (numbers that change/things that change) taken as indicators of growth in farming. Hayami and Ruttan (1985, Chaps. 
 5, 6) and Mundlak (1999, 2000, 2001) have explored in depth the use of cross-country 
 production functions.7 Hayami and Ruttan explained an farming-based output index as a 
 Cobb-Douglas function of inputs for 43 countries in 1960, 1970, and 1980, and used the 
 results to account for growth in output per worker. They found that output per worker in 
 less-developed countries could effectively be increased by input increases along with 
 education and research, and viewed the findings as "mostly encouraging" because 
 they showed the possibility of progress even in the face of population pressure with 
 limited farming-based land availability (p. 157). 
 Mundlak worked with improved data, especially for capital and investment, increased the 
 country coverage to 88, extended the data coverage to 1992, explained farming-based GDP 
 rather than output, and generalized the model to includes (rewards or reasons for doing something) (prices and risk) 
 and restrictions from the money-based and physical (surrounding conditions) as well as the usual input 
 amounts. He also used country-specific "within" as well as "between" time period 
 estimators to (make small) identification problems that bother thin sliceal production 
 function guesses.8 Mundlak found input amounts to be important mostly as expected, 
 mostly in line with earlier findings, and found increases in capital especially important in 
 creating increased farming-based GDP. (numbers that change/things that change) over which a country can have some 
 control as a matter of policy, famously farming-based prices and education, were guessed to 
 have quite small effects (the schooling results very different than Hayami and Ruttan). 
 But, as Mundlak (2001) notes, these policy (numbers that change/things that change) may influence investment and 
 adoption of improved inputs, and the (moving backwards) already include the input levels. To sort 
 7 
 
 Other recent studies almost the same  in approach include Fulginiti and Perrin (1993), Frisvold and Ingram (1995), 
 and Craig, Pardey and Roseboom (1997). For a summary of findings from earlier such studies, see Hayami 
 and Ruttan (1985), p. 149. 
 8 
 See Deaton (1995, pp. 1824-1827) for a well-said presentation of the problems and fixes. 
 
 8 
 out the full (things that are given/work that's done) of such (numbers that change/things that change) as causes of growth one needs either a more 
 complete (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) model of input and output supply and demand, or else reduced-form 
 equations in which growth is guessed as a function of (coming from the outside of something) or policy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 only. 
 Tries to test the coming together guess, such as Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) have 
 created an mostly reduced-form approach that may be helpful. The simplest 
 pre-decided equation for guessing coming together is: 
 (1) 
 
 Gt,0 = Î± + Î² y0 
 
 where Gt,0 is the rate of growth of farming-based GDP per worker between time 0 and a later 
 time, t, y0 is the log of the first level of farming-based GDP per worker, and Î± and Î² are 
 limits/guidelines to be guessed. The guess of Î² points to/shows the change in the growth rate 
 resulting from a one percent higher level of y0. (in the same way), other initial-year levels of 
 other (numbers that change/things that change) guessed to influence growth can be added to equation (1). What we 
 give up with this simple approach is the ability to guess the patterns of growth - 
 how changes in (proof that one thing definitely causes another) (numbers that change/things that change) affect growth and its timing - and the ability to 
 guess (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) limits/guidelines of production or supply relationships. However, the 
 econometric problems of sorting out (proof that one thing definitely causes another) effects from (becoming popular/moving in a particular way) time series, and the 
 fame of measurement errors or other random ups and downs in year-to-year 
 changes, are likely to prevent guessing energetic relationships anyway. 
 Econometric objections to equation (1) have been raised.9 One is the chance of bias 
 toward a negative value of the guessed Î² because initial measured levels are (for a short time) 
 low or high just by chance, because of measurement error or short-lived single-year events. 
 When this happens we are possibly going to watch/notice coming together according to equation (1) even if 
 in fact no real coming together happens. This problem is may be uncontrollable/uncurable given likely 
 measurement error as well as random unsteadiness in the farming-based GDP data. It means 
 we cannot be confident of what is really measured by the guessed Î². 
 A second problem is that if (numbers that change/things that change) left out from the equation are positively 
 (negatively) related to income growth but negatively related to initial income, 
 the guessed Î² will be too nice to a negative (positive) value. Or, in the version 
 discussed by Nerlove (2002, p. 330), the first value of income will tend to be positively 
 related to left out (numbers that change/things that change) (helping increase/showing in a good way) growth, and with toughness in the growth 
 process these (things that decide other things) will still be operating in the period over which coming together is 
 tested, this way (unfairly influencing an opinion) the guessed Î² upward, tending to reject coming together. To address 
 this criticism, one can add initial-year (numbers that change/things that change) for likely left out (numbers that change/things that change) to the 
 equation, this way guessing "(may or may not happen, depending on something)" coming together. This approach is what was 
 suggested above, adding added/more (numbers that change/things that change) guessed to be causes of growth. But 
 some (connected/related) (numbers that change/things that change) are sure to be left-out, just because (good) enough data are not 
 available, so the criticism is in practice (certain to happen). 
 9 
 
 For details, see Quah (1996) or Nerlove (2000, 2002). 
 
 9 
 The general form of the linear (moving backwards) to be guessed is : 
 (2) 
 
 Gt,0 = Î± + Î² y0 + Î³ X0 + Î´ aˆ†Zt,0 + Îµ 
 
 where X0 is a vector of initial values of guessed (proof that one thing definitely causes another) (numbers that change/things that change) that may be 
 endogenous, aˆ†Zt,0 is a vector of rates of change between 0 and t (changes in natural logs) 
 of guessed (proof that one thing definitely causes another) (numbers that change/things that change) that change over time and are (coming from the outside of something) to Gt,0, Îµ is an 
 iid error term, and Î³ and Î´ are vectors of limits/guidelines that provide guessed hits/effects of the 
 (numbers that change/things that change) on growth. The (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) are of a cross section of countries (country 
 subscripts on the (numbers that change/things that change) and error term are held down and stopped). 
 Explaining growth in the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of equation (2) places the focus differently than 
 in cross-country production function guess. The key (numbers that change/things that change) in production 
 functions are input amounts and, in the energetic big picture, investment in capital. But 
 these are endogenous (numbers that change/things that change) and not appropriate either as X0 or aˆ†Zt,0 (numbers that change/things that change) in 
 equation (2). The use of equation (2) is rather to explore (numbers-based) the influence of 
 factors that the books on money-based development has given attention to, usually in a 
 descriptive or (not numbers-based) fashion. For example, a nation's (away from cities) (set of machines), human 
 capital, market institutions, and political (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) are parts of the first conditions 
 that may be helpful or harmful to growth. Policy changes, educational improvements 
 or world market changes, if they are (coming from the outside of something), are examples of possible aˆ†Zt,0 (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Selection of Explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). Tries to think about/believe many routes to growth, and 
 as a result of that (serious thought/something to think about/respect) narrow the focus to key factors, usually take a casestudy, (in a way when you carefully examine something) descriptive approach for one or a few countries rather than trying to 
 in a planned way compare many countries in a cross-country moving backward. Examples of 
 thoughtful studies of this (type of writing or art) include Pearson et al. (1987), Lele (1989), and Eicher 
 (1999), among many others. While such studies have country-clearly stated/particular goals, they 
 can be helpful in specifying thin sliceal (moving backwards) because their findings for 
 particular cases suggest guesses that can sometimes be tested in the cross-country 
 big picture - the main restriction being whether (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) believable data can be found to 
 clearly show/include the guess. 
 It is striking in such case studies that the factors that end up being the focus of interest 
 usually have a public-good or governmental focus. The hidden (under) reason is that the 
 countries thought about/believed tend to be ones in which money-based growth has been weak, as is the 
 case in so much of developing country farming for most of recorded history. If a 
 country is stuck in spoiling and poorness, one has to look for major changes or shocks 
 to the system, and governments (although sometimes foreign governments) are the 
 instruments (nearby/ close/ currently important) to provide public products (that are bought and sold)  such as research or remove public bads such 
 as (one company that controls too much), (very mean, unfair treatment) of power, or legal disorganization. Given that, one may be taken 
 aback to read Mundlak's warning quoted at the beginning of this paper for money-flow experts 
 to operate "against the smart knowledge of governments." The problem is that 
 governments are often the source of the problem, or are not willing or able to begin/try 
 the recommended policies. After all, governments are not things/businesses (coming from the outside of something) to the status 
 quo that can be used to shock the (process of people making, selling, and buying things), but are an part of the way things are now. 
 
 10 
 
 Think about/believe the following conditioning factors for farming-based GDP growth, in all of which 
 government has some role: (i) providing macroeconomic and political (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength); (ii) 
 institutions beginning and building on appropriate (rewards or reasons for doing something); (iii) access to competitive input markets 
 (including credit) and moneymaking output markets; and (iv) helping working wellenhancing new technology. Not prevented by/not part of the issue the earlier econometric limitations/insults against 
 confidence in getting fair coefficients or standard errors, we can look for 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of effects of such growth conditioning factors by introducing (numbers that change/things that change) in 
 equation (2) for initial-period values of (numbers that change/things that change) meant to measure them. Unless 
 otherwise specified the data used come from the World Bank Development Indicators. 
 (i) (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength): Once-a-year inflation rates are used to construct an indicator of macroeconomic 
 (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong), the (quality of changing over time or at different places) (standard moving away) of the rate of inflation over the 1980-2001 
 period. Political (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) is a more unclear but probably more important, especially in 
 the dimension ranging from (war between groups that all live in one country) to domestic peace (see for example Collier et al., 
 2003). I use a dummy (number or thing that changes) equal to 1 for Colombia plus countries identified as 
 internal war cases during 1980-2000 in Stuart, Huang, and Wang (2001). 
 (ii) (reward or reason for doing something)-friendly institutions: A government of confiscatory taxation or regulation, or 
 (not being there; not being present) of property rights, are widely seen as deadly to money-based growth. Indicators 
 from O'Driscoll, Feulner, and O'Grady (2003), Clearness/open honesty International (2002), and 
 Freedom House (2003) are used that are meant to measure, (match up each pair of items in order), commercial 
 freedom, governmental proper behavior (lack of dishonesty), and the overall state of (control/keeping control) 
 in a country. 
 (iii) Factor amounts, usually being endogenous (numbers that change/things that change), are not the (numbers that change/things that change) we 
 want, but rather hidden (under) causes of factor amounts, especially of investment in 
 capital or (bought) inputs bringing across new technology. Prices of clearly stated/particular factors in each 
 country's farming change/differ  across countries but they are also endogenous (numbers that change/things that change), 
 results as much as causes of farming-based growth. Product prices are often good 
 candidates as (proof that one thing definitely causes another) (numbers that change/things that change) especially for traded valuable things (so we are mostly 
 treating farming-based part/area growth as a matter of guessing supply functions) but in the 
 present analysis all difference/different version in the (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) is thin sliceal, so all countries are, to 
 a first guess, operating under the same set of changes in world market 
 conditions. Where countries differ in product and factor market is in the role of 
 payments, trade (blocking things), or other governmental helping actions, often stacked against 
 farming as referred to/given a traffic ticket for example by Schultz (1978) and Krueger, Schiff, and Valdes 
 (1991). Unfortunately, while there have been major efforts to number the support 
 gave/given to agriculture to permit cross-country comparisons among the OECD 
 countries, we do not have such measures for most of the less-developed countries of the 
 world. I use guesses of a country's producer payments as guessed by USDA (1994) 
 for the countries USDA covered.10 
 10 
 
 Product prices in all countries are affected by payments of farming in the OECD countries, and some 
 countries because of their product mix or location are affected differently from others. Bad effects 
 upon growth would appear most directly in a lower farming-based GDP, or slower growth of farming-based 
 GDP, in the most (able to be hurt) countries. In order to get (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the importance of differential 
 
 11 
 
 (iv) New technology. In searching for causes of the change of farming from 
 money-based spoiling to money-based growth, one is naturally drawn to examine the 
 experiences of countries where this has happened, that is, to the countries toward the top 
 of the list in Table 2. This draws one's attention more to the industrial countries and less 
 to poor countries. The story farming-based money-flow experts are most familiar with is as 
 follows: scientists, engineers, and tinkerers, in both the private and (government)s, apply 
 their knowledge to problems of farm-related; extension services and other sources of 
 information place new knowledge in farmers' hands; and with (good) enough property rights 
 and price (rewards or reasons for doing something) to call forward  the necessary investment, farmers adopt new technology 
 and create more output and income from their useful things/valuable supplies. Most of the gains may build up 
 to buyers of farm products rather than their producers as increased output drives down 
 prices, but anyway this is the way of thinking of growth. 
 However, how to specify (numbers that change/things that change) good for equation (2) is not so clear, even at the 
 level of what sorts of (numbers that change/things that change) one needs. History experts have dug up (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on what 
 was going on during the period when U.S. farming entered upon its period of strong 
 and sustained working well growth. This (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), which has been mostly neglected by 
 money-flow experts, includes facts about farmers' attitudes and preferences, the thinking-related and 
 excellent (things that are given/work that's done) of smart (person) people, and (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) institutions 
 and forms of money-based organization good for growth. The idea of the farmer as an 
 (having no knowledge), (mind-related) hardened follower of traditional practice and afraid of change, and 
 (in a way that agrees with or is related to the Constitution) unable to give up/forget about  consumption in order to invest, was an important view in 
 the first half of the twentieth century. In this big picture  investment in new technology 
 needs/demands a cultural change. Anyway, Griliches (1957) brilliantly showed that 
 a money-making state was (good) enough to explain the pattern of adoption of mixed-version corn. But (away from cities) 
 scientists also staked claim to cultural/social explanations such as community 
 leadership and informational networks (for example, Ryan and Gross, 1943; Places and 
 Rogers, 1961). Danbom (1979) describes the efforts by many (help increase/show in a good way)rs of progress in 
 farming, famously President Theodore Roosevelt in the first 20 years of the twentieth 
 century, to put in farm people a thinking good for (making something available for lots of people to buy) of their 
 businesses/projects, investment, and adoption of new and interesting technology. History experts like Clarke 
 (1994) have also given a wider (understanding/ explanation) to farming-based support programs, 
 especially the New Deal programs of the 1930s, focusing on how the programs changed 
 farmers' outlook in ways that (helped increase/showed in a good way) investment and adoption of new technology. 
 Wider modes of thought are (definitely/as one would expect) not new in the explanation of development. Hagen 
 (1962) is excellent of ideas in the 1950s that (blocking or stopping things) to development are mostly 
 product price experiences on differences in the rates of farming-based GDP growth shown in Table 2, that 
 table also shows the rate of growth of FAO's crop production index, a amount indicator. The ranking of 
 countries from high to low growth rates in 1980-2001 is quite almost the same  for the two indicators, and not 
 generally lower for farming-based GDP. Because low or (lowering in number/getting worse) prices reduce farming-based GDP directly, 
 while they affect crop output only indirectly through supply response, the (thing that's almost the same as another thing) of the two columns 
 hints that differential world market price experience is a not a major factor in these rankings - though 
 this guess certainly could use better confirming or disconfirming (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). In the (moving backwards) my 
 rough substitute for international trade effects is the share of GDP accounted for by trade in products (that are bought and sold). 
 
 12 
 traditional (away from cities) village institutions and/or inside the heads of the villagers. So, 
 "money-based explanation has rather little to offer" and "both the (blocking things) to growth and the 
 causes of growth seem to be mostly internal rather than external" (Hagen, quoted in 
 Stevens and Jabara, 1988, p. 94). This view is the opposite of Schultz's talked about/said 
 earlier, that inputs from outside of farming are key, and that, if money-making, they will be 
 adopted.11 The non-money-based approach lost shine with the perceived failure of 
 community development big plans/layouts/dishonest plans, and it seems the last nail in its coffin was the Green 
 Revolution. New varieties were adopted along with (bought) inputs, (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) without 
 need of cultural or mental changes in (away from cities) communities. 
 In order to test these ideas in equation (2) we need both (related to computers and science) and cultural 
 (numbers that change/things that change). The data available on either type of (number or thing that changes) for the countries of the Table 2 
 data set have neither the idea-based level of detail nor the exact measurement that one 
 would like. We do have data that probably reflect differences in technology between 
 countries. A few studies, such as Evenson and Kislev (1975), use a country's research 
 and/or extension expenses as a cause of farming-based growth (with long lags). I use 
 two of their indicators measured as of the mid-1960s, public research expenses and 
 farming-based science (books, magazines, etc.) (Evenson and Kislev, Add on I). However, these data 
 are not reported for 24 countries in the Table 2 sample. The CGIAR publishes later data 
 for more countries, of which I use average public research expenses in each country 
 during 1976-1980. These data are used to guess a research expense (number or thing that changes) that 
 covers 53 countries with information about spending in the 15 years coming before the 19802001 period over which equation (2) is guessed. Because identifying effects of new 
 technology through these (numbers that change/things that change) is far from promised to/certain, given the long falls behind  found by most 
 (people who work to find information) between invention and putting into use and the widespread role of "spill-ins" 
 from other countries' research and from the CGIAR centers, indirect indicators of 
 technology putting into use are also used as X0 (numbers that change/things that change). These are initial (1980) 
 guesses of (material that makes plants grow better) per hectare and tractors per hectare. Also, I use the rate of 
 growth of cereal yields over the twenty years previous/coming before 1980 to point to/show pre-existing 
 desire to create something new that may carry over to the 1980-2001 period. 
 On the cultural side, the most reasonable personal (features/ qualities/ traits) are educational 
 accomplishments. The one for which we have the most (existing all over a large area) data is the extent of 
 (can't read or write) in a country. High (can't read or write) reasonably points to/shows a high number of traditional 
 attitudes that are (blocking things) to growth. However, (can't read or write) may also serve as a substitute for 
 (lack of) education, and education is an indicator of investment in workers and 
 improved labor quality that Schultz first discovered/used as important in farming-based development, 
 and which has been widely accepted by money-flow experts as a source of money-based growth. 
 A quite different labor-centered view of farming and money-based growth comes from/is caused by the 
 (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) of large numbers of poor and (appearing to be) (working in a low-paying job while being highly skilled) people in (away from cities) 
 areas. The (complete/harsh/simple)  labor-extra ideas of early dual (process of people making, selling, and buying things) models have changed to more 
 11 
 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that standard opinion was closer to Hagen than to Schultz in the 1960s is the following from 
 the Rockefeller Foundation on restrictions to adoption of new crop varieties in Colombia: "The bottleneck 
 is the training of farmers to appreciate the value of good seed and to use improved farm practices" 
 (Rockefeller Foundation, 1963). 
 
 13 
 detailed tests that still keep/hold the thought that the path to (away from cities) development must 
 overcome in some way the shortage of moneymaking employment where the ratio of 
 workers to other useful things/valuable supplies is high. Tomich, Kilby, and Johnson (1995), for example, 
 describe the (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) where development is needed as CARLs (countries with 
 plentiful (away from cities) labor). I attempt to test for the difference made by labor (oversupply/large quantity) using 
 (away from cities) population density (workers per hectare) as an explanatory (number or thing that changes). 
 Cross-sectional Moving backward Results. Table 3 reports the results of guesses of three 
 (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of equation (2) for the Table 2 set of countries. The results are just like 
 cross-country (moving backwards) in being interesting but far from definite in sorting out causes 
 of growth. Moving backward 1, the simple coming together model, points to/shows significant separation 
 - in countries that started out with the highest farming-based GDP per worker in 1980, that 
 (number or thing that changes) grew the fastest between 1980 and 2001. The included in (moving backwards) 2 and 3 
 include growth conditioning (numbers that change/things that change) meant to explain the sources of differences in 
 growth rates. They have both/together significant effects on the rate of farming-based GDP 
 increase, and many have the expected signs, but none of them comes out individually as a 
 most important (thing that decides something) of farming-based growth. 
 Think about/believe for example the (can't read or write) (number or thing that changes). This is the (number or thing that changes) most directly related to 
 workers and also to ideas about cultural requirements to growth. The sign of this 
 (number or thing that changes) is not strong - it changes as other right-hand side (numbers that change/things that change) are added or deleted 
 - and the (number or thing that changes) is not (meaningful numbers) (here and later taking importance at the 
 10 percent level - needing/ordering a "t" statistic of 1.7 or more in (value of a number, ignoring its sign)). This lack of 
 importance is not a complete surprise as it is similar to the findings in Craig, Pardey and 
 Roseboom (1997) and Mundlak (1999), who also guessed no significant effects of 
 reading and writing ability on working well or farming-based GDP per worker. However, Hayami and Ruttan 
 (1985, Ch. 6) found education an important cause of working well growth in farming 
 (although their reading and writing ability (number or thing that changes) alone was often unimportant). So did Antle (1983) and 
 Fulginiti and Perrin (1993).12 One can say correctly that (can't read or write) data are quite 
 (not totally pure/not totally correct) both mentally and practically as measures of workers or skill, but that 
 leaves us still with no clear answer about the importance of education to growth, and 
 doubt and distrust about the importance of the (number or thing that changes) (whether one place a workers or 
 cultural (understanding/ explanation) upon it. 
 The other (number or thing that changes) related to labor supply is (away from cities) population density (people per square 
 kilometer) at the beginning of the period, 1980. If plentiful labor is a interference to 
 growth, this (number or thing that changes) should have a negative sign. But the (number or thing that changes) is unimportant in in 
 moving backward 2 and positive in moving backward 3, and generally not strong in other (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) 
 tried.13 ((in almost the same way) (not resulting in anything) results were gotten for an different measure, 
 farming-based workers per hectare of plantable land.) 
 
 12 
 13 
 
 See Huffman (2001) for a thorough review of econometric studies. 
 
 The positive sign in moving backward 3 is not totally unexpected following the arguments of Boserup (1975) 
 that population growth in poor countries is not always the curse it is often taken to be. 
 
 14 
 (numbers that change/things that change) meant to point to/show the first presence of inventions had a 
 mixed performance. The coefficient of the 1980 level of (material that makes plants grow better) per hectare has a 
 positive sign and (meaningful numbers) in moving backward 2, but the effect of tractors per 
 hectare is 1980 are unimportant or negative. Growth of crop output per worker in the 
 previous/coming before period, 1961-1980, is one of the few (numbers that change/things that change) that regularly has a 
 significantly positive sign, suggesting that countries with a history of working well 
 improvement have speed and power that carries through to later growth. However, the 
 research (number or thing that changes) is unimportant. This result (continues to exist/continues to do hard or annoying things) whether research spending is 
 measured per dollar of farming-based GDP or as an total amount (the latter being 
 appropriate if research is a total/totally/with nothing else mixed in public good within the country). The different 
 technology (number or thing that changes) from Evenson and Kislev (1975), gives the same results. 
 The (quality of changing over time or at different places) of the inflation rate, an indicator of (prices going way up in weird ways, lots of people losing jobs, etc.) is completely 
 unimportant, but the four political (numbers that change/things that change) tell a more interesting story. The measures 
 of handcuffs, etc. on money-based freedom and (guarantees to be treated respectfully as a valued human being), as measured by the History 
 Foundation and Freedom House, (match up each pair of items in order), and regularly negative and sometimes 
 significant, and (in almost the same way) the (not being there; not being present) of dishonesty as scored by Clearness/open honesty 
 International. Internal war (good) enough to quality for Stewart et al.'s case studies reduce the 
 rate of growth by 1.7 percent every year according to moving backward 2. 
 Moving backward 3 adds two (numbers that change/things that change) more clearly related to a country's money-based policies, 
 added in a separate moving backward because fewness of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) reduces the sample size 
 much. The first is the value of international trade in products (that are bought and sold)  as a fraction of 
 national GDP. The second is an index of governmental support to farming-based 
 valuable thing markets, the producer helping payment equal (PSE). PSEs have been calculated 
 in some ways, and all of those ways have been subject to criticism. I use the 198589 average PSE as guessed in U.S. Department of Farming (1994). The importance 
 of products (that are bought and sold)  in international trade and the PSE, are both significantly positive, suggesting 
 that a country can increase its growth of farming-based GDP per worker by trading more 
 and by giving money to its farming. (The national welfare results may (definitely/as one would expect) be 
 quite different, famously because the PSE boosts farming at the cost of taxpayer 
 outlays.) Note that the coefficient means that the PSE would have to increase by 30 
 percent of the value of farming-based output in order to boost the rates of farming-based GDP 
 growth by 0.1 percent. 
 Table 2 shows that the slowest-growing agricultures tend to be in African countries. 
 However, adding dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for Africa (and other areas) to (moving backwards) 2 and 3 
 creates unimportant coefficients, suggesting that the growth-conditioning factors we 
 have been carefully studying account for the (related to a large area) differences. Note also that in (moving backwards) 2 
 and 3, the first (1980) value of the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) tends to be negative, suggesting 
 that (may or may not happen, depending on something) on the factors thought about/believed, coming together may be a fact. Maybe more 
 important is the lack of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) for separation. A reasonable good  case can be made 
 for the guesses that rich countries with high farming-based GDP per worker invest more 
 in farming-based research and this boosts later growth in a way less available to 
 poorer countries. (moving backwards) 2 and 3 argue against the (ability to be used for something) of this guess. 
 But recall the limitations/insults above on possible bias in this guessed coefficient. 
 
 15 
 
 Real Household Income Growth 
 Growth in the farming-based part/area is important insofar as it helps (accomplish or gain with effort) growth in real 
 standards of living. But analysis of the relationship between farming-based part/area growth 
 and average r<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
