 Farming-based Money flow, 2 (1988) 231-245 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 231 
 
 Money, Guaranties and (away from cities) Credit in 
 Developing Countries: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Asia 
 Gershon Feder 1 , Tongroj Onchan 2 and Tejaswi Raparla 1 
 1 World 
 
 Bank, J-2075, 1818 H Street, N. W., Washington, DC 20433 (U.S.A.) 
 2 Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900 (Thailand) 
 
 (Accepted 5 February 1988) 
 
 Abstract 
 Feder, G., Onchan, T. and Raparla, T., 1988. Related, guaranties and (away from cities) credit in developing 
 countries: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Asia. Agric. Econ., 2: 231-245. 
 The paper reviews the explanation of the hit/effect of loan money, and in particular land money, 
 in institutional and non-institutional (away from cities) credit markets. (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from three Asian developing 
 countries is presented, showing long/big use of land money among institutional lenders in 
 countries where such money is legal. The use of land money is more common than other 
 forms of security, except in places where legal fears on mortgaging farming-based land exist. 
 Non-institutional lenders are less likely to use land money. However, lenders who do not 
 have links to borrowers in matters other than finance are more likely to use loan securities. Guesses of instutional credit supply and demand in (away from cities) Thailand confirm that the promising of land 
 money affects the supply of credit more than group guaranty. It is also shown that larger farmers 
 are more likely to use land money. The end/end result is that land money is preferred by 
 instutionallenders as it reduces (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to) test costs. Tries to ban or limit money use by statement are (having a reason to do something) by equity (things to carefully think about), but they will cause loss of (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Simplification of ownership checking (for truth) and other policies reducing the transaction cost of money promising will lessen the negative equity effects/results/suggestions of money. 
 
 Introduction 
 
 Loan transactions usually involve the risk of borrower default, and lenders 
 therefore chase after different procedures to reduce default risk and to (make small) the 
 losses which may be gotten/caused in the case of default. (examining and testing so a decision can be made) possible borrowers according to (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to) judging requirements and credit restricting are two common policies put into use by lenders facing default risk (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). 
 The use of money and guaranties is another universal procedure deThe views expressed in this paper are those of the authors. They do not necessarily reflect the 
 views of the institutions with which they are connected. 
 
 0169-5150/88/$03.50 
 
 © 1988 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 232 
 
 signed to increase the lender's expected a money-making state from a loan transaction. 
 A few works developed difficult/strict/high quality models (showing or proving) that related increases (ceteris paribus) the amount of credit offered to a given borrower, or 
 reduce the rate of interest charged (Barro, 1976; Benjamin, 1978; Plaut, 1985). 
 The number of related arrangements or guaranties in many (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 throughout history would seem to point to/show that they (sing, dance, act, etc., in front of people) a useful role for 
 lenders, otherwise such arrangements would not continue. 
 In the big picture  of (away from cities) (money-related) markets in developing countries, however, 
 doubts have been raised whether money and guaranties are useful and 
 effective: 
 "Even when money is taken, it may be very dificult- for political, social, legal and 
 institutional reasons - for lenders to (force people out of a house because they didn't pay) on farming-based land or on other valuable things, such as 
 (cows, bulls, etc.)  and machinery." (Von Pischke, 1986, p. 95) 
 
 If related things are not practically (able to be backed up with punishment if a rule is broken) in (away from cities) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of LDCs, one 
 would expect the practice to disappear, or, if related things are used because of bureacratic (slow or no movement/the force of something moving), they would actually not affect lending decisions. The purpose 
 of the present paper is to present (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from a few less developed countries on the use of money and guaranty procedures in (away from cities) (money-related) markets, and on their hit/effect on lending. 
 The structure of the paper is as follows: the next section provides a idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) on the role of related things and other guaranties, followed by 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the use of such procedures. The later section guesses a 
 supply-demand model using Thai data on credit transactions, to identify the 
 hit/effect of money on credit supply. The last section discusses equity issues 
 and policy effects/results/suggestions. 
 
 1 . Role of loan securities 
 
 For the purposes of our discussion, it is useful to distinguish two broad sources 
 of farm credit, namely, institutional (formal) and non-institutional (informal) lenders. Institutional lenders include banks, cooperatives and (made to do one thing very well) 
 government (services businesses/government units). Non-institutional lenders include friends, relatives, moneylenders, traders and rich farmers. The books on (away from cities) credit markets 
 suggests a few important differences between these two sources of finance. 
 Especially, the role of money may differ for these two types of lenders. 
 The lending decision involves desire/decision of loan amount, the direct and 
 indirect price, loan length of time, and money (or other security) needed things. 
 Some of these decisions may be (happening together) and others may be recursive (e.g., 
 the length of time or the amount of the loan may depend on the type of money 
 gave/given). Lenders face the risk of borrower default and so they require 
 information which is borrower-specific. The purchase/getting/learning of information is expensive, 
 and this aspect defines one of the main differences between institutional and 
 non -institutional lenders. The last thing just mentioned are often part of the farmers' en vi- 
 
 233 
 
 ronment. They have decided on a close knowledge of the farmer and his 
 social group and may, in fact, be part of it. They this way have described/explained and reliable 
 information about the farmer (Timberg and Aiyar, 1984; Miracle, 1983). Institutional lenders, on the other hand, do not usually have described/explained personal 
 (state of knowing someone or something well) with farmers. With less information, a borrower is more risky from 
 an institutional lender's point of view, as compared to a non-institutionallender. 
 Another aspect telling the difference between the two types of lenders is related to 
 the borrower's (reward or reason for doing something) to default and the lender's ability to enforce repayment. Given that the non-institutional bank is a member of the farmer's 
 social (surrounding conditions), there are normal behaviors and pressures that weigh heavily against 
 default. An informal lender can also apply violent enforcement procedures or 
 threats. These aspects are (not there; not present) in the case of institutional lenders (Bottomley, 1983, p. 284; Von Pischke et al., 1983, p. 228). As a result they will be more 
 likely to use risk-reducing measures such as loan secirity. The term loan 
 security usually refers to the promising of money or the provision of related 
 substitute. 
 The role of money in lending is discussed a lot by Barro ( 1976), 
 Benjamin (1978), Binswanger et al. ( 1985), Plaut ( 1985) andBinswanger and 
 Rosenzweig ( 1986). A related increases the expected return of the lender 
 and creates an (reward or reason for doing something) for borrowers to avoid (on purpose) default. It is expected therefore that the amount of loan will increase with the value of the 
 money, ceteris paribus. A money is not a risk free valuable thing: it can be damaged 
 or moved before the bank grabs and takes control of it. It is expected that land will be the most 
 common money in areas away from cities (Binswanger and Rosenzweig, 1986). Usually, in order for land to be used as related, (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of legal ownership is 
 needed/demanded (e.g. title). 
 The utility of land money in areas away from cities depends on the extent to which 
 the legal system as well as the socio-political (surrounding conditions) enable actual (forcing people out of a house because they didn't pay) of farming-based land. Fore-closure usually involves a (large/relatively large) transaction cost (legal fees, auctioner fees; etc.), but these may in fact reinforce 
 repayment control/field of study and improve the utility of related things if the cost is carried 
 by the borrower. The risk of getting/causing a high transaction cost in the case of an 
 unintended default may suggest that farmers will give up/forget about  the use of money even 
 though this limits their access to credit. An added risk-reducing element, 
 understood in a money, is the fact that it restricts the borrower's ability to get/cause 
 added/more institutional (money owed) (Von Pischke, 1986). 
 Farmers operating in areas where good related things are not available (e.g. 
 squatters) resort to alternative arrangements which are referred to as related substitutes, such as third party guaranty (Binswanger et al., 1985). A 
 common related substitute in some LDCs is a 'group guaranty'. Farmers 
 form groups such that while they borrow individually, the group as a whole is 
 responsible for each of its members' loans. It is expected that social pressures 
 will (make small) defaults. However, repayment control/field of study on loans received/got 
 
 234 
 
 through group guaranty may be slowed if actual enforcement of total 
 responsibility is hard. In many cases the repayment performance of such 
 loans was poor (Adams and Ladman, 1979; Onchan and Techavatananan, 1982; 
 Desai, 1983). 
 For obvious reasons, borrowers who own big valuable things are perferable to 
 those who have few valuable things even if no formal money is promised. (in almost the same way), 
 borrowers with a record of good repayment performance, are preferred to those 
 who do not have such a record. 
 Institutional lenders are usually heavily controlled, and in most cases have 
 to obey high-interest money lending laws which command/(have someone write what you say) a (compared to other things) low rate of interest. Noninstitutional lenders are not controlled, and in cases where regulation is attempted it is hard to enforce. As a result, interest rates charged by such 
 lenders are usually higher. The ability of non-institutional lenders to charge 
 higher interest rates to make up for risk reduces their need to use 
 money. 
 2. (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on use of loan security 
 
 The discussion in the previous/coming before section suggested that institutional lenders 
 will be more likely to use money or guaranties as compared to non-institutionallenders. It is also expected that land will be a major type of money 
 as it is the most good related valuable thing. However, ifland cannot be (forced people out of a house because they didn't pay) 
 for social or political reasons, the good qualities of land related things are much reduced and their use will be less common. These suggestions (or plans) are tested 
 below using Data from three less developed countries: Thailand (1985/86). 
 India (1979/80) and Korea (1968). 
 The data from Thailand relate to samples of borrowing farmers from eight 
 areas. The farmers are separated into two groups, namely farmers who 
 have titles to their land, and untitled farmers, who are mostly squatters 
 invading state land. Squatters, who are not legal owners, cannot provide 
 land as a money. The data from Thailand show that titled farmers provide 
 land as money in 63% of the institutional loans sampled (Table 1). Group 
 guaranty, which is officially sanctioned by the government bank, is used in 
 only 29% of the institutional loans of titled farmers. A very small proportion 
 of the institutional loans to titled farmers is not helped by any security. The 
 situation is different in the case of untitled farmers. As they cannot offer a land 
 money, a majority of their loans (71%) is covered by a group guaranty, 
 and the remaining loans are either helped by a guarantor or are granted with 
 no security at all. Non-institutionalloans are mostly granted with no money 
 or other security. However, for the few non-institutional loans which involve 
 any security, the most common security is land money. 
 
 235 
 TABLE 1 
 Borrowing transactions in (away from cities) Thailand ( 1985/86) 
 Type of security 
 
 Lender/Borrower type 
 Institutional 
 
 No related 
 Land money 
 Group guaranty 
 Third party 
 Other 
 Sample size 
 
 Non-institutional 
 
 Titled 
 farmers 
 
 Untitled 
 farmers 
 
 Titled 
 farmers 
 
 Untitled 
 farmers 
 
 (%) 
 
 (%) 
 
 (%) 
 
 (%) 
 
 8 
 63 
 29 
 0 
 0 
 
 24 
 n/a 
 71 
 4 
 1 
 
 79 
 19 
 0 
 1 
 1 
 
 95 
 n/a 
 0 
 0 
 5 
 
 316 
 
 178 
 
 179 
 
 153 
 
 Sources: Surveys paid for and supported by World Bank (1985) and Kasetsart University (1986 ). 
 TABLE2 
 Money types in (away from cities) India ( 1979/80) 
 Related type 
 
 Land money 
 Third-party guaranty 
 Other 
 No money 
 
 Institutional lenders 
 (N=226) 
 
 Non-institutionallenders 
 (N=258) 
 
 (%) 
 
 (%) 
 
 65 
 30 
 0 
 5 
 
 3 
 1 
 13 
 83 
 
 Source: Binswanger eta!. (1985, add on 4). 
 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from India is almost the same (Table 2) 1 . The institutional loans are 
 helped by a land money in almost two thirds of the cases. The rest of 
 the institutional loans are granted with a third-party guaranty2 . Non-institutional loans were mostly without a security, as in Thailand. Land was rarely 
 used as a money by informal lenders in India. 
 The study of Korea happened at a time when the government blocked/forbidden the 
 use of land as a loan money, probably in an attempt to protect farmers 
 against land loss and poor personization. Institutional lenders had to obey this 
 regulation, and resorted mainly to needing/ordering a third party guaranty. Informal 
 lenders, however, could arrange an effective land money through disguished 
 (may or may not happen, depending on something) sale contracts. (Kim, 1971, p. 179). It is this way watched/followed in Table 3 
 1 The data on credit transactions in the Indian sample do not tell the difference between landowners and 
 renters or between titled and untitled farmers. 
 2 Group guaranty was (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) not (able to be done) in India at the time of the study. 
 
 236 
 TABLE3 
 Distribution of loans by lender and related type, Korea 1968" 
 Related type 
 
 Land money 
 Movable property 
 Third party guaranty 
 No money 
 
 Institutional 
 lenders 
 
 4.4 
 9.9 
 66.9 
 18.8 
 
 Non-institutionallenders 
 Moneylenders 
 
 Traders 
 
 Manufacturers 
 
 Other 
 farmers 
 
 Informal 
 credit 
 association 
 
 Relatives 
 and 
 friends 
 
 25.8 
 29.6 
 36.2 
 8.4 
 
 12.0 
 20.4 
 28.9 
 38.7 
 
 10.1 
 19.7 
 28.1 
 42.1 
 
 7.4 
 12.7 
 11.8 
 68.1 
 
 2.0 
 15.3 
 26.5 
 56.2 
 
 3.8 
 12.0 
 7.6 
 76.9 
 
 "Numbers in the table are percentages of total volume of loans given by each source of credit. 
 Source: Kim (1971). 
 
 that most types of non-institutional lenders had a higher frequency of land 
 money than institutional lenders, ranging from 26% among moneylenders 
 to 7% among farmers-lenders. It is important/famous that those informal lenders who 
 have some social bond with the borrowers (friends, relatives, informal credit 
 associations, other farmers) are more likely to give up/forget about  a money (about 60% 
 of their loans were not helped by any security). Lenders who have some business transactions with the borrowers (e.g. traders, manufacturers) require 
 somewhat more often a loan security (only 40% of their loans were granted 
 without security). Moneylenders, whose only dealings with farmers are in the 
 big picture  of credit transactions, needed/demanded some form of loan security for more 
 than 90% of the loans extended. This pattern is compatible with the discussion 
 of the previous/coming before section. Lenders who are socially related to the borrower have 
 a better enforcement ability through social pressure. Lenders with other 
 business dealings with borrowers can use the threat of disrupting other business to increase their enforcement ability (to hold or do something). Moneylenders, who deal with 
 farmers only in credit transactions, require more security. 
 If the promising of a land money increases the supply of credit to farmers, 
 use of money in (away from cities) lending can have bad effects/results/suggestions for equity. Suppose, for simpleness, that a certain amount of credit per hectare ofland 
 owned is available to farmers when they offer no security, and a larger amount 
 per hectare is avialable if a land money is promised. The same opportunities 
 are this way available possibly to larger and smaller farmers, gave/given that 
 they own land. (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.) and renters, who do not own land, do not have the 
 option of getting the larger amount of credit per hectare and (in this/within this) lies one 
 inequality hint/result/effect of land related things. This problem, however, is often resolved by the (managers of apartment buildings) getting credit from institutional lenders and relending money to their (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.). 
 The actual provision of a land money often needs/demands certain fixed 
 transaction costs on the part of farmers, such as ownership certification, legal 
 
 237 
 
 fees and the farmer's time. Fixed costs suggest a higher effective borrowing cost 
 per hectare to smaller farmers. Also, the risk of loosing land if the harvest fails is likely to be a stronger reducer of less rich farmers. Smaller 
 farmers may therefore stop promising money either due to cost (things to carefully think about) or due to risk disgust (Aku, 1986, p. 27). This suggestion/possible plan is tested 
 using data from four areas in Thailand. A logit equation was guessed, 
 relating the chance that a titled farmer promises his land as money to the 
 size of his holding ((changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for quality differences). The equation is of the 
 form: 
 (1) 
 
 where Pis the chance of money use, Sis farm size, and a, bare limits/guidelines. 
 The results are reported in Table 4, and point to/show that the limit/guideline of farm 
 size is significantly greater than zero at a 99% confidence level. This confirms 
 that the (number of times something happens) of land money use among borrowing farmers increases 
 with farm size. So, even when all land owners face possibly almost the same  credit 
 supply schedules per hectare ignoring size, the actual borrowing per hectare is larger for richer farmers. 
 A honor/difference can be drawn between commercial banks and other institutional lenders. While commercial banks are profit-oriented, other institutional 
 lenders such as government-owned banks and cooperatives may have wider 
 goals, and in particular they may be likely to chase after a wider breaking up/spreading out 
 of money among all classes of farmers. This may translate into different positions with respect to use of money. As argued above, a needed thing for money, and in particular land money, may leave out/keep out or discourage less rich 
 farmers. For this reason, more socially-oriented lenders put into use more kind 
 money policies. This guess is compatible with the data from Thailand 
 and India: of the loans granted by commercial banks, 85% and 89%, respecTABLE4 
 Logit analysis of the effect of farm size on the chance of using money 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 Constant 
 Farm size ((changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for quality) 
 Chance ratio statistic 
 No. of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements)b 
 
 Limit/guideline 
 -0.4010 
 (1.519)" 
 0.0160 
 (2.903) 
 9.955 
 201 
 
 "Numbers in parentheses are t-values. 
 bThe data relate to 201 titled borrowers from four Thai areas surveyed in 1985/1986 under 
 World Bank and Kasetsart University (money-based support). 
 
 238 
 
 tively, were helped by land organizeraP. This is a much higher frequency 
 than that watched/followed in the overall sample of the loans from institutional lenders 
 (about 66%). Recent (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Nigeria, while not providing described/explained data, 
 points to/shows that commercial banks often require land money in their 
 transactions with farmers (Aku, 1986, p. 27). (in almost the same way), Collier ( 1983, p. 163) 
 points out the importance of land money in the operations of commercial 
 banks in (away from cities) Kenya. Since commercial banks are profit-oriented, and assuming that their information and lending costs are just like those of other institutionallenders, this watched/followed pattern of their lending is compatible with the 
 guess that the use of money (and specifically land money) 
 increases the money-making ability of their lending. 
 3. Econometric analysis of supply and demand for institutional 
 credit 
 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) in the previous/coming before section is generally agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the suggestions (or plans) created in Section 1. However, if money is used only for slow-working purposes, the data do not necessarily suggest that the use of money increases the availability of credit. In order to clear up this issue, an analysis of credit supply is needed/demanded. The standard appraoch in carefully studying marketobserved amounts and prices is to assume balance and estimate supply 
 and demand equations where price (or amount) is the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)). 
 However, the credit market may not be in balance due to the number of 
 restricting (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981). This thing/event is especially likely 
 in the case of institutional credit, where information unevenness increases the 
 need for supply restricting and where a ceiling on the rate of interest may win. The econometric approach good for dealing with data created by 
 market unbalance is popularly known as 'switching moving backward', and it uses a maximum chance procedure to get (happening together) guess of supply and demand equations' coefficients which are (producing a lot with very little waste), consistent, and 
 asymptotically (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy). The data used in the analysis were gotten in a 
 farmers' survey done in Lop-Buri area of control/area of land of Thailand in March 1985. 
 The guessed system is defined formally as: 
 L 1 =a' X+ (; 1 
 
 (supply of institutional credit) 
 
 ( 2) 
 
 (demand for institutional credit) 
 
 (3) 
 
 L =min (L1 , L 2 ) (watched/followed borrowing from institutional lenders) 
 
 (4) 
 
 where L 1 is the amount of institutional credit lenders are willing to provide, X 
 is a vector of farmer (features/ qualities/ traits) which influence lender perceptions, a a 
 corresponding vector of limits/guidelines, L 2 the amount of credit the farmer would 
 3 
 
 The data from Korea do not tell the difference between different types of institutional lenders. 
 
 239 
 
 like to have, Z a vector of factors deciding/figuring out the farmer's credit needed things, 
 E1 and E2 are random error terms 
 which are assumed to be (usually/ in a common and regular way) distributed wich mean zero. Farmers are 
 expected to attempt to make happy their overall credit needs from (cheap) institutional sources first, and only if there is some unsatisfied demand will they 
 approach non-institutionallenders. This hints that information on farmers' 
 transactions in the non-institutional credit market does not affect the guesses of the limit/guideline vectors a and fJ of equations (2) and ( 3). 
 Difficult/strict/high quality models of credit supply and demand have already been developed 
 in the books (e.g., Barro, 1976; Bell and Srinivasan, 1985). We, therefore, 
 provide only a talkative outline of the explanation hidden (under) the (numbers that change/things that change) used 
 in the scientific analysis and their expected effects. In general, (numbers that change/things that change) that 
 were incorporated in the supply equation are indicators which are (compared to other things) 
 easy to watch/notice for an instituionallender. Demand (numbers that change/things that change), on the other hand, 
 reflect (numbers that change/things that change) known to the borrower, but not necessarily to the lender. The 
 (things that decide other things) of institutional credit supply are: 
 ( 1) Land money dummy. The provision of land as a formal money 
 greatly reduces the risk to the lender and so is guessed to increase the 
 amount of credit offered, relative to a case where no related is given. 
 (2) Group money dummy. The practice of group guaranty possibly 
 reduces default risk. It is guessed, however, that the amount of credit 
 offered with a group money will be less than what is offered with a 
 land money. More than that, in areas where repayment performance on groupresponsibility loans is poor, the amount of credit which is offered with such a 
 money is not expected to be higher than what is offered in the (not being there; not being present) 
 of any money. 
 ( 3) Land value. Land is usually the most valuable thing owned by the farmer, 
 and as such it can serve to create cash by sale if (producing crops/helping something grow) money/money income are not 
 (good) enough. Also, land is a productive factor which creates cash income. 
 Land value summarizes information having to do with the land's productive potential ( Chalamwong and Feder, 1987). It is this way expected that farmers who have 
 higher land value will be offered more institutional credit. 
 (4) Capital. Farm capital is both an indicator of the farm's productive ability (to hold or do something) and an valuable thing with cash value which can serve as an understood money. 
 Farmers with more capital (measured in current value) are expected to be 
 offered more credit. 
 ( 5) (money owed)  to institutional lenders. Farmers' outstanding (money owed)  to institutional 
 lenders is a drain on their cash useful things/valuable supplies and is therefore expected to negatively affect the amount of credit they are offered. (money owed)  to informal lenders is 
 not included because it is not (capable of being seen and known) to formal lenders. 
 (6) Past default dummy. If the farmer has defaulted in the past on payments 
 to institutional lenders, his (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to) is expected to be negatively affected, and because of this also the supply of institutional credit available to him. 
 
 fJ a similar set of limits/guidelines, and 
 
 240 
 
 (7) Formal liquidity. Farmers with more liquid valuable things are less likely to default 
 since they can use their liquid useful things/valuable supplies in order to create the cash needed/demanded 
 to pay back a loan, rather than get/cause  the costs of default. The present study defines 
 outstanding deposits in banks as indicators of liquidity (capable of being seen and known) to institutional lenders, and these are expected to increase the supply of 
 credit. 
 (8) Experience/age. The number of years a farmer has acted as farm manager is expected to increase his working well and so to (use/put into action) positive influence 
 on a lender's test. However, this (number or thing that changes) is highly related to age. 
 If younger farmers are seen as  being more productive and new and interesting, the 
 effect on credit supply will be negative. 
 Demand (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 (1) Number of adults. The number of working age adults (ages 14-65) in 
 the household represents a fixed gift (in the short run), which redudes 
 the need for cash for hired labor. However, this (number or thing that changes) is also an important 
 (thing that decides something) of consumption needed things, and could this way affect positively the 
 demand for credit. The final effect on demand is this way undetermined. 
 (2) Education. The number of years of formal education is an indicator of 
 workers, which affects positively (wasting very little while working or producing something). For this reason, education 
 would also be an indicator of (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to), and would affect the supply of 
 institutional credit. However, sample farmers have had only a few years of 
 elementary education, and it is hard for the lender to (check for truth/prove true) that the reported number of school years is in fact correct. It should also be pointed out 
 that there is very little difference/different version in the sample with respect to reported formal 
 education. Higher workers increases the not important working well of changeable inputs, and so increases the demand for inputs and the received/made from demand 
 for cash. 
 (3) Experience. The number of years of practice as farm decision maker is 
 an indicator of workers, and would this way be expected to have an effect 
 (numbers-based) almost the same as  that of education. However, given the high relationship 
 between this indicator and age, and the possibility that higher age is related to 
 lesser cleverness, the final/best effect on credit demand may be positive or 
 negative. 
 (4) Title dummy. Possession of a legal title increases ownership security, 
 and in that way it increases the (reward or reason for doing something) to invest (Feder and Onchan, 1987). 
 The higher demand for investment translates into higher demand for credit, 
 and it is this way expected that the possession of title will positively affect credit 
 demand. 
 (5) Capital. The effect of the farmer's stock of capital on credit demand is 
 complex, and there are a few counterveiling aspects. A higher stock of capital 
 increases the not important productivities of changeable inputs (when production 
 
 241 
 
 (when two things work together equally well) exists), and would this way cause a higher received/made from demand for 
 credit. But the availability of more family-owned machinery and animals reduces the need to hire machine and animal services, and so reduces cash 
 need. The net effect on credit demand is this way confusing. 
 (6) Owned land, (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for quality. Land is a major (thing that decides something) of the 
 farmer's productive (possible greatness or power) and of his scale of operation. With larger amounts 
 of land owned, the farmer's total demand for changeable inputs will be higher, 
 and so the demand for credit. The amount of land owned is (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for 
 quality differences using a land quality index came/coming from a (related to feeling pleasure) price 
 analysis of land values ( Chalamwong and Feder, 1987). 
 ( 7) Net liquidity. The farmer's liquidity, including certain liquid valuable things not 
 easily (capable of being seen and known) to formal lenders, such as a output not yet sold, will have a 
 negative effect on the farmer's demand for cash. 
 (numbers that change/things that change) having to do with cropping decisions (i.e., area helped grow, types of crops 
 grown) are not included in the analysis since they are being decided/figured out (at the same time) with the demand for credit, or even after the farmer knows what 
 amount of liquidity he can get. The interest rate on institutional credit is 
 practically identical for all farmers within the area studied because of a legal 
 interest rate ceiling. It is therefore left out/kept out from the analysis. 
 If the institutional credit market were in balance (i.e., demand and supply are equal at the winning/most common interest rate), then a single-equation reduced 
 form could be guessed, involving all the (numbers that change/things that change) in vectors X and Z. The 
 two models (balance and unbalance) cannot be tested formally for 
 (quality of being better than everything else) as they are not nested. However, the main interest is in the hit/effect 
 of the related (numbers that change/things that change), which can be identified even in the reduced form 
 balance model (they appear in the supply equation only). Therefore, both 
 (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) can be compared with respect to the ends/end results they create 
 for the related (numbers that change/things that change). The guess results are reported in Table 5 
 The results for both models are quite almost the same. The guesses point to/show that 
 the coefficient of the land money dummy (number or thing that changes) in the supply equation is 
 significantly greater than zero at the 95% confidence level. This confirms that 
 the promising of land related increases (a lot) the amount of credit offered by institutional lenders as compared to the case of no money. The 
 coefficient of the group money dummy (number or thing that changes) is small in importance, and 
 it is not very different from zero (it is negative in the unbalance 
 model). The difference between the coefficient of the land money and the 
 group guaranty is (meaningful numbers) at a 95% confidence level for both 
 models. The results suggest that farmers providing land money get more 
 institutional credit than farmers providing group guaranty or no security at 
 all. In the area studied, group guaranty (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) does not imporve access to 
 credit. 
 The limits/guidelines of land value and capital in the supply equation of the unbalance model are significantly greater than zero, as expected. It is note- 
 
 242 
 TABLE5 
 Econometric analysis of institutional credit supply and demand (Lop-Buri Area of control/area of land, Thailand, 
 1985) 
 Unbalance model 
 Supply equation 
 Constant 
 Land money 
 Group guaranty 
 Land value 
 Capital 
 Liquidity 
 (in institutions) 
 Experience 
 (age) 
 (money owed)  to 
 institutions 
 Past default 
 (dummy) 
 
 Balance model 
 Demand Equation 
 
 8.8431 
 (17.524)" 
 0.3643 
 (2.091) 
 -0.0666 
 (0.421) 
 0.1694 
 (2.547) 
 0.0508 
 (2.368) 
 0.0004 
 (0.028) 
 0.2193 
 ( 1.884) 
 0.0404 
 (2.491) 
 -0.0205 
 (0.182) 
 
 Constant 
 No. of adults 
 Education 
 Land ((changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 
 for quality) 
 Capital 
 Liquidity 
 (total) 
 Experience 
 (age) 
 Title (dummy) 
 
 Reduced Form 
 11.1641 
 (2.292) 
 2.2356 
 (1.402) 
 -0.4084 
 ( 1.211) 
 0.3958 
 (0.384) 
 0.1063 
 (0.777) 
 -0.0626 
 (0.260) 
 -0.9145 
 (0.955) 
 8.0803 
 (0.407) 
 
 Constant 
 land money 
 Group guaranty 
 Land valueh 
 Capital 
 Liquidity in 
 (institutions) 
 Experience (age) 
 (money owed)  to 
 institutions 
 Past default 
 (dummy) 
 No. of adults 
 Education 
 Liquidity 
 (total) 
 Title (dummy) 
 
 Rz 
 
 n.a. 
 Chance ratio statistic 
 No. of (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 n.a. 
 55.5 
 116 
 
 8.7213 
 (15.356) 
 0.4386 
 (2.126) 
 0.0738 
 (0.414) 
 0.1854 
 (2.760) 
 0.0541 
 (2.395) 
 0.0123 
 (0.827) 
 -0.2916 
 (2.222) 
 -0.0355 
 (1.909) 
 0.0280 
 (0.223) 
 0.1277 
 (0.844) 
 -0.0015 
 (0.030) 
 -0.0249 
 (0.975) 
 0.0970 
 (0.617) 
 0.34 
 n.a. 
 116 
 
 -Numbers in parentheses are asymptotic t-values in the unbalance model, and t-values in the 
 balance model. 
 hBecause land value and area (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for quality are highly related, only land value was used 
 in the reduced form. 
 
 worthy that the coefficient of land is significantly larger than that of capital, 
 suggesting that land is seen as  a better understood money. In the unbalance model, (things you owe/things you're responsible for/disadvantages) to institutions have a significant negative effect on 
 supply as expected. Experience, or rather, age, seems to have a negative effect 
 
 243 
 
 on institutional credit supply. The default dummy (number or thing that changes) and the liquidity 
 (number or thing that changes) are not (meaningful numbers) although they have the expected sign. 
 In the demand equation of the unbalance model most of the limits/guidelines 
 are not (meaningful numbers). The number of adults increases significantly 
 (at a 95% one-tailed confidence level) the demand for credit. The (not resulting in anything) of the demand guesses is (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) because the unbalance model almost all borrowers (97%) had a high chance (of 50% 
 or more) of being credit supply-held back. 
 The number-based results suggest that in the area studied, the promising of land 
 money increases the amount of institutional credit offered by 43% ( unbalance model) or 55% (balance model), as compared to a loan without 
 a security (calculated using the logarithmic coefficient in Table 5). This is 
 compatible with a situation where lenders perceive a big improvement 
 in loan a money-making state when land money is promised. The Thai legal system does 
 in fact allow land (forcing people out of a house because they didn't pay) (Feeny, 1982, pp. 96, 189-190). While (acts of forcing people out of a house because they didn't pay) are not frequent, the threat of land loss is (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) seen as  doable/possible 
 by farmers, and land money is therefore useful for lenders. 
 
 4. Policy effects/results/suggestions 
 The possible negative equity effects/results/suggestions of money needed things underly 
 the frequent attempts by development (people in charge) and policy makers to reduce or 
 eliminate the need for land related things. Different arrangements such as group 
 guaranties and partial government guaranties are usually proposed. In a few countries, the use of land money is blocked/forbidden or is made ineffective 
 by political helping actions taking back (acts of forcing people out of a house because they didn't pay). 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) shows that institutional lenders prefer land related things to other 
 loan securities, where land related things are legal. More than that, group guaranties 
 are often ineffective, as is seen/obvious from a review of experience in a few 
 LDCs (Desai, 1983). Government guaranties for farmers' loans can lead to 
 moral danger/risk problems: lenders will be likely to adopt a lazy  (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to) 
 test procedure, and borrowers will have less (reward or reason for doing something) to pay back. Moral 
 danger/risk problems this way lead to welfare losses. (wasting very little while working or producing something) loss is also likely to 
 result from a ban on land money as this forces lenders to spend more useful things/valuable supplies (at the margin) on (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to) test, and less lending to 
 farmers may happen as lenders shift money to other borrowers who are less 
 risky (but have lower return) at the margin. As (showed/shown or proved) in the case of 
 Korea, the prohibition on land money, while stuck to by institutional 
 lenders, did not prevent informal lenders from using money in a disguised 
 form, and so did not prevent land loss. 
 The costs of (quality of being considered OK by banks to give credit to) tests are an important thing to think about (ignored/didn't notice/looked at) 
 by many development officers and smart people  who call for (being left alone, with no help) of 'old 
 fashioned' lending procedures based on money in favor of procedures based 
 
 244 
 
 on projections of farm budgets and described/explained tests of farmers' abilities. Such tests put a heavier demand on lending institutions' staff time, 
 and so the more fair distribution of credit is received/got at a real cost. 
 One policy which is usually chased after for other purposes, but which has a 
 direct bearing on the transaction cost of promising land related things (and hence 
 on the equity issue) is land titling and registration. When land registers are 
 kept up to date and ownership documents are given on a large scale with 
 simple procedures, it is easy (and cheap) for farmers to confirm ownership and 
 to promise related. Simplification of legal procedures for land transactions is 
 also a policy with a almost the same  effect, namely, it reduces the inequality in access to 
 credit without getting/causing an (wasting very little while working or producing something) loss. 
 Another policy facing smaller farmers' hatred of the promising of money is the (putting into) use of procedures within which/by which rescheduling of loans is 
 possible (with a small interest penalty to cover processing costs) if the inability to pay back on schedule is a result of natural bad events or a (lasting for a short time) weak 
 market. This procedure reduces somewhat the farmer's fear of land loss in 
 the case of bad developments beyond their control, but maintains a legal hold  on 
 the land, this way providing an (reward or reason for doing something) to pay back. 
 The relaxation of interest rate ceilings, or elimination of payments on farming-based credit, aside from a direct (wasting very little while working or producing something) gain, will reduce (at the margin) 
 the role of land related things and other securities. However, the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) in the 
 paper (shows or proves) that even in the uncontrolled informal credit markets, related things are being used, although at a lesser frequency. Since information (left and right sides not matching) are bound to (continue to do/happen) most lending transactions by institutional 
 lenders, it is unlikely that the usefulness of related things will be eliminated once 
 interest rate restrictions are removed. 
 
 References 
 Adams, D. and Ladman, J., 1979. Lending to (away from cities) poor through informal groups: a promising 
 (money-related) market invention of new things? Paper presented at the 17th International Conference of Farming-based Money-flow experts, August 1979, Banff, Alta., Canada. 
 Aku, P.S., 1986. Lending to farmers through the commercial banks in a developing (process of people making, selling, and buying things): the 
 Nigerian experience. Agric. Syst., 22: 23-32. 
 Barro, R., 1976. The loan market, money and rates of interest. J. Money Credit Banking, 8: 
 439-456. 
 Bell, C. and Srinivasan, T.N., 1985. Farming-based credit markets in Punjab: (division of something into smaller parts), restricting and spillover. RP0-671-89 Work. Pap. 7, World Bank, Washington, DC, 53 pp. 
 Benjamin, D.K., 1978. The use of money to enforce (money owed)  contracts. Econ. Inq., 16: 333-359. 
 Binswanger, H.P. and Rosenzweig, M.R., 1986. Behavioral and material (things that decide other things) of production relations in farming. J. Dev. Stud., 22: 503-539. 
 Binswanger, H., Balaramania, V., Rao, B., Bhende, M. and Kashirsagar, K., 1985. Credit markets 
 in (away from cities) India: possible issues and scientific analysis. Disc. Pap. ARU-45, Farming-based Research Unit, World Bank, Washington, DC, 84 pp. 
 
 245 
 Bottomley, A., 1983. Interest rate desire/decision. In: J.D. Von Pischke, D. Adams and G. Donald 
 (Editors), (away from cities) (money-related) Markets in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press, 
 Baltimore, MD, pp. 243-250. 
 Chalamwong, Y. and Feder, G., 1987. Ownership security and land values: explanation and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 from Thailand. Department of Farming-based and (away from cities) Development, World Bank, Washington, 
 DC, 28pp. 
 Collier, P ., 1983. (not working properly) of African (away from cities) factor markets: explanation and a Kenyan example. 
 Oxford Bull. Econ. Stat., 45: 141-173. 
 Desai, B., 1983. Group lending in areas away from cities. In: J. Von Pischke, D. Adams and G. Donald (Editors), (away from cities) (money-related) Markets in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press, 
 Baltimore, MD, pp. 284-288. 
 Feder, G. and Onchan, T., 1987. Ownership security and farm investment. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 
 69: 311-320. 
 Feeny, D., 1982. The Political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of Working well: Thai Farming-based Development 18801975. University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver, B.C., 238 pp. 
 Hazell, P., Pomareda, C. and Valdes, A. (Editors), 1986. Crop Insurance for Farming-based Development. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 322 pp. 
 Kim Sung Hoon, 1971. The structure and functioning of (away from cities) credit in Korea: an scientific analysis. Ph.D. speech/story. University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, 321 pp. 
 Miracle, M., 1983. Money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) for loan agents. J. Von Pischke, D. Adams and G. Donald 
 (Editors), (away from cities) (money-related) Markets in Developing Contries. Johns Hopkins University Press, 
 Baltimore, MD, pp. 213-217. 
 Onchan, T. and Techavatananan, V., 1982. Money flow of group lending in Thailand: a case study 
 in Suphanburi Area of control/area of land. Center for Applied Money-based Research, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 32 pp. 
 Plaut, S.E., 1985. The explanation of money. J. Banking Finane., 9: 349-475. 
 Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A., 198I: Credit restricting and markets with (not totally pure/not totally correct) information. Am. 
 Econ. Rev., 71: 393-410. 
 Timberg, T. and Aiyar, C.V., 1984. Informal credit markets in India. Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 33: 
 43-59. 
 Von Pischke, J.D., 1986. Can crop credit insurance address risks in farming-based lending? In: P. 
 Hazell, C. Pomareda and A. Valdes (Editors), Crop Insurance for Farming-based Development. 
 Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, pp. 87-100. 
 Von Pischke, J.D., Adams, D. and Donald, G. (Editors), 1983. (away from cities) (money-related) Markets in Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, 441 pp. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
