 Farming-based Money flow, 3 ( 1989) 381-398 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 381 
 
 Sense and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as an 
 Goal in International Farming-based 
 Research 
 John K. Lynam and Robert W. Herdt 
 The Rockefeller Foundation, 1133 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10036, (U.S.A.) 
 
 Abstract 
 Lynam, J.K. and Herdt, R.W., 1989. Sense and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as an goal in 
 international farming-based research. Agric. Econ., 3: 381-398. 
 This paper first discusses how to use (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as a judging requirement by which to test farming-based research, then illustrates the (problems, delays, etc.) built into applying the judging requirement and finally draws 
 effects/results/suggestions for international farming-based research. Seven suggestions (or plans) relating to (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 are stated. Farming-based (people who work to find information) are asked/encouraged to (a) recognize the importance of the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 of farming-based systems. (b) figure out appropriate ways to measure (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), (c) scientifically 
 examine the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of some (clearly visible/clearly understood) cropping or farming systems, (d) define the externalities that exist in such systems, and (e) develop methods to measure those externalities. 
 
 Introduction 
 
 The international farming-based research establishment, having (accomplished or gained) a 
 degree of visibility following the (what people commonly call a/not really a) Green Revolution, has attracted the 
 attention of international jerks and social people (who say bad things or give opinions), each new generation announcing new judging requirements for the test of farming-based technology. Previous 
 judging requirements have included production, technology for small farmers, welfare of lowincome people, technology for women, (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) and (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength). (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is the latest twist in the continuing description of judging requirements by which 
 farming-based development is defined and farming-based technology is tested. 1 
 A large amount of/large number of recent (books, magazines, etc.) have explored the possible effects/results/suggestions for 
 the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions, human welfare, and the world food balance that have been 
 signaled by indications that the farming-based useful thing/valuable supply base in the tropics is 
 1Two facts illustrate the jerks nature of the word (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): one is hard pressed in 1988 to 
 find an farming-based (meeting to discuss things/meeting together), (book, magazine, etc.) or new research program that does not include 'sustainability' in its title, but the word does not appear in Webster's New College-related Dictionary or in 
 the dictionary of WordPerfect 3.2. 
 
 0169-5150/89/$03.50 
 
 © 1989 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 382 
 
 being over-fully used. These reflect a concern for the future and at their most 
 deep/extreme represent an command for the world to plan more thoughtfully, and 
 in some events reconsider, the progress of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) farming-based development. While fully accepting the need to be worried about future development paths, this paper attempts the more limited and boring job  of (thinking about/when one thinks about) how (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) concerns might be included into the research 
 activities of the international farming-based research centers. 
 The coming into view of the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) judging requirement has come from the recent visibility of scientists in farming-based development in the Third World. Anyway, the theme of (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) has been took by a range of institutions interested in farming-based development and now includes a broad organized row of 
 concerns about the maintenance of the useful thing/valuable supply base to secure/make sure of future levels of 
 farming-based production. These concerns include such (many different kinds of people or things) areas as loss 
 of (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) (many different kinds of people or things) in crop species, (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees), soil wearing away, the effect of agro-chemicals on the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions, and the effects/results/suggestions of worldwide 
 warming for farming-based production. Those concerns are high on the list of topics 
 ofthe international farming-based research establishment; however, because (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is mostly a set of concerns about future conditions, it is not easy 
 to translate these into operational farming-based research activities. 
 The (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) idea  could be included into the research process 
 at three levels: (a) as an test judging requirement in technology testing, (b) as a 
 design judging requirement in the creation of crop technologies, and (c) as a set of concerns (goals?) around which to organize research. (development or increase over time/series of events or things) from (a) 
 to (c) shows/indicates the upgrading of (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) from an intermediate to an end 
 goal (Pinstrup-Andersen and Franklin, 1977). More than that, at the first level, 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) could be included in existing research programs while the 
 third level hints the reorganization of the research process. 
 The paper explores issues raised by the above structure. The first section 
 faces/deals with the question of how to create (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as a judging requirement for 
 testing farming-based technologies. The second section illustrates the (problems, delays, etc.) built into applying such a judging requirement in technology design problems. 
 Finally, the effects/results/suggestions for research within the international farming-based research centers are talked about in the third section. Some suggestions (or plans) 
 relating to (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), and five concrete steps that farming-based (people who work to find information) 
 should take, are stated. 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): an test judging requirement 
 
 To use (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as an test judging requirement needs/demands a exact and clear definition. No one would disagree with the statement that putting into use (able to last/helping the planet) development would "secure/make sure of that people/(the kindness of people) meets the needs 
 of the present without reducing or interfering with the ability of (people who will live in the future) to meet 
 their own needs" (Our Common Future, report of the World Commission of 
 (surrounding conditions) and Development). But this does not provide a judging requirement for ag- 
 
 383 
 
 ricultural (people who work to find information). Papers by the Technical (communication about what could or should be done) Group of the 
 Advice-giving Group on International Farming-based Research (CGIAH, 1988) 
 and the World Useful things/valuable supplies Institute (Dover and Talbot, 1987) provide not so 
 much a definition as a description of the term. The TAC hints that it 
 is not (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength). Dover and Talbot appear to suggest that (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength), used in an 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) way, comes closest to defining (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). Conway ( 1985) offers 
 a exact definition but Dover and Talbot suggest that his is only the definition for toughness, another specific (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) idea. Holling ( 1973) provides a discussion of toughness and (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) in (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) explanation. All this points 
 to a idea  involving big confusing statement in any particular application. 
 Conway's (1985) definition, anyway, provides a useful starting point, 
 namely "(the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is the ability of a system to maintain working well in 
 spite of a major disturbance, such as is caused by intensive stress or a large 
 (disturbing or causing a small change in something)." In this definition (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is a property of a system operating over time, a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) which this paper also fights (for something). The important part of the 
 idea-based problem involves (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the edges of the system and 
 the time period, in particular as a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for testing crop technology. 
 The problem of edge-related (detailed description of exactly what is required) rises from choosing the system level 
 at which (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) becomes a (connected/related) (feature/ quality/ trait). Much of the confusion in the discussion of (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) reflects a mixing of system levels, namely 
 the lack of recognition that a plant photosynthetic system is deeply set within  a 
 plant system which is deeply set within  a cropping system which is part of a farming 
 system, which is deeply set within  a (related to a large area) or national farming-based marketing 
 system, which lies within the international market system. Or, one 
 could talk about/say cell, plant, field, continent, globe and even solar system. Except 
 for the highest system level, (in other words) the international market, each of the lower 
 systems is, except under quite special facts or conditions (that surround someone), open to influences from 
 outside. Openness creates the very hard problem of deciding when (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is an built-in property of the defined system, dependent on endogenous system relationships as for Conway, or when (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is so dependent on external forces that the system level should be upgraded in order to 
 define (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) well enough. 
 Given that (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is a (feature/ quality/ trait) of a system's productive performance over time, it follows that the effect of a crop technology on the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of the system is measured through its effect on output-i.e. the "ability to meet needs." Technology changes the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of the system in 
 which it is being applied; it is not an built-in (feature/ quality/ trait) of a variety, a 
 cultural practice, or a particular input. A technology's effect on a system's 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is this way depending on the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the system and is measured by the system's output performance over time. The output measure will 
 depend on the system level. At the crop variety level it is yield per plant or per 
 hectare, at the crop level or the cropping system level it is total factor working well, at the farming system level it is income, and at the market level, com- 
 
 384 
 
 modity supply. We define (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as the ability (to hold or do something) of a system to maintain 
 output at a level about equal to or greater than its historical average, 
 with the guess figured out by/decided by its historical level of (quality of changing over time or at different places). Because of this, 
 a (able to last/helping the planet) system is one with a non-negative (popular thing/general way things are going) in measured output; a 
 technology adds to system (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) if it increases the slope of the trend 
 line. This definition (makes different) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) from (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength), which is the 
 difference/different version in the output measure around the trend line. 
 Measuring the slope of the trend line of a system's output measure involves 
 specifying the system, the measure of output, the time period of concern and 
 watching/ noticing/ celebrating/ obeying the measure over the specified time period. It will be obvious that 
 scientific tests of (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) will be expensive and therefore related to only 
 a few elite technologies within a few systems-raising an interesting issue of 
 the value of the information in relation to the experimental costs. More than that, 
 none of the three (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) is plain/honest/easy. 
 Selection of the system level needs/demands a choice (and therefore a trade-off) 
 between the number of other choices that can be screened and the range of (coming from the outside of something) difference/different version to which those other choices are exposed. The lower the system's level, the fewer the number of possible system interactions, and the less 
 complex the experimental design. One issue then is the lowest system level at 
 which (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) can be defined. More than that, test judging requirements at lower levels must be compatible with judging requirements at higher systems levels, e.g., increased 
 yields or (producing more with less waste) input use must translate into higher a money-making state as 
 well as output that better makes happy what people want to buy. At the plant level, (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is measured as a yield trend line, and the problem is in defining the 
 conditions when (able to last/helping the planet) produces /gives up at the plant level lead to (able to last/helping the planet) working well at the cropping system level, which lead to (able to last/helping the planet) incomes at 
 the farming system level, which lead to (able to last/helping the planet) valuable thing supplies, and 
 so forth. But above the farming system level so many factors outside the system 
 hit/effect on its (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), it is almost impossible to decide/figure out the source 
 of such hits/effects. The effects/results/suggestions of the above discussion can be summarized 
 in a first suggestion/possible plan, namely: (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is a (connected/related) judging requirement for testing 
 farming-based technologies only when a system using a technology has been well 
 specified, and therefore in most cases the judging requirement cannot be scientifically applied 
 above the farming system level. 
 The second (detailed description of exactly what is required) problem, connected with the choice of system 
 level, is the definition of output. Where crop output is tested under a fixed 
 sets of inputs over time, crop yield per hectare is the appropriate output measure. On the other hand, (related to scientific farming) yield trials managed and did/done over time often involve changes in clearly stated/particular inputs like (material that makes plants grow better) materials or insecticide compounds where these are not the 'test' (numbers that change/things that change), often in order to protect the 
 crop against unexpected or changing conditions. Output measures of cropping 
 systems, which by definition include a few crops, must use some means of 
 adding together different crops, maybe food and grain or (wood burned for heat) and fruit. 
 
 385 
 
 This leads to (make a suggestion to) 2: the appropriate measure of output by which to decide/figure out (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) at the crop, cropping system or farming system level is 
 total factor working well, defined as the total value of all output produced by the 
 system during one cycle divided by the total value of all inputs used by the system 
 during one cycle of the system: a (able to last/helping the planet) system has a non-negative (popular thing/general way things are going) in 
 total factor working well over the period of concern. The value of inputs and 
 output must be figured out/calculated at a set of (done or made to look the same way every time) prices which should reflect 
 their long-term money-based value. 
 The third (detailed description of exactly what is required) problem is defining the time period of concern-a 
 (good) enough length of time over which the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of a system can be serious and stubborn. Cost (things to carefully think about) suggest a need to delimit a (good or well enough) short time 
 period to provide a projection of system output into the future with a (good or well enough) low chance of error. The time period of concern is clearly greater 
 than one crop season, in nearly every case greater than 3-5 years and maybe 
 greater than 10-20 years. However, we believe the most decision makers, even 
 those worried about the distant future, would choose a time period of less 
 than 20 years. 
 Using the the same, but far simpler, case of yield (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength), it is seen/obvious 
 that such time-dependent limits/guidelines are rarely measured without prior information both to improve the value of the experimental information and to reduce the cost. For example, yield (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) is tested in relation to available 
 information on rainfall (quality of changing over time or at different places) over time. This leads to the third proposition: (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of a system cannot be feasibly measured without a prior desire/decision of the factors likely to make that system impossible to do/impossible to keep going. For an farming-based research program, there needs to be a prior desire/decision of how a 
 technology could lead to an impossible to do/impossible to keep going system. This leads to a very hard 
 chicken/egg issue, which in the physical sciences (has given a reason to do something) development 
 of a possible structure leading to guess testing and model (testing out). 
 Farming-based (trying new things out/testing ideas scientifically) is only slowly moving in this direction. 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), technology design, and ecology 
 
 Securing/making sure of that technologies arising from crop research do not lead to impossible to do/impossible to keep going systems will require more than the mere development of testing procedures. Scientific tests are too complex and expensive to put into use in more than 
 a handful of cases so that the ability to measure (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) at the testing 
 and test stage of the research process will be limited. Therefore, it is 
 necessary to incorporate (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as an goal in research planning 
 and technology design. 
 One viewpoint in the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) debate holds that high-industrial-input 
 farming-based systems are basically and mostly impossible to do/impossible to keep going. Supporters of that view have 
 shifted the focus of debate away from production or income distribution to 
 
 386 
 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) worsening and input use. Agro-ecology, as a scientific control/field of study, has led the opinion of developed-world farming-based invention of new things over the 
 (after the war) period and has led in the creation of other choices to this "highinput, industrial" model (Douglas, 1984 ). More than that, it supports the view that 
 the high-input model is inappropriate for farming-based development in the tropics, giving as a main reason that (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) farming systems based on such a model are 'unsustainable'. (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), according to this view "needs/demands new 
 directions for farming-based development, directions based on the ways of thinking/basic truths/rules and 
 practical knowledge of ecology" (Dover and Talbot, p. 7). This two-part thing has 
 tended to politicize the term (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and business partner it with a particular 
 research (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal) based on ecology. 
 In contrast, our concerns about the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) farming-based 
 systems are directly related to how these systems will meet the increasing demand for food over the next 5, 10 and 20 years, especially in those countries 
 where population is still growing quickly. Farming-based research having (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as a judging requirement will aim to understand how input or output mix are changed in systems in order to increase farming-based production and whether those 
 shifts result in systems that give (able to last/helping the planet) growth over time. In a energetic 
 (surrounding conditions) new farming-based technologies can help such shifts or in an 
 otherwise static (surrounding conditions) may cause/result in system changes. Farming-based research programs which use (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as a design judging requirement, would give higher 
 priority to research on farming systems which had difficulty in making a sustained (change to make better/related to changing something) to higher working well levels. This is basically different from testing how new technologies may affect the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of the 
 system. Design of technologies would this way increase the priority given to those 
 elements in the system which were insulting/getting worse as a result of more intensive 
 abuse, almost always either some aspect of the soil useful thing/valuable supply or emotionystem (Robinson, 1976). 
 Designing (able to last/helping the planet) farming systems therefore needs/demands an understanding 
 of the process by which farmers (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to a changing external (surrounding conditions), 
 whether that is caused by climate, market (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.), or a growing population 
 density. The ability of farmers to develop more intensive systems has been 
 widely recorded/supported. The classic example is the farmer-started crop-watering/rinsing with water systems of Asia. Others include farmer development of varieties, farmer (beginning of something/actions you do to get in to an organization) 
 of varietal exchange, crop substitution such as the substitution of yams by 
 cassava in West Africa in response to (lowering in number/getting worse) soil life-creating ability, and the development of mulching, unplanted, and burn systems to maintain soil life-creating ability (Binswanger and Pingali, 1987). Paul Richards (1986) adopts the more extreme 
 view that, in order for farming-based research to improve the development of 
 (able to last/helping the planet) farming-based systems in West Africa, it should mostly strengthen 
 this existing ability (to hold or do something) of farmers to develop their own (related to computers and science) solutions 
 to changing needs. 
 However, we believe that population growth can be so fast, climate change 
 
 387 
 
 so sudden, or market penetration so quick as to frustrate/block the ability of farmers to 
 change. Research to improve farmer's ability to sustain production will be necessary, judging from many case studies that have written down the inability of 
 traditional farmers to strengthen at a (good or well enough) fast rate to meet increasing 
 demands on the farming system. Examples extend from Geertz's classic case 
 of farming-based involution on Java to soil wearing away in the East African highlands 
 to desertification in the Sahel. A fourth suggestion/possible plan would follow, namely: 
 whether (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) should be a judging requirement of research programs depends on 
 their target area; unsustainability is often locally or (within a large area) defined and depends on such factors as the rate of increase in (coming from the outside of something) demand on the system, 
 agro-(related to the Earth's weather) (surrounding conditions), and the relative strength (generally in land use) of 
 existing systems. Targeting this way becomes a key issue for farming-based research 
 programs where (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is a principal goal. 
 Ecology, with its focus on communities, has extended these concerns to higher 
 system levels. But, as argued earlier, when dealing at a higher level than the 
 farming system, (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is full of a series of definitional problems. 
 The edge of the system becomes hazy, and even if defined, the system will 
 likely be expected to meet a few (happening together) judging requirements, not just (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). 
 The concerns at levels above the farming system usually include (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) worsening and may arise from (a) overexploitation of a common 
 property useful thing/valuable supply and (b) production externalities. 
 The 'tragedy of the commons' rises in a situation of increasing population 
 density (either human or animal) where decisions that individually have invisible (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) hit/effect, together can have big hit/effect. Traditional legal/law-based (machines/methods/ways) (total decision making) may be effective 
 protection against the terrible event for poor (person) (communities of people), but the protection may 
 break down in the face of fast population growth or expanded market opportunities. Such common useful things/valuable supplies may be grazing areas, water supplies, firewood, fishing areas or forest areas. The definitional problem-and this way how the 
 research problem is created-can be illustrated by the issue of management of forest useful things/valuable supplies. First, there is debate over the system edge: is it 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth)ly defined (an agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) area), (money-based)/cheaply defined (the area serving a timber market), or defined by a land-use system (a managed 
 forest)? Second, what is the output of the system: the other choices span the 
 range from (using less of something) (non-use) to different logging other choices (which can 
 be organized for (able to last/helping the planet) output but usually involve a loss of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (many different kinds of people or things))? Both problems suggest a fifth proposition: (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of common 
 useful thing/valuable supply systems necessarily includes value judgements on many judging requirements 
 over how the community wishes to use the useful thing/valuable supply; more than that, (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 of the system will depend more on social institutions controlling access and use 
 than on production technologies. 
 Worsening of production externalities-an money-based term which shows/indicates 
 a cost or return arising from a production activity which is not carried by the 
 
 388 
 
 producer but by other members of (community of people/all good people in the world)-can also arise from (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). 
 Soil wearing away from upland farming systems that affect crop-watering/rinsing with water systems downstream or the leakage of agro-chemicals into (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) are classic 
 examples. 
 Externalities are especially complex problems arising from three (to both people or groups equally) 
 reinforcing parts of some things: physical, money-based and time. As Kneese 
 and Schultze ( 1975) focus on, externalities are due in part to the physical 
 conservation of matter. Bug-killers applied to a field must go somewhere, usually into the (underground water that supplies wells); even bug-killers that break down yield voter/part 
 parts/pieces that go into the (underground water that supplies wells). If (able to be backed up with punishment if a rule is broken) property rights exist 
 for the (underground water that supplies wells), the owner can charge for the disposal of the bug-killer and 
 by that/in that way offset its costs (i.e., (make a part of you) the costs to the producer). Externalities may also be caused by lack of information. Knowing nothing about pollution or of the 
 results of bug-killer pollution is (good) enough for that pollution to exist even 
 if a market for (underground water that supplies wells) existed. Farming-based production processes require 
 time and the external effects of actions at one point are not known until some 
 later time. If private benefits are (understood/made real/achieved) early and social costs late in time, 
 any positive social discount rate reduces the present value of costs, by that/in that way 
 adding/giving to the externality. The common property nature of useful things/valuable supplies also 
 can create externalities: if one individual owned both the (underground water that supplies wells) and 
 the land on which a bug-killer was used, decisions would be taken that reflected 
 the effect of the bug-killer on (underground water that supplies wells) quality. 
 Resolution of externality problems may involve helping action by the state. 
 More than that, their effect on a system's productive ability (to hold or do something) usually affects a few 
 aspects, e.g., value of farming-based production and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) quality, leading to (problems, delays, etc.) in how to test different system states, especially where 
 there are trade-offs. 2 
 An examination of issues related to agro-chemicals - (not living) (material that makes plants grow better)s, 
 herbicides and bug-killers - illustrates many dimensions of this idea-based 
 problem, because such input use is at the heart of the debate over other choice 
 farming-based development plans 3 - The starting point is to recognize that 
 2 We would argue that the weights to test such trade-offs should reflect long-term values to 
 (community of people/all good people in the world). In a real sense, agreement on the appropriate weights is where money-flow experts and scientists 
 most differ, with the former arguing for weights reflecting prices that would win in a well 
 functioning market where the value of every input and output is (felt inside of you) to the decision maker, 
 and the last thing just mentioned arguing for a set of weights reflecting long-term preservation of an (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth)ly 
 defined ideal state. This ideal most often is reflected in preservation of the current (the way things are now) of 
 an community. However, neither money-flow experts nor scientists can make a convincing case for the 
 (quality of being better than everything else) of their set of weights over the other's. 
 3 lncreased input use has been seen as sounding the same as/equal to farming-based development in some 
 of the development books. Johnston and Kilby ( 1975) provide probably the fullest account of 
 this view where agro-chemicals provide a basis for increasing marketed (more than what's needed) in the farming-based (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-in fact increased input use is usually first found in cash or export crops, even in 
 poor (person) agriculture-and in turn provide important backward linkages for industrial development 
 in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 
 389 
 
 farming is an (related to pumping or digging things from the ground) activity (Loomis, 1984) and depends on managing or 
 controlling the crop (surrounding conditions), including maintenance of the soil useful thing/valuable supply. 
 Increasing working well, especially crop yields, increases the rate of extraction 
 of soil (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) at the same time that it involves increased control over the 
 crop (surrounding conditions). The rate of breeding progress is in turn usually linked to 
 these improvements in managing the crop (surrounding conditions). (material that makes plants grow better)s increase 
 plant nutrient availability and with other agro-chemicals provide better control of the crop (surrounding conditions). The improved (surrounding conditions) provides increased 
 output on intensively farmed land and reduces the pressure to expand to new 
 land. 
 In the late 1980s agro-chemicals are an established feature of the farming-based 
 system of all developing countries, although used at widely different strengths. 
 What then are the disadvantages of a reliance on agro-chemicals and what are 
 the other choices? By any standard, the (after the war) record of U.S. crop produces and 
 the after-Green-Revolution rice yields in Asia have showed sustained, fast 
 growth. This growth has been closely linked to increases in the use of farming chemicals. Concerns about the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of production levels in these 
 farming systems are based on (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) explanation about what could happen to 
 output rather than on what has happened and on external costs involved in 
 some of these. While much of the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is arranged around the not unimportant externality problem, proposed solutions often do not address the externalities but, rather, resort to a explanation of 'sustainable agro-communities'. The 
 lack of scientifically (showed/shown or proved) non -(the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) in part results from the 
 time span necessary to measure (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). Reganold, Elliot and Unger 
 ( 1987) could show differences in wearing away losses between an organic and a ordinary farming system after a 37 -year period but they guessed that actual 
 working well differences would not appear for another 50 years. Explanation is this way 
 a necessary part of the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) debate, but as Loomis's (1984) opinion 
 demonstrates, there needs to be a (completing/matching) ability (to hold or do something) in place to test that 
 explanation-e.g., his discussion of the relation between (many different kinds of people or things) and (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength). The 
 debate is now divided because there are not enough data to reject or 
 change the two competing explanations, often coming close to beliefs. 
 The principal other choices to agro-chemical use that are proposed are improved soil quality and improvement in the rates and (wasting very little while working or producing something) of existing 
 (related to the body function of living things) processes that control nutrient cycling and pest (groups of people/animals/things). This 
 leads to research on topics such as improved (related to the body function of living things) nitrogen constant thought, more 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) mycorrhiza strains, community copying in cropping patterns, crop rotations and multiple cropping, and (related to the body function of living things) control of insects, sicknesses and 
 weeds-topics which, even in the 1970s and 1980s, formed most of the (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal) at international farming-based research centers. 
 There are a few large hurdles for technologies based on such a research 
 (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal). First, such technologies are (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) sensitive and will require 
 as it was (change to make better/related to changing something). The demands on research ability (to hold or do something) will necessarily be larger 
 than has usually/(in the past) been the case. 
 
 390 
 
 Second, the demands made on farmer knowledge and management will likely 
 be greater than with high external input technologies. Inputs clearly show/include research 
 knowledge and are (compared to other things) undemanding of added/more farmer knowledge, 
 while highly productive farming systems using few external inputs are labor 
 and management intensive - at least the few that have been (showed/shown or proved). To 
 a significant extent this is why agro-chemicals are more and more being used 
 in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) countries. On the other hand, once an improved agro-community is 
 in place, it may require less management due to self-legal/law-based (machines/methods/ways). 
 The difficulty is in designing and causing/resulting in the system change. 
 Third, farmers will decide between using (related to the body function of living things) technologies or farming chemicals, decisions influenced by their knowledge, the local (system where supply and demand controls prices and production) 
 and government policies. Even when (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is an goal of farmers, 
 the choice of a technology or a change in management practices will mostly be 
 figured out by/decided by its (thing that's given/work that's done) to farmer welfare as reflected in current or nearterm future (money made/good thing received) or costs. Technologies have to raise (money made/good thing received) or the farmer's 
 perceived welfare before they will be adopted and in that way have an opportunity 
 to add/give to system (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). Translating the (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) research 
 (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal) into adoptable technologies that compete effectively with agro-chemical other choices will not be easy. These arguments are gathered to support a 
 sixth, and (a) little angry, suggestion/possible plan: dividing research solutions to the 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) problem into two clear/separate and competing plans is time-wasting; to be successful the (related to the body function of living things) research (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal) will have to complement 
 the continued use of inputs in the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of farming systems in the tropics. 
 Clearly, strengthening farming by high input use is not always the appropriate solution, as illustrated by research on (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) by IITA's farming system's program in West Africa and the INIPANorth Carolina State University program in Yurimaguas, Peru. In those projects the goal of (able to last/helping the planet) increase in per hectare yields in continuous 
 cropping systems have been (accomplished or gained) through high labor and external input 
 use. A money-making state has not been generaly (accomplished or gained), however. Interestingly, Binswanger (1986) argues that such efforts may be misplaced without a recognition of the effective demand for technology. Especially, he argues that "concentrating research effort on yield increasing technologies makes little sense 
 in the more land plentiful (surrounding conditions)." Rather he argues that either quality-improving or stress-avoiding technologies would be more likely to be 
 adopted. In recognition of these realities, the Yurimaguas group has retreated 
 from its high-input, continuous (producing crops/helping something grow) system (Sanchez et al., 1982) to a 
 lower input system that uses a plant rotation for life-creating ability maintenance and 
 weed control (Sanchez and Benites, 1987). Thissystem, anyway, is still 
 labor and input intensive compared to the shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) system and its 
 prospects for adoption remain undetermined. In such land-plentiful conditions, (related to the body function of living things) technologies would be highly competitive with input-based 
 solutions, if they focused on improved (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) ofthe system without increases 
 
 391 
 
 in labor needed things. Ruthenberg ( 1980) and Binswanger and Pingali ( 1987) 
 document the pattern of (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) in sub-Saharan Africa: in most cases 
 the (change over time) involves improved management of (related to the body function of living things) processes which 
 needs/demands increased labor. To make the point again, the successful design of 
 technologies to improve system (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) will begin with clearly showed useful thing/valuable supply, farming and marketing systems. The real utility of agro-ecology will come from its ability to understand and (describe the future) system (change over time), a 
 ability (to hold or do something) which will require some marriage of agro-ecology and money flow/money-based studies. 
 Whether there can be a merging of the (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) with the money-based (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) depends, among other things, on the thinking-related view of 
 scientists on the role that markets and social institutions play in system (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), from the farming systems level up. Money-flow experts believe that today's 
 world is committed to a path in which population growth, useful thing/valuable supply restrictions 
 and human needs and desires lead to market development, which in turn leads 
 necessarily to a division of labor, output (focusing on doing one thing very well), and increased (dependent on each other) between money-based agents. This hints a loss of crop (many different kinds of people or things) at 
 the farming systems level (although (many different kinds of people or things) may be maintained at a national 
 or a (related to a large area) level) and with the coming of input markets a harder (surrounding conditions) in which to (help increase/show in a good way) the low-external-input (related to the body function of living things) other choice. 
 Market development would this way appear to interfere with a significant part of the 
 (related to the body function of living things) research (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal), but viewed (a) little differently, increasing market 
 dependence improves the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of farming systems and (related to a large area) or 
 national food systems by reducing pressure on some agro-ecologies while increasing output from more strong ones. Recent history, in much of Asia for 
 example, would suggest an command toward increased social organization 
 and market development in order to change something (to help someone)/take care of someone increasing population pressure on a limited land useful thing/valuable supply. A division of labor and trade leads to an improved working well of the overall system, even without any necessary change 
 in hidden (under) production technology. 
 More than that, trade and institutional development improve the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 of food systems in important ways. As has been noted, institutional and social 
 inventions of new things are key to solving the problem of over-use of common useful things/valuable supplies. 
 However, probably hunger is the final/best indicator of the unsustainability of 
 a food system. Hungers are more common in areas away from cities than in city-based  areas 
 and in areas away from cities they are more likely in those areas not (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) into 
 market systems-certainly this is the case in sub-Saharan Africa. Trade and 
 stock management are buffering (machines/methods/ways) for not important agro-(related to the Earth's weather) areas and in a sense preserve farming systems in areas where they could not 
 exist independently. This (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) does not argue A.K. Sen's (1981) 
 work on hungers which suggests the basic role of incomes and distributional (machines/methods/ways), especially in Asia. But (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of food systems 
 also depends on the appropriate design of institutions that correct for 'entitlement' problems. This leads to a rather interesting and maybe disturbing sev- 
 
 392 
 
 enth proposition: (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is first defined at the highest system level and 
 then go aheads downward; and, as a result/resulting/statement, the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of a system is not 
 necessarily dependent on the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of all its sub-systems. 
 Effects/results/suggestions for international farming-based research 
 
 How should farming-based research, in particular the international centers, 
 respond to the call for (able to last/helping the planet) farming-based systems? For a start, they should 
 recognize the value of (able to last/helping the planet) cropping, farming, farming-based and national 
 money-based systems. Second, they should define appropriate measures of total 
 working well and establish methods for measuring it for (clearly visible/clearly understood) plant systems, cropping systems and farming systems. Third, they should manage and do research with the goal of understanding the likely (popular thing/general way things are going) of total working well 
 in (clearly visible/clearly understood) cropping and farming systems over appropriate time and space 
 dimensions. Fourth, they should identify the externalities connected with such 
 (clearly visible/clearly understood) systems, and finally, they should begin to develop methods to 
 measure such externalities. 
 The first step, recognition of the issue, probably has been completed 
 among all but the most disobedient of centers, although there are many people at the centers who are more cautious about (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) than the 
 international (popular thing/general way things are going) setters among the donor community. After all, the last thing just mentioned 
 group can simply issue the call for 'sustainability research' and go back to their 
 business of seeing how (able to reply or react/quick to respond) (people who work to find information) are. The (people who work to find information) have to 
 decide/figure out how to measure the idea  so that the work carried out under the 
 flag adds to knowledge that will improve food production, small-scale farmers' incomes, people' welfare, women's status in development, national research program ability (to hold or do something), (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of farming. 
 More than that, it is likely that some agro-ecologies are basically and mostly more good 
 for intense use while others can only be used sustainably at low levels of strength. Successful farming-based research will stratify their target areas in the same way/in that way 
 and figure out ways to raise strength levels on the first thing just mentioned, by that/in that way permitting the 
 latter to sustain low levels of output. More clearly, (related to scientific farming) (people who work to find information) 
 conducting field experiments on production systems and money-flow experts who carefully study systems research must move from a steadiness on produce as the measure of farming-based system 'success' to a measure of total working well. This hints, as 
 discussed earlier, a definition of total working well which includes, as much as 
 possible, all costs and benefits, not just those building up in the immediate time 
 period and to the immediate decision maker. Like all high-reaching goals, this 
 goal will not be easy to (accomplish or gain with effort), but one can approach it (in little steps). 
 Just liketal working well measures require measurement of all inputs and 
 outputs of experimental systems, agreement on weights and computation of 
 just liketal working well measures for other choice treatments of the system. This is clearly within the reach of the international farming-based research 
 
 393 
 
 centers and should be a priority of their (related to scientific farming) and money-based (people who work to find information). 
 Identification and costing of externalities is harder, needing/ordering specific 
 ways of doing things which are still being developed (Antle and Capalbo, 1988). It 
 will be impossible, however, unless the first step is started. 
 The third step that international research centers could take is to institute 
 a set oflong-term cropping or farming system experiments in a limited number 
 of agro-ecologies like their order responsibilities. These would have 
 to be carefully designed to provide useful information in the short run as well 
 as over the long term. They would have to contain a (good) enough range of treatments of a system to provide a set of comparisons that would be useful as 
 money-based and weather conditions changed. Plots would have to be large enough 
 to reflect what might happen under farmers' conditions and to permit the possibility of future change of treatments. One might build in flexibility, by 
 selecting/naming certain treatments as the 'best commercial practice under current 
 prices', or 'most promising new cultivar', or 'integrated pest management'. A 
 careful advance test of the likely sources of (disturbing or causing a small change in something) will be necessary if the experiments are to be useful in making judgements about (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength). And, one must recognize that the experiments, however 
 carefully designed, will be not enough for many purposes. They will not necessarily identify (able to last/helping the planet) systems, but at the end of 10 or 20 years a great 
 deal more information and a great deal more understanding will be available to examine the issues of (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and working well and (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) and input use 
 and much else that is now unknown. 
 The fourth step links directly to the third-scientists should examine the 
 experimental systems for all possible externalities and identify them. The fifth 
 step, that of developing methods to measure and value such externalities, then 
 follows directly. These efforts will require new skills and ways of doing things, and hence 
 may take most farming-based research organizations some time to do, 
 but they should be started now. 
 While the above may be viewed as the necessary first steps to facing 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as a research goal, they do not wrestle with the issue of how 
 international farming-based research changes (to get better) or organizes programs so that (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is talked to/looked at. The other choice approaches are three; namely (a) a 
 recasting of existing valuable thing research programs, (in other words), a continued focus on 
 plant breeding research but an incorporation of the five added/more steps organized and listed above, (b) organize research around useful thing/valuable supply management, e.g., around 
 soils, crop-watering/rinsing with water, or forestry, and (c) organize research around 'solutions', for 
 example, agro-forestry, (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) soil (study of living things/qualities of living things), and insect (body structure/related to the study of body functions). There is an 
 visible structure in the form of international research networks or centers 
 organized around these (last two things just mentioned) different approaches. More than that, CGIAR 
 centers are adding or adapting research programs along almost the same  lines. These 
 are in most cases independent efforts, which leads to the natural question of 
 whether there is an visible order in this 'rush' to (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). 
 
 394 
 
 This visible order will have to resolve two basic (problems, delays, etc.) that 
 describe (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) research, namely (a) how to organize research on 
 problems whose solutions are very location-specific and, (b) how to organize 
 (related to the body function of living things) research where the focus is on the whole farming-based system rather 
 than individual parts/pieces. At issue is whether some (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of the three 
 above approaches can overcome or change something (to help someone)/take care of someone these (problems, delays, etc.). 
 Researching whole agro-communities is not practical. First, it is not clear how 
 to select and test other choice states of an agro-community, so that the (related to the body function of living things) performance of the whole system is examined under different treatments that can be compared and tested. Second, the number of agro-communities in the tropics is mostly (without limits or an end), exactly because these managed 
 (related to the body function of living things) systems are so finely tuned to the great difference/different version in soils, climate, 
 pest complexes, useful thing/valuable supply availability and output markets. System definition to 
 focus the research under such facts or conditions (that surround someone) becomes impossible. Or, (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) research can be structured around parts/pieces within an 
 integrating (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), even when the broad goal is valuable thing improvement. Agro-ecology provides a possible (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for selection of these 
 parts/pieces and some research groups, and some valuable thing research 
 programs, are working on (related to the body function of living things) nitrogen constant thought, (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) pest management, (related to the body function of living things) pest control, agro-forestry, (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) soil (study of living things/qualities of living things) and multiple cropping. 
 Or, a big amount of applied (related to the body function of living things) research has been 
 organized around management of valuable things from nature, for example, in forestry 
 and fishery management. Such research focuses on the management of a single 
 valuable thing from nature system where the (related to the body function of living things) yield of the system mostly happens with the money-based yield. However, farm-related, soils, water and forests 
 are managed as part of farming systems and there is often a (not being connected) between management of the (able to last/helping the planet) working well of a single useful thing/valuable supply and 
 organizing output and input mix to improve income. The difficulty for 
 organizing (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) research - if not the organizational weird statement - is suggested by the example of hillside maize systems: the wearing away problem cannot 
 be solved by a focus on the maize system and in turn a focus 
 on wearing away control technology without (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of the maize cropping system is impossible. Equally, research to improve management of Vertisols or 
 acid soils cannot be done without (thinking about/when one thinks about) other choice cropping systems to 
 be grown on those soils. Research on useful thing/valuable supply management is, in reality, part-related research. The difference is in the definition of parts/pieces and their 
 coincidence with farmer goals. 
 So, the systems problem built into (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) research is being talked to/looked at by organizing research groups that focus on parts/pieces defined as 
 sub-systems, useful things/valuable supplies, or valuable things. Such part-related research faces the 
 challenge of developing solutions of general (ability to be used for something) which meet the individual needed things of particular systems. This problem is usually resolved 
 
 395 
 
 through (able to change and get better) research that (combines different things together so they work as one unit) parts/pieces into systems, taking as 
 its research the long-run (popular thing/general way things are going) of total factor working well. The basic and applied research goals that underlie the development of (able to last/helping the planet) systems 
 are met by focusing on sub-systems. Anyway, it is (a responsibility on) (people who work to find information) in these programs to be informed about research on other parts/pieces and 
 how the sub-systems might interact. That is, they should be doing part-related 
 research with a (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). 
 Putting improved systems together depends on two hopefully (completing/matching) 
 approaches. These are system (testing out) models (Dent and Thornton, 1988) 
 and (able to change and get better) research, organized around agro-communities (Conway, 1985). 
 Much like farming systems research (FSR), the use of agro-communities as a research way(s) of doing things has most utility at the (able to change and get better) research level. 
 Whether it also can be a bridge to problem identification for applied research 
 is still unknown-FSR has in practice not (did/done as expected) as well as was (at first/before other things happened) 
 understood/created as a vehicle for information (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) to basic and applied research 
 programs (Lynam, 1986). 
 The CGJAR system is now testing how it can best put into use (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) as a research goal. Two clear/separate but not necessarily disagreeing approaches are newly appearing. The TAC, in its policy paper ( CG JAR, 1988), has (transferred power to/gave assignments to) responsibility to each of the centers, in the sense that each has to 
 includes the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) goal into its work. How this will be done is, 
 given the independence of the individual centers, left to their (related to a plan to reach a goal) decision 
 process. However, the TAC paper recognizes, in a unclear way, that such an 
 incorporation will require some reorganization and a (giving out things in a different way) of staff to 
 what is termed useful thing/valuable supply management. This reorganization is a understood (speaking the truth about something bad) 
 that the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) problem must be broken down into a set of researchable 
 part areas that complement the valuable thing research programs. What 
 those areas are and which centers will (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) their programs to include 
 them are issues which are left stopped. 
 Another proposal ( Colmey and Schuh, 1988) hints that the CGJAR could 
 meet the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) goal by incorporating added/more centers that address useful thing/valuable supply management. Such an (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) would secure/make sure of the CGJAR were 
 facing the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) goal only to the extent that (controlled by one central place) useful thing/valuable supply portion also results in better inter-center cooperation, a more clear division of labor, and more effective priority and program definition. 
 Such coordinating (machines/methods/ways) now exist only weakly within the CGJAR 
 system. A planned-together move to set apart the different dimensions of (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 research among (existing and added/more) centers would require a totally 
 stronger coordination (machine/method/way). Most (people who are watching something) agree that one of the 
 strengths of the CGJAR system is its (compared to other things) (without rules, schedules, etc.) nature. Must the 
 organization of the CGJAR become more complex to deal with the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) problem, leading to the danger that what it gains in coordination of activities, it will lose in slow-working stiffness and information management costs? 
 
 396 
 
 Summary and Ends/end results 
 
 We agree with those who are concerned that farming-based production systems 
 should be (able to last/helping the planet), and further believe that technology can be designed to 
 add/give toward increasing the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of systems. We have developed 
 the following suggestions (or plans) which provide a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) in which international 
 farming-based research centers can scientifically address (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): 
 ( 1) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is a (connected/related) judging requirement for testing farming-based technologies only when a system using a technology has been well specified, and 
 therefore, in most cases, the judging requirement cannot scientifically be applied above the 
 farming system level. 
 ( 2) The appropriate measure of output by which to decide/figure out (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 at the crop, cropping or farming system level is total factor working well, defined as the total value of all output produced by the system during one cycle 
 divided by the total value of all inputs used by the system during one cycle of 
 the system; a (able to last/helping the planet) system has a non-negative (popular thing/general way things are going) in total factor working well over the period of concern. 
 (3) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of a system cannot be feasibly measured without a prior 
 desire/decision of the factors likely to make that system impossible to do/impossible to keep going. 
 (4) Whether (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) should be a judging requirement of research programs depends on their target area; unsustainability is often locally or (within a large area) defined and depends on such factors as the rate of increase in (coming from the outside of something) demand 
 on the system, agro-(related to the Earth's weather) (surrounding conditions), and the relative strength (generally in land use) of existing systems. 
 (5) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of common useful thing/valuable supply systems necessarily includes value 
 judgements on many judging requirements over how the community wishes to use the 
 useful thing/valuable supply; more than that, (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of the system will depend more on social 
 institutions controlling access and use than on production technologies. 
 ( 6) Dividing research solutions to the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) problem into two clear/separate and competing plans is time-wasting; to be successful the (related to the body function of living things) research (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal) will have to complement the continued use of inputs 
 in the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of farming systems in the tropics. 
 ( 7) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is first defined at the highest system level and then go aheads downward; and, as a corallary, the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of a system is not necessarily dependent on the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of all its sub-systems. 
 The minimum steps that inter<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
