 Farming-based Money flow, 3 ( 1989) 345-364 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 345 
 
 Farming-based Technology and Farm-Nonfarm 
 Growth Linkages 
 Steven Haggblade 1 and Peter Hazell 2 
 1 Syracuse 
 2 
 
 University, 400 Maxwell Hall, Syracuse, NY 13210 (U.S.A.) 
 World Bank, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433 (U.S.A.) 
 
 Abstract 
 Haggblade, S. and Hazell, P., 1989. Farming-based technology and farm-nonfarm growth linkages. 
 Agric. Econ., 3: 345-364. 
 Farming-based growth stimulates (away from cities) nonfarm activity by boosting demand for production inputs and (products normally found in stores). But different kinds of farming-based technology (help increase/show in a good way) different patterns of nonfarm linkages. To explore how key features of farming-based technology affect growth in 
 the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things), this paper reviews an organized row of thin slice and time-series (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 bearing on the patterns of the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Then, using consumption and production 
 limits/guidelines connected with different farming-based technologies, it introduces a simple model which 
 separates the effects of different technologies on nonfarm growth linkages. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 Improved farming-based technology holds the key to increasing food production in many developing countries. Yet (related to computers and science) change needs/demands expensive 
 investments in research and extension. Since government must usually provide them, such investments must be reasonable by their money-based and social 
 benefits. 
 A few studies have shown that technology-driven farming-based growth can 
 add/give significantly to growth in national income (Byerlee, 1973; Cavallo 
 and Mundlak, 1982; Rangarajan, 1982; Adelman, 1984). A large, if more angry books, discusses the poorness-reducing hit/effect of (related to computers and science) 
 change (see Lipton, 1985 and Pinstrup-Andersen and Hazell, 1985 for recent 
 reviews). 
 Nonfarm linkages created by technical change in farming can draw attention to both the growth and the poorness-reducing hit/effect of farming-based growth. 
 A growing farming demands nonfarm production inputs and supplies raw 
 materials to transport, processing and marketing firms. Also, increases in 
 farm income lead to greater demand for (products normally found in stores) and services. In ad0169-5150/89/$03.50 
 
 © 1989 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 346 
 
 clition to stimulating national money-based growth, these production and consumption linkages affect poorness and (related to space or existing in space) growth patterns, especially when 
 farming-based growth is focused on small- and medium-sized farms (Johnston 
 and Kilby, 1975; Mellor, 1976; and Mellor and Johnston, 1984). Because much 
 of the resultant growth in nonfarm activityis located in areas away from cities and small 
 towns, it can add/give to the containment of too much/too many (away from cities) to city-based  traveling. More than that,the kinds of nonfarm products (that are bought and sold)  and services demanded by smalland medium-sized farms are often those produced by small, labor-intensive 
 businesses/projects whose growth can add/give to increased employment and income-earning opportunities for the poor. 
 But different farming-based technologies create different patterns of nonfarm linkages. The input strength, consumption profile of targeted farms and 
 processing (features/ qualities/ traits) of the farm output all affect the size and composition 
 of nonfarm spinoffs. So too do the multiplier effects change/differ  across countries as a 
 result of different institutions, population densities, (related to space or existing in space) settlement patterns and policy (surrounding conditions). The goal in this paper is to explore how key 
 features of farming-based technology affect nonfarm growth linkages. This is done 
 in two ways: (a) by looking at (again) an organized row of thin slice and time-series (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) bearing on the patterns of (away from cities) nonfarm (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), and (b) through 
 use of a simple model which separates the effects on nonfarm growth linkages of 
 consumption and production limits/guidelines connected with different farming-based 
 technologies. 
 2. Importance of the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 
 Nonfarm activity occupies an important place in (away from cities) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) throughout poor countries, especially in Asia and Latin America. While nonfarm businesses/projects account for only 14% of full-time employment in (away from cities) Africa, 
 their employment share jumps to 26% in Asia and to 28% in Latin America 
 (Table 1 ) . When (away from cities) towns are included, nonfarm employment shares increase noticeably, rising to 19, 36 and 47%, (match up each pair of items in order). The employment 
 densities in Table 1 Panel B confirm the weaker pattern of nonfarm employment in (away from cities) Africa. 
 Income shares- which unlike employment data include earnings from parttime and seasonal activity - highlight the importance of (away from cities) nonfarm activity. They show nonfarm earnings adding/giving 25-30% of income in (away from cities) 
 Africa and 30-40% in Asia and Latin America, sometimes more when (away from cities) 
 towns are included ( Chuta and Liedholm, 1979; Phongpaichit, 1982; Islam, 
 1984; Haggblade, Hazell and Brown, 1989; Figueroa, 1982; Luzuriage and Zuvekas, 1983). 
 The (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) plays an important, although (number or thing that changes), equityenhancing role across countries. Landless and near-landless families everywhere depend on nonfarm earnings; those with less than 0.5 ha usually earn 
 
 347 
 TABLE 1 
 Share of the (away from cities) labor force mostly employed in nonfarm activities- 
 Africa 
 Percent of total employment 
 (away from cities) settlementsb 
 (away from cities) townsc 
 (away from cities) settlements plus (away from cities) towns 
 Total 
 Maled 
 Female- 
 Employment density per 1000 population 
 (away from cities) settlementsb 
 (away from cities) townsc 
 (away from cities) settlements plus (away from cities) towns 
 Total 
 Maled 
 Female" 
 
 Asia 
 
 Latin America 
 
 14 
 59 
 
 26 
 81 
 
 28 
 85 
 
 19 
 16 
 19 
 
 36 
 37 
 34 
 
 47 
 36 
 79 
 
 50 
 187 
 
 83 
 238 
 
 79 
 245 
 
 65 
 35 
 30 
 
 121 
 90 
 31 
 
 129 
 87 
 42 
 
 Source: Population censuses for 43 countries (14 in Africa, 14 in Asia, and 15 in Latin America), 
 all those for which employment data could be broken out by place, size and sex. References 
 available on request. 
 "Includes all nonagricultural activity except mining, that is International Standard Industrial 
 Classification activities 3-9. 
 bRural definitions change/differ  with individual country (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  definitions. As a general rule, (away from cities) settlements in Africa and Asia are those below 5000. In Latin America, the cutoff (usually/ in a common and regular way) lies at 2500. 
 cRural towns do not go beyond 250 000. 
 dMale nonfarm employment divided, for percentages, by total male employment, for densities by 
 total population. 
 "Female nonfarm employment divided, for percentages, by total female employment, for densities 
 by total population. 
 
 over half their total income from nonfarm sources (for reviews, see Islam, 1984; 
 Ho, 1986b; Kilby and Liedholm, 1986). Yet across income groups, no steady pattern comes out (Ho, 1986b; Shand, 1986; Haggblade, Hazell and Brown, 
 1987), maybe in part because of the very success of nonfarm earnings in raising up some of the would-be-poor to higher-income groups or, (using other choices), 
 because of (problems, delays, etc.) in correctly measuring what are often equity-improving female nonfarm earnings (Simmons, 1976; Matlon et al., 1979). 
 But in total terms, nonfarm earnings, especially certain activities, regularly assume major importance for the (away from cities) poor (see Matlon et al., 1979; 
 Horseain, 1987; Haggblade, Hazell and Brown, 1987; Romijn, 1987). Low-investment manufacturing and services - including food preparation and processing, weaving, pottery, domestic and personal services, gathering, and unskilled nonfarm wage labor - usually account for a greater share of income 
 for the (away from cities) poor than for the wealthy. In contrast, rich families earn 
 more from transport, (the buying and selling of goods), and manufacturing activities such as milling 
 
 348 
 
 and metal lie/construction, which require big investment. Women, (compared to other things) 
 more active than males in nonfarm activities in Africa and Latin America (Table 1), rule many of the equity-improving nonfarm activities such as food 
 processing, drink preparation, weaving, gathering, selling of prepared snack 
 foods, and personal services. 
 3. Farming and changes in the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 3.1 
 
 Factors affecting change in the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 
 The density and composition of (away from cities) nonfarm activity differs/changes much 
 across continents (Table 1 ), across countries, and even across areas within 
 individual nations. So, the Totonicapan area of eastern Guatemala (focuses on doing one thing very well) in fabric production; while other areas (focus mental and physical effort) on artworks, 
 with some hamlets even (focusing on doing one thing very well) by job (Smith, 1975, 1986). Northeast 
 Thailand (focuses on doing one thing very well) in cloth production, mostly because of seasonal release of 
 labor from farming (World Bank, 1983). And brewers in (away from cities) Rwanda produce (grass grown for food) beer in the northwest area while banana wine rules 
 in other places, following the farming-based cropping patterns. 
 Differences in farming explain much - although by no means all - of the 
 difference/different version in (away from cities) nonfarm activity. On the demand side of the (away from cities) nonfarm 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things), farming (uses/puts into action) a common influence, since nonfarm businesses/projects depend mostly on the farm input and consumption demand of farming-based families. Driven mostly by farming-based earnings, (away from cities) income levels decide/figure out the extent of personal (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into nonfoods. More than that, 
 land distribution affects income distribution and so the share of (in small steps up) expense gave out to (away from cities)ly supplied, instead of imported, nonfoods. 
 Studies by King and Byerlee (1978), Hazell and Roell (1983) and Deb and 
 Horseain ( 1984) suggest that larger-sized farms and higher-income groups create the greatest consumption linkages with the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 Within these studies, high-income groups and farm sizes gave out the largest 
 not important budget shares to (away from cities)ly produced nonfoods. But with their largest 
 farm sizes between 5 and 15 ha, none of these studies included rich estateowners. Nor have any other studies, although such huge houses are usually believed to spend a high proportion of their income on imported products (that are bought and sold). 
 Demand for production inputs also differs/changes across farming-based zones. Watered 
 farming demands much more inputs than rainfed (producing crops/helping something grow), while 
 mechanized and animal traction systems require more tools, equipment and 
 repair services than do hand-hoe cropping systems. 
 Farming also influences the supply side of the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things), mostly through the labor market. Wages in farming set the opportunity cost of labor directed to nonfarm activities, while seasonality of labor 
 demand in farming affects the supply of labor available for nonfarm en- 
 
 349 
 
 deavors. Further influencing supply, the (work of art/artistic combining of elements) of farming-based output 
 furnishes raw materials which (away from cities) producers can transport, change or 
 market. Weight-reducing processes such as sugar and oil extraction often 
 require (away from cities) processing. For this reason, sugar and oilseed cropping patterns 
 create (having a unique quality) (related to a large area) clustering of (away from cities) processing activities (World 
 Bank, 1983; Horseain, 1987; Papola, 1987). 
 But farming does not (in a one-sided way) govern the size, (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) and (change over time) of the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Operating mostly on the supply side, 
 non-farming-based factors such as policy (surrounding conditions), (set of machines), human 
 capital, social class, tradition, and the availability of nonagricultural raw materials 
 all influence the nature of (away from cities) nonfarm activity. So, since 1977 employment in Sri Skinnya's handloom industry, its largest (away from cities) manufacturer, has 
 fallen by 50% as a result of money-based (easing government rules) which reduced former high 
 rates of protection (Osmani, 1987). (in the opposite way), (away from cities) rice mills have expanded 
 quickly in Thailand since the 1940s, following closely right behind rail penetration into the (away from cities) areas (World Bank, 1983). 
 3.2 
 
 Effects of farming-based growth on the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 
 A small but growing organized row of scientific work has begun exploring the relationship between changes in farming and changes in the (away from cities) nonfarm 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things). The cross-country data in Fig. 1 show a strong relationship between 
 farming-based income and the size of the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Charting the 
 increasing importance of (away from cities) nonfarm activity as one moves from Africa to 
 Asia to Latin America, Fig. 1 also documents the close connection between 
 nonfarm activity and the development of (away from cities) towns. As the contrast between 
 panel A and B shows/tells about, measuring the nonfarm spinoffs of farming-based growth 
 needs/demands including in something of the many that take root in (away from cities) towns (see also Gibb, 
 1974; Anderson and Leiserson, 1978; Haggblade, Hazell and Brown, 1987). 
 These relationships are agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the idea that farming-based income 
 growth leads to consumption (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into nonfoods, many of which can 
 be supplied by (away from cities) firms. Yet one cannot necessarily guess  (things causing other things to happen) from 
 these associations, since investments in (set of machines), introduction of improved farming-based technologies, (away from cities) income growth and increases in (away from cities) 
 nonfarm incomes all often move in tight parallel. 
 Time-series (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from countries with fast-growing farming suggests, 
 however, that farming may create powerful growth linkages. East Asia, 
 especially, has sparked extreme interest, as many (people who are watching something) have asked why 
 (away from cities) nonfarm activity has grew/showed/waved in Japan and Taiwan in the after-WWII 
 period, while in South Korea it has not. In 1980, farm families in Japan and 
 Taiwan earned 80 and 65%, (match up each pair of items in order), of their income from off-farm sources, 
 three-fourths of it in high-paying wage employment in (away from cities) towns and city-based 
 areas. Yet Korean farmers earned only 33% of their total household income 
 
 350 
 
 g 
 
 80 
 
 - 
 
 ....c 70 r- 
 
 . 
 
 &#126; 
 
 60 
 
 0. 
 
 r-- 
 
 - 
 - c 
 c- 
 c * 
 -- c 
 c - 
 -- 
 c 
 1-i "*- 
 
 &#126; 50 r- 
 
 1!::J 
 a:: 
 0 
 fa 
 
 40 
 
 Ul 
 
 20 
 
 30 
 
 .I! 
 
 E 
 
 2c 
 0 
 z 
 
 10 
 
 - 
 
 '- 
 
 -** 
 * 
 &#126;.* * 
 &#126; 
 
 Con'el¢on - 
 
 fit 
 
 0 
 
 - 
 
 0 
 
 500 
 
 (a) 
 
 1000 
 
 1500 
 
 .n 
 
 2000 
 
 2500 
 
 Farming-based Income per Farming-based Population ($1980) 
 Latin America 
 D 
 Africa 
 Aala 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 80 
 
 Con'elatlon - .37 
 
 g 
 
 70 
 
 '- 
 
 &#126; 
 0. 
 
 60 
 
 '- 
 
 50 
 
 1- 
 
 ....c 
 
 .. 
 
 &#126; 
 
 1!::J 40 
 a:: 
 0 
 fa 
 
 .I! 
 
 Ul 
 
 E 
 
 2c 
 z0 
 
 30 
 
 f- 
 
 - 
 c 
 
 * 
 
 - 
 
 c 
 r--l:bc 
 
 20 r- -c * * 
 10 r-.** 
 
 &#126;· 
 
 * 
 ' 
 * 
 
 00 
 (b) 
 
 c 
 
 ... 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 
 c 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 
 - 
 
 c 
 
 500 
 
 1000 
 
 1500 
 
 2000 
 
 2500 
 
 Farming-based Income per Farming-based Population ($1980) 
 
 - 
 
 Africa 
 
 D 
 
 Aala 
 
 - 
 
 Latin America 
 
 Fig. 1. (away from cities) nonfarm employment as a function of farming-based income: (a) areas away from cities plus (away from cities) 
 towns &#126; 250 000; (b) areas away from cities only. 
 
 from nonfarm sources (15% if payments are left out/kept out), with less than half 
 in wage-employment (Ho, 1986a; Oshima, 1986a; Park, 1986). Nor has the 
 (related to working on the job) structure of Korea's (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) changed significantly in the 
 past ten years (Park, 1986), while Japan and Taiwan, on the other hand, have 
 
 351 
 
 saw fast increases in the (away from cities) nonfarm employment and income shares 
 (Ho, 1982; Shih, 1983). 
 In explaining this weird difference, most analysts point first to differences in farming-based performance (see Ho, 1979, 1982, 1986a,b; Kada, 1986; Oshima, 1986a, 
 b; Park, 1986; Says, 1987). They identify lower initial farming-based working well in Korea, a relative neglect of farming and its as a result lower growth, 
 especially since 1970. Weaker farming-based growth reduced (away from cities) consumption linkages in Korea and at a later stage restricted the prospects for 
 labor release from farming to high-paying, full-time, off-farm employment. 
 In addition to more quickly growing farming-based incomes, Japan and Taiwan 
 invested more heavily in (away from cities) roads, (sets of steel tracks for trains) and electricity and put into use a 
 policy (surrounding conditions) supportive of broke up manufacturing, commercial and 
 service activity. By the early 1960s, Japan and Taiwan bragged a paved road 
 and (away from cities) electrical network with densities over five times those in Korea ( Says, 
 198 7). Rather than doing the same thing, South Korea (increased and focused) its industrial 
 (set of machines) in Seoul and Pusan. 
 In other areas of the world, many (people who are watching something) fear the prospects for almost the same 
 growth in high-return nonfarm activity are much less good (Islam, 1984, 
 1987; Deshpande and Deshpande, 1985; Mukhopadhyay, 1985; Ho, 1986b; 
 Shand, 1986). Given greater landlessness in South Asia, Southeast Asia and 
 Latin America, they fear that employment prospects in farming will not 
 keep pace with population growth. As a result, the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 will become an employer of last resort, a sponge, soaking up by default labor 
 force small steps forward/upward unemployed in farming into (more and more) lower and lower 
 return nonfarm activities. 
 Yet the limited (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) newly appearing from Latin America, South and Southeast 
 Asia hints that even where landlessness and (living somewhere) exist, farming-based 
 growth can stimulate not only greater (away from cities) nonfarm employment, but also 
 growing nonfarm incomes because of a (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into higher-return nonfarm activity. Time-series studies from rich farming-based areas in Colombia (Reinhardt, 1987), The Philippines (Gibb, 1974), the Indian Punjab 
 (Chadha, 1986), North Arcot, India (Hazell and Ramasamy, 1988), Malaysia 
 (Bell, Hazell and Slade, 1982) and Thailand (World Bank, 1983) describe 
 changes in the (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) which suggest that rising farming-based wage earnings and growing consumption demand from farm families have stimulated 
 increases in (away from cities) nonfarm employment, incomes and a move to more moneymaking 
 nonfarm activity. 
 (away from cities) labor markets play an important in shifting the composition of (away from cities) nonfarm activity. Providing it increases the demand for labor, farming-based growth 
 increases (away from cities) wage earnings and the opportunity cost of labor, by that/in that way mak- 
 
 352 
 
 ing low-return nonfarm activities uneconomic. 1 Horseain (1988), in a recent 
 study of the hit/effect of green revolution technologies in Bangladesh, has written about this interaction clearly. In villages with a majority of rice cropped 
 in high-cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties, he identifies higher farming-based incomes, higher farming-based wages and higher nonfarm income per person compared to villages 
 still dependent on traditional varieties. The higher nonfarm income in rich villages reflects a greater concentration of high-return nonfarm activity 
 (transport and services) and less low-wage company, construction and 
 earth dragging/carrying. Agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with these findings, cross-(related to a large area) studies from (away from cities) 
 India (Papola, 1987), Togo and Sierra Leone (Haggblade, Hazell and Brown, 
 1987) show a positive relationship between earnings per worker in farming 
 and in (away from cities) nonfarm activities. 
 Slow-growing farming-based areas have enjoyed less careful attention. Yet a 
 regularly heavy dependence of landless on nonfarm activity, joined with 
 the contrast between South Asia's low-return (away from cities) companies, and the 
 (without having one central area of command) high-wage factory production in East Asia, is leading to a growing agreement that prospects for an expanding, moneymaking (away from cities) nonfarm 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) depend heavily on farming-based growth ( Chuta and Liedholm, 1979; 
 Anderson and Leiserson, 1980; Islam, 1984, 1987; Deshpande and Deshpande, 
 1985; Ho, 1986b; Mukhopadhyay, 1985; Shand, 1986). 
 4. Modeling farming-based growth linkages under different 
 technologies 
 
 Research and extension policies will affect the type of (related to computers and science) change 
 (accomplished or gained) in farming. And the different technologies will, in turn, change  the 
 nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in different ways. Modeling provides a convenient means of 
 separating the key hit/effect of other choice technologies on (away from cities) nonfarm activity. 
 4.1 
 
 Basic ideas (you think are true) 
 
 The model developed below shows a simplified (related to a large area) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in which 
 the main farming-based outputs - food or cash crops - are tradable but specialty 
 and (likely to go bad in a short time) farming-based valuable things and all nonfood products (that are bought and sold)  and services 
 are classified as nontradables. While available technology limits tradable ag1 Note that the move out oflow-return activities does not necessarily require that farming-based wage 
 rates increase, but only that farming-based wage earnings per worker increase. The honor/difference is 
 important because while many yield-increasing technologies do lead to increases in the total number of days of hired labor employed in farming, the supply of labor is often (good or well enough) elastic 
 that daily wage rates do not increase. But from the point of view of the individual worker, if he/ 
 she can get more days of farming-based employment at times when they were (before that/before now) (working in a low-paying job while being highly skilled), then they will (change the normal flow or route of) labor from lower paying activities. 
 
 353 
 
 ricultural output, 2 the supplies of nontradables are highly elastic, their output 
 held back by local demand. The prices of all tradables are taken as (coming from the outside of something) 
 to the area, and this idea (you think is true) along with the perfectly elastic 
 supply of nontradables hints that the prices of nontradables are also fixed. 
 As improved farming-based technology becomes available it increases farming-based output and so the demand for (related to a large area) nontradables. In this pretty/interesting 
 view of the (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things), differences/different versions in farming-based technology lead to different (away from cities) growth linkages to the extent the input demand and the consumption 
 patterns they create differ. As a result, key features of farming-based technology affecting the projected size of (away from cities) nonfarm spinoffs include: (a) the 
 amount of farm inputs needed/demanded; (b) their sophistication, (from that place or time) the ability 
 of (away from cities) businesspersons to supply them; (c) the farming-based income (value added) 
 created; and (d) the divisibility of the technology, which affects the distribution of (in small steps up) earnings among income groups. 
 The idea (you think is true) of elastic supply of nonfood nontradables seems reasonable 
 given the available (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on excess ability (to hold or do something) in nonfarm production, low 
 (in small steps up) capital-output ratios, and the seasonal availability of labor at low 
 wages during slack periods in the farming-based calendar (Anderson and Leiserson, 1978; Liedholm and Mead, 1987). The parallel idea (you think is true) for nontradable foods also comes close to reality given that specialty farming-based production is not tied to the same seasonal cycle as tradable farming-based production, 
 so much of its labor needed things can be met during periods when there is 
 extra farming-based labor. 
 While (taking by force)/(taking control of) a few key features of farming-based-nonfarm interactions, 
 the model advanced below faces a few limits. First, it is a static balance approach that ignores the growth effects of added/more investment. More than that, by treating investment expenses as (coming from the outside of something), part of the difference 
 in demand linkages arising from farms of different types and size may be lost. 
 Second, the model does not includes any clear (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the labor 
 market, and so does not allow exploring things of the changes in worker working well that may go with growth in nonfarm activity caused by farming-based 
 growth. 3 Third, the model describes a self-contained (related to a large area) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and in 
 A technology restriction necessarily hints an hidden (under) useful thing/valuable supply restriction that is binding. In 
 most cases, this is land, and yield-increasing technologies are needed/demanded to relax the land restriction. 
 But sometimes seasonal labor bottlenecks may be more binding, as in the less populated areas 
 of sub-Saharan Africa, or crop-watering/rinsing with water water may be more critical as in some parts of Asia. In these 
 cases, (connected/related) technologies may involve mechanization or improvement in crop-watering/rinsing with water (set of machines). 
 3 Since most nontradables are thought to be labor-intensive, assuming their supplies to be perfectly 
 elastic completely/in a hinting way assumes that the supply of labor is also highly elastic, and that wage rates therefore remain constant. This is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the idea of increasing working well per worker if, 
 as argued earlier, (related to computers and science) change increases employment opportunities in farming and 
 enables farming-based laborers to give up low-working well nonfarm activities. Horseain (1988) has 
 recorded/supported just such a move/change in Bangladesh. 
 2 
 
 354 
 
 so doing ignores spillovers to or from major city-based  areas. 4 Fourth, by assuming 
 highly elastic supplies of nontradables, the model may lead to overestimates of 
 the size of the multipliers, especially in labor-rare/not enough  situations. With these 
 warnings in mind, we now turn to a formal statement of the model. 
 4.2 
 
 The Model 
 
 A three-part/area version of the semi-input-output model developed by Bell and 
 Hazell ( 1980), the model describes a (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in which (related to a large area) gross 
 output includes tradable output T, assumed to be fixed at T, plus nontradable 
 nonfoods, N, and nontradable farming-based output, A. Since the supply of N 
 and A is assumed to be highly elastic, their output is figured out by/decided by local demand. Local demand includes household consumption demand for nontradables (H), (related to a large area) producers' (middle-position) demands for nontradables (P), 
 government expenses on nontradables (G), and (related to a large area) investment demand for nontradables (I). 
 Household consumption expenses on nontradables are assumed to be 
 linearly related to income as follows: 
 
 HA =aoA + PA (Y -S) 
 
 (1) 
 
 HN=aoN+fiN(Y-S) 
 
 (2) 
 
 where Y is total household income, S is total savings, the a's are constants, 
 and PA and fiN are, (match up each pair of items in order), the not important budget shares for nontradable 
 foods and nonfoods. Savings are assumed to be (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) income: 
 (3) 
 
 where s is the not important natural tendency to save. 
 In Leontief fashion, (middle-position) demands for nontradables are assumed to 
 be (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) part/areaal gross outputs, so that: 
 
 PA =aArT+aAAA +aANN 
 
 (4) 
 
 PN=aNrT+aNAA+aNNN 
 
 (5) 
 
 where aij represents (middle-position) deliveries from part/area ito part/area j. 
 Finally, assuming that government and investment demands for nontradablesare (coming from the outside of something)ly given (GA =GA, GN =GN,IA =fA andlN=[N ), the output 
 of nontradables is serious and stubborn as follows: 
 4 Spillover effects arise because imports into the (related to a large area) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) may create jobs and income 
 in other places in the nation. (in almost the same way), while savings that are invested outside the area represent a 
 loss to (related to a large area) growth, they are anyway valuable in helping national money-based growth. 
 (in the opposite way), (related to a large area) growth may get/cause  costs in other places in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). To take by force/take control of these spillover 
 effects needs/demands a general balance modeling approach such as that used by Byerlee for Nigeria 
 (Byerlee, 1973) and Sierra Leone (Byerlee eta!., 1977) and by Adelman ( 1984) for South Korea. 
 
 355 
 
 A=HA +PA +L. +GA 
 
 (6) 
 
 N=HN+PN+[N+GN 
 
 (7) 
 
 To complete the model, it is necessary to define household income Y. Assuming that (a) value added is a constant share of gross output in each part/area (i.e. 
 Vj= VA)GOj is constant,j=T, A and N), and (b) all value added builds up to 
 families, then: 
 (8) 
 
 Substituting all the assumed relations into ( 6) and ( 7) and collecting terms, 
 the output of nontradables becomes: 
 A=c5A + (1-s)fiAvAA+ (1-s)fiAvNN+aAAA+aANN 
 N=c5N+ (1-s)fiNvAA+ (1-s)fiNvNN+aNAA+aNNN 
 
 (9) 
 
 (10) 
 
 where 
 c5A =aoA = [_( (1 +s)fiAvr+aAr] T+ [A +GA 
 
 and 
 c5N=aoN+ [_((1-s)fiNur+aNr]T+[N+GN 
 
 Solving for A and N: 
 1 
 A= D [1-aNN- (1-s)fiNvN]c5A 
 1 
 N= D [aNA+ (1-s)fiNvA]c5A 
 
 1 
 
 +D 
 
 1 
 
 +D 
 
 [aAN+ (1-s)fiAvN]c5N 
 
 (11) 
 
 [1-AAA- (1-s)fiAvA]c5N 
 
 (12) 
 
 where 
 D= [1-aAA- (1-s)fiAvA] [1-aNN- (1-s)fiNvN] 
 - [aAN+ (1-s)fiAuN] [aNA+ (1-s)fiNuA] 
 
 Suppose now that (related to computers and science) change in farming enables the area to 
 increase its output of tradables. What will be the multiplier hit/effect on the 
 area's income? Using (8), the derivative: 
 dY 
 aA 
 aN 
 dT=vr+uAa'f+uN a'f 
 
 (13) 
 
 measures the change in (related to a large area) income for a unit change in the value of tradable farming-based gross output. The value added multiplier, which (make something look or work the same way every time)s 
 ( 13) for differences in the value added to gross output ratio in tradables pro- 
 
 356 
 
 duction, is received/got as: 
 
 (14) 
 The multiplier measures the increase in (related to a large area) value added given a one-unit 
 increase in value added from tradable farming-based output. Nate that the increase in value added in the nontradable part/area has two parts/pieces; (aAj 
 aT) (vAfvr) is the increase in value added in nontradable farming-based production (usually fresh fruits, vegetables and some animals products), and (aN/ 
 aT) (vNfvr) is the increase in value added in nonagricultural nontradables: 
 ThevaluesofaA;a'TandaN;a'Tareobtainedfrom (11) and (12) as follows: 
 aA 
 
 ar= D1 
 
 [1-aNN- (1-s)fiNvN] [_( (1-s)fiAvr+aAT) 
 
 (15) 
 
 and 
 
 aN 
 
 ar= D1 [aNA+ (1-s)fiNvA] [_( (1-s)fiAvr+aAT) 
 
 (16) 
 
 1 
 + D [1-aAA- (1-s)fiAvA] [_( (1-s)fiNvr+aNr] 
 
 In addition to projecting group (related to a large area) income multipliers, the model 
 can be used to separate the importance of the household consumption linkages 
 relative to the interindustry (or production) linkages in the multiplier. By 
 setting the P coefficients equal to zero, household consumption expense 
 becomes constant in the model. The received/made from multiplier arising from farming-based growth will then be due completely to production linkages. 
 4.3 
 
 Size of the multiplier 
 
 Twelve key limits/guidelines decide/figure out the size of the multiplier for a (related to a large area) 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things). They are the not important budget shares for nontradables in household 
 expense &amp;lt;PA and fiN), the not important natural tendency to save (s), the ratios of 
 nontradable intermediates to gross output in part/areaal production (aAT- aAA- 
 a AN- aNT- aNA and aNN), and the ratio of value added to gross output in part/areaal 
 production (vr, vA and vN). If these limits/guidelines are known, the model can 
 project the size of the indirect multiplier benefits coming from farming-based 
 growth in a area. 
 In Table 2 a variety of data sources have been used to guess model limits/guidelines for some important types of farming and technology found in Asia, 
 Africa and Latin America. The Asia guesses draw heavily on the social accounting matrices (SAMs), available for the Muda area in Malaysia (Bell, 
 
 TABLE2 
 Value of the (related to a large area) value-added multiplier under different ideas (you think are true) about key limits/guidelines for a (related to a large area) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 Value of model limits/guidelines- 
 
 Size and (work of art/artistic combining of elements) of 
 multiplier 
 
 fJA 
 
 fJN 
 
 s 
 
 VA 
 
 Vr 
 
 aNT 
 
 T 
 
 A 
 
 N 
 
 Total 
 
 Multiplier 
 with 
 consumption 
 (coming from the outside of something) 
 
 Percent 
 multiplier 
 due to 
 consumption 
 linkagesb 
 
 0.05 
 0.05 
 
 0.30 
 0.40 
 
 0.1 
 0.2 
 
 0.7 
 0.7 
 
 0.8 
 0.8 
 
 0.1 
 0.1 
 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 
 0.06 
 0.06 
 
 0.49 
 0.58 
 
 1.55 
 1.64 
 
 1.12 
 1.12 
 
 78.2 
 81.2 
 
 0.05 
 
 0.40 
 
 0.1 
 
 0.7 
 
 0.8 
 
 0.1 
 
 1.00 
 
 0.07 
 
 0.67 
 
 1.74 
 
 1.12 
 
 83.7 
 
 0.05 
 0.05 
 0.05 
 
 0.25 
 0.35 
 0.35 
 
 0.1 
 0.2 
 0.2 
 
 0.7 
 0.7 
 0.7 
 
 0.9 
 0.8 
 0.65 
 
 0.05 
 0.1 
 0.08 
 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 
 0.05 
 0.06 
 0.06 
 
 0.33 
 0.50 
 0.50 
 
 1.38 
 1.56 
 1.56 
 
 1.06 
 1.12 
 1.12 
 
 84.2 
 78.5 
 78.5 
 
 Rainfed, smallholders 
 - hoe (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 - oxen (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 
 0.1 
 0.15 
 
 0.15 
 0.20 
 
 0.1 
 0.1 
 
 0.8 
 0.8 
 
 0.95 
 0.85 
 
 0.02 
 0.05 
 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 
 0.10 
 0.17 
 
 0.18 
 0.30 
 
 1.28 
 1.47 
 
 1.03 
 1.06 
 
 89.3 
 87.2 
 
 Rainfed, huge houses 
 - low local consumption 
 - high local consumption 
 
 0.05 
 0.15 
 
 0.1 
 0.2 
 
 0.3 
 0.3 
 
 0.8 
 0.8 
 
 0.6 
 0.6 
 
 0.08 
 0.08 
 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 
 0.05 
 0.14 
 
 0.20 
 0.30 
 
 1.25 
 1.44 
 
 1.13 
 1.13 
 
 48.0 
 70.5 
 
 Rainfed, smallholders 
 
 0.05 
 
 0.25 
 
 0.1 
 
 0.7 
 
 0.9 
 
 0.02 
 
 1.00 
 
 0.05 
 
 0.30 
 
 1.35 
 
 1.03 
 
 91.4 
 
 Rainfed, huge houses 
 - low local consumption 
 - high local consumption 
 
 0.05 
 0.05 
 
 0.1 
 0.35 
 
 0.3 
 0.3 
 
 0.7 
 0.7 
 
 0.6 
 0.6 
 
 0.09 
 0.09 
 
 1.00 
 1.00 
 
 0.05 
 0.05 
 
 0.21 
 0.47 
 
 1.26 
 1.52 
 
 1.15 
 1.15 
 
 42.3 
 71.2 
 
 Asia 
 
 Watered rice, HYV s 
 - small farms 
 - medium farms 
 (average savings) 
 - medium farms 
 (low savings) 
 Watered rice, all farms 
 - traditional varieties (oxen) 
 - HYVs (oxen) 
 - HYVs (tractors) 
 Africa 
 
 Latin America 
 
 -Jn all cases, aAA=aAr=aAN=0.01; aNA =0.05; aNN=0.1; VN=0.8. 
 bCalculated as (M, -M) /(Me -1) X 100% where M, and Horse  the multipliers calculated with consumption specified endogenously and (coming from the outside of something)ly, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 en 
 "" 
 -:] 
 
 358 
 
 Hazell and Slade, 1982) and North Arcot in South India (Hazell and Ramasamy, 1988). The consumption limits/guidelines, the P's, for Asia are based on Hazell and Roell ( 1983), Hazell and Ramasamy ( 1986) and Horseain ( 1988). 
 Production limits/guidelines for Africa and Latin America draw on published farm 
 management data, especially Ruthenberg (1980). The African P's come from 
 King and Byerlee (1978) and Hazell and Roell (1983), while those for Latin 
 American smallholders are simply predicted from Asia. Without 
 any consumption studies examining the locational (work of art/artistic combining of elements) of (away from cities) consumption demand for estate families, it has been necessary to project probable lower and upper bounds for the P's. 
 The multipliers in Table 2 range in size from 1.25 to 1. 74. That is, each dollar 
 of added/more value added created in tradable farming-based output stimulates 
 an added US$0.25 to US$0. 74 of value added in (related to a large area) nontradables production. Watered rice areas in Asia growing HYV s create the largest multipliers, while traditional smallholder areas under rainfed conditions in Africa and Latin America produce the smallest multipliers (about 1.3). The 
 multipliers connected with estate farm-related range between the above extremes and depend critically on the assumed local content of estate household 
 consumption expense. 
 As a check on the reliability of the model, it is useful to compare the Asian 
 multipliers in Table 2 with the more careful guesses given by Bell, Hazell 
 and Slade (1982) for the Muda area in Malaysia, and by Hazell and Ramasamy ( 1988) for the North Arcot area in South India. In both study areas, 
 (in the past) watched/followed changes in the output of farming-based tradables projected 
 multipliers of 1.83, (a) little higher than those in Table 2. But this difference 
 rises because the full SAM projections gave out increased tradable output 
 across a variety of parts/areas, not just paddy as in the Table 2 projections. Luckily, Hazell and Ramasamy (1988) also report a value added multiplier 
 received/made from specifically from an increase in paddy exports alone and, at US$1.67, 
 this multiplier is very close to the results in Table 2. 
 Nonfarm activities account for a larger share of the total multiplier in Asia 
 and Latin America than in Africa. For example, Table 2 shows that ways of communicatingized, watered rice farms growing HYV s in Asia have a multiplier of 1.64. Of 
 the US$0.64 indirect gain, US$0.58 (or 90%) builds up to producers of nonfarm 
 nontradables and only US$0.06 builds up to producers of nontradable foods. In 
 contrast, only US$0.18 (or 64%) of the total indirect gain ofUS$0.28 builds up 
 to producers of nonfarm nontradables in rainfed areas of Africa ruled by 
 hoe helping grow smallholders. The different structure of the multiplier rises 
 because of a larger not important budget share for nontradable foods in Africa. Hazell and Roell ( 1983) attribute this result to fewer towns and poor transport 
 facilities, and as a result limited access to nonfoods in (away from cities) villages. Poor 
 (set of machines) development in Africa also pieces markets for (likely to go bad in a short time) 
 foods, by that/in that way creating nontradable foods that are tradables in Asia. 
 
 359 
 
 The consumption linkages account for some 80-90% of the total multiplier 
 for all but estate farming according to Table 2. This supports Mellor's ( 1976) 
 argument that Hirschman's ( 1958) (something left out) of consumption linkages led to 
 his unnecessarily negative-minded accusation of farming as a low-linkage, underpowered engine of growth. 
 4.4 
 
 Effects of different farming-based technology 
 
 The results in Table 2 (show or prove) that the choice of technology and farm 
 type targeted by farming-based research and extension have important effects/results/suggestions for the size of the multiplier. 
 Among HYV rice farms in Asia, the multiplier is greatest when (related to computers and science) change is focused on medium- rather than small-sized farms. If small- and 
 medium-sized farms are assumed to have an identical savings rate of 0.1, then 
 the multiplier is 1.74 for medium-sized farms and 1.55 for small-sized farms. 
 More than that, the multiplier for medium-sized farms remains larger, at 1.64, even 
 when actual savings rates- which are twice as large for medium-sized farmsare assumed. This results from the stronger household consumption linkages 
 of medium -sized farms; as Hazell and Roell ( 1983) and Mellor and Lele ( 1973) 
 have noted, the PN coefficients for medium-sized farms are larger. 
 Before ending/deciding that farming-based development programs should target 
 medium -sized farms, some important qualifications need to be made. 
 First, the results assume that small- and medium-sized farms use the same 
 scale-free technology. This is often the case for HYV rice in much of Asia, but 
 where medium-sized farms are more mechanized, the extra employment they 
 create in the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) might be offset by losses in direct employment in farming. Second, by holding investment constant, the model 
 does not allow for possible differences in the nontradable content of investment expense by farm size group. The difference in the multipliers could 
 be worn away if small farms invest greater shares of their savings locally than their 
 medium-sized brothers. Third, the results are sensitive to the assumed supply 
 elasticities in the model. If nontradables are less elastic in supply, or if the 
 export demand for the area's tradables were inelastic, then the relative size 
 of the multipliers might be reduced or reversed. 
 The choice between targeting huge houses or smallholders in Africa and Latin 
 America is less confusing. The huge houses create smaller multipliers if, as seems 
 reasonable, they have crowded household expense patterns with low not important budget shares for (away from cities) nontradables. Only if their expense patterns 
 approach those of smaller-sized farms do the huge houses create more good 
 multipliers. 
 A comparison of traditional and high cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties on Asian rice farms 
 shows a larger multiplier for the HYVs ( 1.56 against/compared to/or 1.38). Farms growing traditional varieties require fewer tradable inputs, and their ratios of value added 
 
 360 
 
 to gross output are higher. But this positive (thing that's given/work that's done) toward the multiplier 
 is more than offset by lower household demand linkages as a result of lower 
 incomes and smaller not important budget shares for nontradables. 
 The choice of mechanization package (oxen against/compared to/or tractors) does not affect 
 the multiplier on Asian rice farms, although oxen (producing crops/helping something grow) does produce 
 higher indirect income small steps forward/upward than hoe (producing crops/helping something grow) among Africa's 
 smallholders. Greater mechanization increases the demand for nontradable 
 intermediates in production (iron workering, machinery repair and servicing, 
 etc.), and this adds to the size of the multiplier. At the same time, there is an 
 almost exactly offsetting effect due to a decline in the value added created 
 per unit of output. The size of the multiplier therefore depends on the strength 
 of the household demand linkages. If mechanization leads to increased family 
 incomes, and because of this larger not important budget shares for nontradables, the multiplier is larger. This seems to be the case with oxen (producing crops/helping something grow) in Africa, because it enables farmers to help grow more land. But if mechanization simply 
 involves a substitution of capital for labor without adding/giving much to total 
 income- as is often the case with tractors in Asia (World Bank, 1987) -the 
 multiplier is no larger than for less mechanized technologies. 
 5. Ends/end results 
 (related to computers and science) advance in farming creates big increases in (away from cities) income over and above the direct hit/effect on farming-based earnings. These 
 benefits are of the order of 25 and 75 cents for each $1.00 of value added created directly in farming. 
 Because consumption linkages account for over 80% of the indirect income 
 small steps forward/upward, the most important features of farming-based technology are those 
 affecting income distribution and because of this consumption patterns. Input divisibility comes out as most important because of the prospects it offers for (existing all over a large area) distribution across income classes. In general, this hints that (related to the body function of living things) improvements will produce greater indirect income benefits than will 
 mechanical inventions of new things. Middle-sized farms appear to create the greatest 
 (away from cities) growth linkages because of greater demand (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into nonfarm 
 products (that are bought and sold)  compared to small farms and because of lower import content than estate farms, although this final guess will require confirmation once careful 
 large-farm consumption profiles become available. 
 Through the labor market, farming-based growth also influences (away from cities) wage 
 rates and so the supply side of the (away from cities) nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Scientific studies suggest that labor-using farming-based growth can effectively help develop a move 
 to high-return nonfarm activities. 
 While the type of (related to computers and science) change influences the relative size of the 
 multiplier, its total size is mostly controlled by the policy, institutional and 
 useful thing/valuable supply (surrounding conditions) in which farming-based production happens. The mul- 
 
 361 
 
 tipliers tend to be smaller in Africa, for example, probably as a reflection of 
 poorer (away from cities) (set of machines), lower population density, lower income and as a result less personal (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) into nonfoods, fewer prospects for crop-watering/rinsing with water and therefore fewer backward linkages than other areas. Because 
 appropriate public policies and investments will play an important in improving 
 the strength of the indirect benefits of farming-based growth, they should be seen 
 as playing a (completing/matching) role to investments in farming-based research. 
 
 References 
 Adelman, 1., 1984. Beyond export-led growth. World Dev., 12: 937-949. 
 Anderson, D. and Leiserson, M., 1978. (away from cities) business/project and nonfarm employment. World Bank, 
 Washington, DC, 87 pp. 
 Bell, C.L.G. and Hazell, P.B.R., 1980. Measuring the indirect effects of an farming-based investment 
 project on its surrounding area. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 62: 75-86. 
 Bell, C., Hazell, P.B.R. and Slade, R., 1982. Project Test in (related to a large area) (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important): A Study 
 of an Crop-watering/rinsing with water Project in Northwest Malaysia. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 
 MD, 326pp. 
 Byerlee, D., 1973. Indirect employment and income distribution effects of farming-based development plans: a (testing out) approach applied to Nigeria. Afr. (away from cities) Employment Pap. 9, 
 Michigan State University, Department of Farming-based Money flow, East Lansing, MI, 76 pp. 
 Byerlee, D., Eicher, C., Liedholm, C. and Spencer, D.S.C., 1977. (away from cities) employment in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) 
 Africa: summary of findings. Afr. (away from cities) Econ. Work. Pap. 20, Michigan State University, Department of Farming-based Money flow, East Lansing, MI, 176 pp. 
 Cavallo, D. and Mundlak, Y., 1982. Farming and money-based growth in an open (process of people making, selling, and buying things): the 
 case of Argentina. IFPRI Res.-Rep. 36, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, 162 pp. 
 Chadha, G.K., 1986. The off-farm money-based structure of (related to farming) growing areas: a study of 
 Indian Punjab. In: R. T. Shand (Editor), Off-Farm Employment in the Development of (away from cities) 
 Asia, 2. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 147-175. 
 Chuta, E. and Liedholm, C., 1979. (away from cities) non-farm employment: a review of the (the best design available now). 
 MSU (away from cities) Dev. Pap. 4, Department of Farming-based Money flow, Michigan State University, 
 East Lansing, Ml, 96 pp. 
 Deb, N. and Horseain, M., 1984. Demand for (away from cities) businesses products in Bangladesh. Bangladesh 
 Dev. Stud., 12: 81-99. 
 Deshpande, S. and Deshpande, L.K., 1985. (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  of 1981 and the structure of employment. Econ. 
 Polit. Weekly, 20: 969-973. 
 Figueroa, A., 1982. La money-baseda del minifundio de Ia sierra del Peru. In: P. Musgrove (Editor), 
 lngreso, Desigualdad y Probeza en America Latina. Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo, Rio 
 de Janeiro, pp. 225-296. 
 Gibb, A., 1974. Farming-based modernization, non-farm employment and low level (city growth): a 
 case study of a Central Luzon sub-area. Ph.D. speech/story, University of Michigan, Ann 
 Shady place, MI, 289 pp. 
 Haggblade, S., Hazell, P.B.R. and Brown, J., 1987. Farm-nonfarm linkages in (away from cities) sub-saharan 
 Africa: evidence and policy effects/results/suggestions. Disc. Pap. ARU 67, Farming and (away from cities) 
 Development Department, World Bank, Washington, DC, 207 pp. 
 Haggblade, S., Hazell, P.B.R. and Brown, J., 1989. Farm-nonfarm linkages in (away from cities) sub-saharan 
 Africa. World Dev., 17 (in press). 
 
 362 
 Hazell, P. and Ramasamy, C., 1986. Household expense patterns and the growth of the nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Pap. 8, IFPRI/Tamil Nadu Farming-based University Workshop on Growth Linkages, 14-16 February 1986, Ootacamund, India, 38 pp. 
 Hazell, P.B.R. and Ramasamy, C., 1988. Green revolution reconsidered: the hit/effect of the highyielding rice varieties in South India. International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC (unpublished). 
 Hazell, P.B.R. and Roell, A., 1983. (away from cities) growth linkages: household expense patterns in Malaysia and Nigeria. Res. Rep. 41, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, 
 DC, 64pp. 
 Hirschman, A.O., 1958. The Plan of Money-based Development. Yale University Press, New 
 Place, CT, 217 pp. 
 Ho, S.P.S., 1979. (without having one central area of command) (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) and (away from cities) development: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from Taiwan. 
 Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 28: 77-96. 
 Ho, S.P.S., 1982. Money-based development and (away from cities) industry in South Korea and Taiwan. World 
 Dev., 10: 973-990. 
 Ho, S.P.S., 1986a. Off-farm employment and farm families in Taiwan. In: R.T. Shand (Editor), Off-farm Employment in the Development of (away from cities) Asia, 1. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 95-134. 
 Ho, S.P.S., 1986b. The Asian experience in (away from cities) non-farming-based development and its relevance 
 for China. World Bank Staff Work. Pap. 757, World Bank, Washington, DC, 105 pp. 
 Horseain, M., 1987. Employment generation through companies - potentials and restrictions: the case of Bangladesh. In: R. Islam (Editor), (away from cities) (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) and Employment in Asia. International Labour Office, New Delhi, pp. 19-58. 
 Horseain, M., 1988. Nature and hit/effect of the green revolution in Bangladesh. Res. Rep. 67, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, 146 pp. 
 Islam, R., 1984. Nonfarm employment in (away from cities) asia: energetic growth or (member of the working class)isation? J. 
 Contemp. Asia (U.K.), 14:306-324. 
 Islam, R., 1987. (away from cities) industrialisation and employment in Asia: issues and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). In: R. Islam 
 (Editor), (away from cities) Industrialisation and Employment in Asia. International Labour Office, New 
 Delhi, pp. 1-18. 
 Johnston, B.F. and Kilby, P., 1975. Farming and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) Change: Money-based Plans in Late-Developing Countries. Oxford University Press, London, 474 pp. 
 Kada, R., 1986. Off-farm employment and the (away from cities)-city-based  (connecting point/way of interacting with something) in Japanese money-based development. In: R.T. Shand (Editor) Off-farm Employment in the Development of (away from cities) Asia, 1. 
 Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 75-94. 
 Kilby, P. and Liedholm, C., 1986. The role of nonfarm activities in the (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Employment Enterp. Dev. Policy Anal. Disc. Pap. 7, Harvard Institute for International Development, 
 Cambridge, MA, 37 pp. 
 King, R.P. and Byerlee, D., 1978. Factor strengths and locationallinkages of (away from cities) consumption 
 patterns in (away from cities) Sierra Leone. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 60: 197-206. 
 Kochar, A., 1983. Restrictions on the development of personal demand based (away from cities) household 
 manufacturing units in dry areas. Indian J. Agric. Econ., 38: 347-354. 
 Liedholm, C. and Mead, D., 1987. Small scale businesses in developing countries: evidence and policy effects/results/suggestions. MSU Int. Dev. Pap. 9, Department of Farming-based Money flow, 
 Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 141 pp. 
 Lipton, M. with Longhurst, R., 1985. Modern varieties, international farming-based research, and 
 the poor. Study Pap. 2, CGIAR Advice-giving Group on International Farming-based Research, 
 World Bank, Washington, DC, 139 pp. 
 Luzuriaga, C.C. and Zuvekas, C., Jr., 1983. Income distribution and poorness in (away from cities) Ecuador, 
 1950-1979: a survey of the books. Center for Latin American Studies, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 240 pp. 
 
 363 
 Matlon, P., Eponou, T., Franzel, S., Byerlee, D. and Baker, D., 1979. Poor (away from cities) families, technical change and income distribution in developing countries: two case studies from West Africa. Afr. (away from cities) Econ. Work. Pap. 29, Department of Farming-based Money flow, Michigan State 
 University, East Lansing, Ml, 190 pp. 
 Mellor, J.W., 1976. The New Money flow of Growth: A Plan for India and the Developing 
 World. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 402 pp. 
 Mellor, J.W. and Johnston, B.F., 1984. The world food equation: interrelations among development, employment and food consumption. J. Econ. Lit., 22: 524-531. 
 Mellor, J.W. and Lele, U., 1973. Growth linkages of the new food grain technologies. Indian J. 
 Agric. Econ., 18: 35-55. 
 Mukhopadhyay, S., 1985. (away from cities) non-farm part/area in Asia: a description. Econ. Polit. Weekly, 
 20: 966-968. 
 Mukhopadhyay, S. and Lim, C.P., 1985. (away from cities) non-farm activities in the Asian area: an summary. In: S. Mukhopadhyay and C.P. Lim (Editors), Development and (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) of (away from cities) 
 Businesses in Asia. Asian and Pacific Development Centre, Kuala Lumpur, pp. 3-49. 
 Oshima, H.T., 1986a. Off-farm employment and incomes in (after the war) East Asian growth. In: R.T. 
 Shand (Editor) Off-farm Employment in the Development of (away from cities) Asia, 1. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 25-74. 
 Oshima, H.T., 1986b. The change from an farming-based to an industrial (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in East Asia. 
 World Dev., 34: 783-809. 
 Osmani, S.R., 1987. The hit/effect of money-based liberalisation on the small-scale and (away from cities) businesses 
 of Sri Skinnya. In: R. Islam (Editor), (away from cities) Industrialisation and Employment in Asia. International Labour Office, New Delhi, pp. 171-210. 
 Papola, T.S., 1987. (away from cities) industrialisation and farming-based growth: a case study on India. In: R. 
 Islam (Editor), (away from cities) Industrialisation and Employment in Asia. International Labour Office, 
 New Delhi, pp. 59-106. 
 Park, F.K., 1986. Off-farm employment in Korea: current status and possibilities. In: R.T. 
 Shand (Editor) Off-farm Employment in the Development of (away from cities) Asia, 1. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 59-106. 
 Phongpaichit, P., 1982. Employment, Income and Getting (something) ready for action of Useful things/valuable supplies in Three Thai Villages. International Labour Office, New Delhi, 140 pp. 
 Pinstrup-Andersen, P. and Hazell, P.B.R., 1985. The hit/effect of the green revolution and prospects 
 for the future. Food Rev. Int., 1: 1-25. 
 Rangarajan, C., 1982. Farming-based growth and industrial performance in India. Res. Rep. 33, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washingto<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
