 Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 The hit/effect of seed industry concentration on invention of new things: 
 a study of US science (companies that sell the most of certain items) 
 David E. Schimmelpfennig a,aˆ-- , Carl E. Pray b , Margaret F. Brennan c 
 a 
 
 Money-based Research Service, US Department of Farming, useful thing/valuable supply Money flow Division, 
 1800 M Street, NW, Room 4195, Washington, DC 20036-5831, USA 
 b Department of Farming-based, food and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow, Rutgers University, USA 
 c Cook College Office of Research, Rutgers University, USA 
 
 Received 18 April 2001; received in changed form 1 June 2002; accepted 6 November 2002 
 
 Abstract 
 Farming-based research drives increases in farming-based working well, and the number of private farming-based input firms has been 
 declining. The scientific relationship between the number of firms doing applied science crop research and the amount 
 of research output they produce is (examined closely) in a research profit function model. Increases in seed industry concentration 
 have reduced science research strength in the United States in the 1990s. Concentration and research are (at the same time) 
 decided/figured out and are influenced by the appropriability of research results and the state of (related to computers and science) opportunity. 
 Â© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: L1; Q16; C3 
 Keywords: Industrial organisation; Science R&amp;D 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Working well growth has an important influence on 
 the (wanting to beat others in contests) and a money-making state of international 
 farming. To remain in business farming-based producers have often had to put into use new technologies. Some 
 of these inventions of new things have been included in mechanical inputs that have replaced labour. Other new inputs, 
 like high-cooperating with/producing/giving up seed varieties and chemical herbicides and bug-killers, have increased land working well. 
 These new technologies have led to (after the war) total factor working well growth in farming that is almost 
 aˆ-- Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-202-694-5507; 
 fax: +1-202-694-5774. 
 E-mail address: des@ers.usda.gov (D.E. Schimmelpfennig). 
 
 four times the growth rate in the non-farm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 in the US (Jorgenson and Gollop, 1992). 
 Huffman and Evenson (1992) showed that both public and private research were major contributors to working well growth in the (after the war) period. The relative 
 importance of the public and (people and businesses that are not part of the government)s has been 
 changing around the world, but especially in the US. 
 (people and businesses that are not part of the government) spending on farming-based research and 
 development (R&amp;D) more than doubled in the US between 1970 and 1996, from 2 to 4.2 billion US dollars 
 (bUS$). Public Federal and State research have been 
 spoiled at a little over 1.5 and 1 bUS$, (match up each pair of items in order), 
 since 1978 (Fuglie, 2000). 
 In the 1990s, the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) made major investments in farming-based science research. Just and 
 Hueth (1993) link the direction of science in- 
 
 0169-5150/$ - see front matter Â© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2002.11.001 
 
 158 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 novation to market structure. They argued that chemical companies would develop (related to the body function of living things) inventions of new things 
 that increase dependence on the chemicals that they 
 sell. Ollinger and Pope (1995) tested Just 
 and Hueth's possible findings using the numbers of 
 permits for pre-market field tests of (having characteristics that were changed by people) crops from the US Department of Agriculture's 
 (USDA) Animal Plant Health and (careful examination of something) Service 
 (APHIS). They did not find scientific support for the 
 Just and Hueth guess. 
 The large number of mergers and purchases in 
 farming-based inputs businesses around the world raises 
 the question whether more (mainly studied) markets increase or decrease the level of science research, 
 and future increases in farming-based working well. Other 
 than the studies talked about/said in the previous paragraph, 
 there have been no scientific studies of the links between the structure of the farming-based input businesses 
 and the amount of R&amp;D. What's more, for all businesses there are few indicators to help the Federal Trade 
 Commission (FTC) or Department of Justice in the 
 US, or their partners around the world, identify 
 whether the level of concentration in the invention of new things 
 market is in some sense sub-best. We develop a (happening together) possible model of concentration in the 
 invention of new things market and private R&amp;D strength in an attempt to answer this question. 
 Of course, industry structure is not the only factor that can influence the amount of private research. 
 Public R&amp;D and stronger copyright/patent rights 
 (IPRs) could also cause more private R&amp;D. This way our 
 model also includes (numbers that change/things that change) for public research and 
 IPRs. We test the model with private R&amp;D measured 
 by data on science field trials of corn, cotton and soybeans divided by total (science and non-science) US 
 market seed sales to control for potential market size. 
 
 The answers to these questions will be of interest to 
 policymakers and (people in charge) in (related to preventing one company from becoming too powerful) regulation who 
 are concerned with levels of seed and science industry 
 concentration. We provide some of the first guesses 
 of the effects of concentration in these businesses. The 
 results should also be of interest to managers in 
 public research institutions and people in charge of 
 IPRs. The next section reviews the recent stylised facts 
 about US corn, cotton and soybean production and the 
 influence of science on these crops. The following sections introduce the possible model and test 
 it using group US data. The last section examines 
 some of the policy effects/results/suggestions of our results. 
 
 2. Corn, cotton and soybean production, industry 
 combining, and the spread of (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) 
 changed varieties 
 This study focuses on corn, cotton and soybeans 
 because (having characteristics that were changed by people) (GM) varieties of these 
 three crops cover most of the total area of GM crops 
 in the US. Table 1 presents some of the (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 of the US markets for and research efforts on these 
 crops. Total area planted to transgenic varieties remained quite large in 2000. Round-up ReadyTM soybeans cover the most area followed by insect resistant 
 (Bt) corn, Bt cotton and cotton with stacked Bt and 
 Round-up Ready (RR) (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things). The spread of GM varieties in these crops is partially the result of large investments in plant breeding and science research that 
 have focused on these crops. Corn has attracted far 
 more plant breeding and science research useful things/valuable supplies 
 than any other crop (see last column in Table 1), and 
 has had the largest number of transgenic varieties approved for commercial use (see next to last column of 
 
 Table 1 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of US science markets and research on corn, cotton and soybeans 
 
 Corn 
 Cottona 
 Soybeans 
 
 Area planted in 
 US, 2000 
 (millions of areas of land) 
 
 Area of transgenic 
 varieties, 2000 
 (millions of areas of land) 
 
 Number of private 
 plant people (who help animals have babies), 
 1994 (Frey, 1996) 
 
 Number of 
 science patents 
 (1990-1999) 
 
 Number of 
 transgenic varieties 
 approved for 
 commercial use 
 
 Number of field 
 trials (and rank) 
 
 79.6 
 15.4 
 74.5 
 
 19.9 
 9.4 
 40.2 
 
 510 
 103 
 101 
 
 299 
 382 
 141 
 
 14 
 5 
 5 
 
 2591 (1) 
 395 (5) 
 509 (3) 
 
 Sources: area planted and area of transgenics from NASS (2000). Transgenic varieties approved and number of field trials from APHIS 
 (1999). Patents see Table 2. 
 a Upland varieties (leaves out/keeps out Pima cotton). 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 Dow, but only a few (including Freedom LinkTM and 
 non-transgenic imidazolinone (IMI) herbicide tolerant 
 varieties) have been adopted in the US so far. 
 There is less concentration in the invention of new things markets than in the sales of (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  or varieties. Measuring 
 concentration in the invention of new things market is possible because all new GM varieties ready to be tested in open 
 fields have to be registered with USDA and data on 
 each application is publicly available. This data can be 
 used to measure concentration in a few ways. First, 
 we can simply look at the number of firms that are 
 doing research on (having characteristics of a living thing controlled by people) crops. Fig. 1 
 shows that the number of firms increased quickly to 
 the mid-1990s and slowly started to (lower in number/get worse) after that. 
 Second, we can calculate a four-firm concentration ratio of the field trials of these crops. In 1989-1990 and 
 1998, over 80% of all field trials were done by the top 
 four firms. Third, one firm, Monsanto, has conducted 
 over a third of all field trials in some years. 
 Another reason to look at these crops is that US policy makers are getting involved and helping in the supply of research 
 and technology in many ways--(related to preventing one company from becoming too powerful) activity, 
 public research, and strengthened patents. Concentration in these businesses has already attracted (related to preventing one company from becoming too powerful) 
 actions. When Monsanto got Holden's Foundation Seed Company in 1997, the government needed/demanded 
 Monsanto to continue to make corn germplasm available to other companies for some years. To get 
 approval for its purchase/getting/learning of DeKalb, Monsanto had 
 to remove restrictions on the use of other companies' 
 (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  in connection with Monsanto's (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  and give 
 up some of its plant change technology to the 
 
 Table 1). Soybeans and cotton were ranked third and 
 fifth in science research (match up each pair of items in order). We concentrate 
 only on the US because of the strong possible 
 hit/effect that personal acceptance may have had on the 
 development and adoption of transgenic varieties in 
 Europe in the late 1990s. 
 There has been growing concentration in the seed 
 markets of these crops in the US. Mergers and purchases have led to a corn seed market in 1997 in which 
 Pioneer/DuPont had over 40% of total sales, Monsanto 
 had 20% and a large number of companies competed 
 for the other 40% or less. "In addition, Monsanto's 
 (instance of buying something for money) of Holden's [Foundation Seed Company] 
 gives them big influence over germplasm sold 
 to other companies; Holdens' germplasm is guessed 
 to be part of an added 30-40% of called/labeled seed 
 sales" (Hayenga, 1998). These two companies are also 
 leaders in soybean seed sales. Each company's share 
 of (bought) seed is around 20%. Finally, in cotton, 
 one company, Delta and Pineland, which was almost 
 (bought something for money) by Monsanto, controls more than 70% of 
 the seed market. The next largest company has about 
 16% (Hayenga). 
 Sales of the science-(tiny chemical assembly instruction inside of living things)  part of these seeds 
 are even more (focused one's effort/increased/mainly studied) although levels of concentration are (lowering in number/getting worse) as more (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  owned by more 
 companies come available to buy. Monsanto provides 
 the Bt and RR (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  for corn, soybeans and cotton not 
 only to their own small companies, but also to Pioneer and 
 other competitors (Rausser et al., 1999). Competing 
 varieties of Bt and herbicide tolerance (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  are available from American Cyanamid, Aventis, Syngenta and 
 
 % 
 
 100 
 
 45 
 
 90 
 
 40 
 
 80 
 70 
 
 35 
 
 60 
 50 
 
 No. of 
 25 Firms 
 20 
 
 30 
 
 40 
 30 
 
 15 
 10 
 
 20 
 10 
 
 5 
 
 0 
 
 0 
 1989 
 
 1990 
 
 1991 
 
 1992 
 
 1993 
 
 1994 
 
 159 
 
 1995 
 
 1996 
 
 1997 
 
 1998 
 
 Source: APHIS, 1999 
 Fig. 1. Concentration of research and number of firms. 
 
 Monsanto 
 4 Firm 
 Total No. 
 of Firms 
 
 160 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 University of California. Also, it appears that 
 the FTC held up Monsanto's (instance of buying something for money) of Delta and 
 Pineland until Monsanto sold off their cotton seed 
 less important thing/small company Stoneville. 
 The Federal government is also getting involved and helping in these 
 markets by investing a lot of public 
 money in corn, cotton and soybean research including (related to a plan to reach a goal) research like the corn (total set of tiny chemical assembly instructions of a living thing) project. 
 In soybeans, public varieties still make up about 
 10% of soybean sales. Finally, the government helps through the patent system. The US system allows patenting of plant varieties, (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  and science 
 tools unlike most other countries in the world where 
 plant varieties and (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  can not be patented. The results received/got for the US can help inform science policymaking in other countries and especially in the 
 (related to Europe) Community (EU) where the US companies 
 are quite active. 
 
 3. The money-based model 
 Arrow (1962) argued that the payoff to a successful 
 firm in an R&amp;D race would depend on the structure 
 of the market for its invention of new things. Phillips (1971) extended this possible argument by pointing out that 
 the nature and structure of R&amp;D might feed back and 
 influence the structure of the market for the resulting 
 inventions of new things. Schumpeter was among the first to (see/hear/become aware of) 
 that in more competitive businesses the rate of invention of new things seemed to be higher, but in his later writings 
 he points out that market concentration can lead to 
 more R&amp;D. In this paper, we scientifically test a Schumpeterian model in which market structure and R&amp;D 
 are both/together and endogenously decided/figured out (Levin and 
 Reiss, 1984; Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1980a). We also 
 clearly model and test the influence of appropriability and public R&amp;D on private research spending, and 
 this way possibly industry structure. 
 Besides the link between industry structure and invention of new things, Schumpeter is also connected with the related idea that the rate of invention of new things might depend on 
 firm size. Kohn and Scott (1982) examine the possible relationships between firm-specific R&amp;D scale 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) and firm size in a static model. They find 
 that relationships between firm size, R&amp;D and different 
 Schumpeterian guesses could be influenced by differences in sizes of potential (your share of sales out of all sales)s, opportu- 
 
 nities for risk spreading, costs of capital, and access to 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) marketing channels. The message from this 
 books is that the relationship between a firm's size 
 and its rate of invention of new things is probably energetic in once-a-year data. Cohen and Levin (1989) find that most of the 
 scientific book-related testing Schumpeterian guesses 
 is (not resulting in anything) because of failures to focus on factors 
 explaining interindustry differences in rates of invention of new things and firm mixed-up nature.1 They point the way 
 forward by pointing to/showing the need to measure interindustry differences in the availability of (related to computers and science) opportunity and the appropriability of the returns from 
 invention of new things. 
 We develop a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) that clearly thinks about/believes 
 these factors, and we appeal to Cohen et al.'s (1987) 
 finding that firm size has a small, unimportant interindustry effect on R&amp;D strength when (related to computers and science) opportunity and appropriability are held constant. 
 It seems quite likely that the same will be true when 
 three (compared to something else) almost the same  farming-based science crops 
 contain the 'industries'. Levin et al. (1985) find 
 this to be true across 13 (two-digit SIC) businesses. 
 The remaining question then is whether the data on 
 these three crops will allow us to identify significant 
 cross-crop effects of concentration on R&amp;D strength 
 in group US data. 
 We employ a static model with identical firms and 
 assume firms (make as big as possible) make money by choosing only their 
 levels of output and expenses on R&amp;D. Firm i's 
 R&amp;D (xi ) shifts its own cost function down, independently of the level of output chosen, and adds/gives 
 to the industry level of R&amp;D (Î£xi = X). The unit cost 
 of firm i is, 
 ci = c(xi , X) 
 
 (1) 
 
 where c1 , c2 &amp;lt; 0, and c11 , c22 &amp;gt; 0,2 with positive, 
 curving out returns to own and industry R&amp;D.3 X is an 
 argument in the firm's cost function because the firm 
 may benefit from invention of new things spill-overs within its industry. Spill-overs are an external scale (process of people making, selling, and buying things) that 
 1 A few businesses are necessary in most scientific studies to 
 allow for the collection of (good) enough data to test for significant 
 relationships. 
 2 Number-based subscripts represent first or second derivatives with 
 respect to first (1) or second (2) arguments. 
 3 Moschini and Lapan (1997) argue that for farming-based input 
 inventions of new things, product and process inventions of new things can both be modeled 
 as downward moves/changes in the cost function of the creative firm. 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 firms may attempt to control, so we solve the model 
 in a way that allows us to watch the appropriability 
 of own R&amp;D (xi ). The problem of firm i is then to, 
 = [p(Q) aˆ' c(xi , X)]qi aˆ' xi 
 
 Max 
 qi ,xi 
 
 (2) 
 
 i 
 
 where Q = Î£qi is industry output, and p(X) is the 
 inverse industry demand curve for science seed varieties. 
 There is some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that farming-based input markets are oligopolistic with free-entry (Barton, 1998; 
 Harl, 2000). We therefore assume that firms make 
 Cournot guesses (related to/looking at/thinking about) the output levels chosen 
 by all other firms. For firm i this hints dQ/dqi = 1. 
 Guess-related differences/different versions about the response of input industry R&amp;D to a change in one firm's R&amp;D level 
 could be more complicated. To leave open a full range 
 of guesses concerning inter-firm (related to a plan to reach a goal) R&amp;D behaviour we assume dX/dxi = Î¸i , so Î¸ is a function 
 of xi (may or may not happen, depending on something) on X (xi /X). Later we explore how 
 changes in Î¸ influence the scientific results, but we do 
 not guess Î¸ directly.4 Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980b) 
 show that the (money made/good thing received) of each firm in an industry, in a 
 almost the same  model, is zero in the long-run with matching 
 free entry and exit. 
 Following Levin and Reiss, the first-order conditions for (biggest increase/best possible extent) of the (money made/good thing received) of the ith firm are 
 si 
 p 1aˆ' 
 = c, 
 (3) 
 Îµ 
 and 
 aˆ'(c1 + c2 Î¸i )qi = 1 
 
 (4) 
 
 where Îµ = p/Qp1 , is the price ability to stretch of demand, 
 and si = qi /Q, is the ith firm's (your share of sales out of all sales). With 
 Cournot guesses in output, equilibria exist under a 
 wide range of limit/guideline values. Using the matching 
 industry zero-profit condition, 
 [p(Q) aˆ' c(xi , X)]Q = nx 
 4 
 
 (5) 
 
 It is also possible to think of the output and R&amp;D levels chosen by the firms as the result of a matching Nash (one-shot) 
 noncooperative game. Introducing energetic games like Stackelberg 
 leaders and followers would be quite appealing because of the 
 possibility that there is a first-mover advantage in agbiotech research, but this is beyond the extent of/the range of our paper. Instead we make 
 the convenient idea (you think is true) that (related to computers and science) opportunity and appropriability control for firm mixed-up nature in (related to a plan to reach a goal) behaviour, 
 the same idea (you think is true) that we made for firm size. 
 
 161 
 
 so that markets clear, and after dividing both sides of 
 (5) by total money/money income, we have two (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) equations: 
 1 
 (qi ) = Îµ(qi )R, 
 n 
 and 
 R 
 (xi /X) 
 = Î±(xi /X) + Î³(X/xi )Î¸ 
 1aˆ'R 
 n 
 
 (6) 
 
 (7) 
 
 where n is the number of firms in each input market as 
 a function of the output of firm i, so 1/n is the Herfindahl index of concentration (H) for equally sized firms. 
 R is the ratio of industry R&amp;D to sales.In Eq. (7), 
 (1 aˆ' R) is the share of sales money/money income that does not go 
 to R&amp;D in the industry, and Î± is firm ability to stretch of unit 
 cost with respect to own R&amp;D (xi ) holding industry 
 R&amp;D constant. Since R&amp;D is assumed to be focused 
 on cost-reducing inventions of new things, Î± represents the working well of research or (related to computers and science) opportunity. Also in 
 (7), Î³ is the ability to stretch of unit cost with respect to input 
 industry R&amp;D (X) holding own R&amp;D constant. This 
 ability to stretch is a measure of the extent to which research 
 results are appropriable by the clever creator or spill-over 
 to lower the costs of other firms. As long as the guess-related difference/different version, Î¸, is positive, higher levels of Î³ will 
 be connected with increased appropriability.5 Concentration and R&amp;D strength are both/together endogenous (and 
 are functions of the choice (number or thing that changes), output) and the 
 possible model is identified by Î± (that is a function 
 of the other choice (number or thing that changes), R&amp;D). 
 The input market elasticities, Î±, Îµ, and Î³ are time 
 version in the possible model, so to scientifically guess the model with time series data, added/more structure must be forced on (6) and (7). By assuming that 
 both the hidden (under) cost and inverse demand functions 
 have constant elasticities, and after taking natural logs 
 of Eq. (6), the scientific model becomes: 
 Log H = constant1 + Î²1 log (R) + e1 
 
 (8) 
 
 R 
 = constant2 + Î²2 Î± + Î²3 (Î¸Î³H) + e2 
 1aˆ'R 
 
 (9) 
 
 where R is industry R&amp;D strength, Î²1,...,3 are guessed coefficients, and the e1,2 are leftover/extra errors. 
 5 If the behavioural limit/guideline Î¸ were negative, it would mean 
 that firms are free-riders to the extent that a 1$ increase by firm 
 i produces cutbacks of more that 1$ in the R&amp;D expenses of 
 the other firms. 
 
 162 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 Eq. (9) is not in logarithms so the model can be guessed both/together as a linear (happening together) system. The 
 possible model points to/shows appropriability should be 
 interacted with concentration (1/n) (when Î¸ is held 
 constant) in (9), so the guessed models provide information on the substitutability and (when two things work together equally well) 
 of appropriability and concentration. If Î²3 is positive 
 (negative), appropriability and concentration are (completes/goes along with) (substitutes). 
 The model is guessed as an independent linear 
 (happening together) system for each of the three crops (corn, 
 cotton and soybeans), and as a panel, assuming that 
 coefficients are (group of things that are all pretty much the same) across the crops, accounting for any relationship between the errors in 
 the equations for different crops. There are a few 
 approaches available for instrumental changeable guess of panel data. Baltagi (1981) shows that one-way 
 error parts/pieces three-stage least squares reduces 
 to one-way error parts/pieces two-stage least squares 
 (EC2SLS) when the errors in Eqs. (8) and (9) are uncorrelated with each other. This appears to be the case 
 as we show in the results section. The model is identified scientifically by the use of first stage instruments 
 that are related to the (numbers that change/things that change) and uncorrelated 
 with the error terms. The first stage (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) that 
 we use are total US sales figures for rapeseed, rice 
 and sugarbeets. 
 
 4. Data 
 To test the hit/effect of concentration on research strength, our way of thinking/basic truth/rule goal, we have identified (numbers that change/things that change) 
 that measure concentration and research, and other important (numbers that change/things that change) that influence research strength. The 
 changeable names and data sources are listed in Table 2. 
 Concentration is measured as the Herfindahl index for 
 the industry, which for equally sized firms is equal to 
 the two-way of the number of firms.6 Science 
 research strength is measured as counts of science 
 crop field trials divided by total GM and non-GM seed 
 sales to take by force/take control of GM market (possible greatness or power).7 Field trials are 
 6 The possible model that we test assumes equally size firms, 
 so we maintain this idea (you think is true) in the creation of (numbers that change/things that change) to 
 test the model. The 4-firm concentration ratio displays not enough 
 inter-once-a-year (quality of changing over time or at different places). 
 7 Our strength (number or thing that changes) measures applied research, and we are 
 unable to decide/figure out how market structure might influence the 
 
 a good substitute for private (or unique) data on applied R&amp;D expenses by crop. Every time a company wishes to 
 test a plant variety that it has changed with a foreign (tiny chemical assembly instruction inside of living things)  it must apply to the USDA for permission to 
 test this variety in experimental fields. Field trials are 
 not the perfect expense (number or thing that changes) because of other 
 random and (related to managing and running a company or organization) factors in the GM-crop approval process that can influence the number of field 
 trials, but they do measure research activity and not 
 just research success. For corn, for example, only 14 
 GM varieties have been approved for commercial use 
 while there have been 2591 field trials of GM corn 
 varieties (Table 1). Our possible model focuses on 
 the current relationship between these (numbers that change/things that change), abstracts from energetic (things to carefully think about), and points to/shows that 
 research strength may be influenced by at least two 
 groups of factors in addition to concentration. 
 The first set of these other factors are those that shift 
 Î± or (related to computers and science) opportunity. Some of these factors 
 are crop specific public research and plant breeding, 
 crop clearly stated/particular change possibilities, and the abuse of spillovers from public products (that are bought and sold). We measure 
 this as the number of scientists (scientist years, SYs) 
 at the USDA and the land grant universities working 
 on crop specific public research as recorded in the 
 USDA's Current Research (List of items/produce a list of items) System (CRIS). 
 Research expenses from the same source did not 
 provide useful results, probably because of the big (related to managing and running a company or organization) and overhead costs included in 
 these expenses. The more scientists are working 
 on a crop, the more likely they are to find new research methods, new (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things), new germplasm or new 
 knowledge about the crop that will reduce a private 
 firm's costs of developing a new variety. We applied 
 a simple lag to the data and in the name of cheapness 
 avoided more detailed distributed lag structures. 
 Firms' expectations about (related to computers and science) opportunity are likely to be based on the cost of research and 
 the chance of developing and making money from a 
 new product. This expectation will in turn depend on 
 the cost of research inputs, and the time and effort 
 needed to develop a commercial product. We tried, 
 unsuccessfully, to create a (number or thing that changes) for past research 
 success. (related to computers and science) opportunity to improve each 
 desire of firms to work at basic research, such as (study of the tiny chemical instructions within cells), 
 which could be influenced by quite a different set of factors 
 because of the long-term nature of basic research. 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 163 
 
 Table 2 
 Corn, cotton and soybeans science data, 1989-1998 
 (number or thing that changes) name 
 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 How to measure 
 
 Source 
 
 Research strength 
 
 Private applied science R&amp;D 
 per unit of seed sales 
 Public research expense 
 
 Once-a-year field trials by crop per 1 US$_$ of seed 
 sales of that crop 
 Scientist years (SYs) by valuable thing 
 
 APHIS and ERS USDA 
 CRIS USDA 
 
 Science patents 
 
 Patents of private firms by crop 
 
 Derwent world patent index 
 
 R&amp;D concentration 
 Huge company 
 
 1/number of firms managing and doing field trials on a crop 
 Percentage of trials by huge company companiesa 
 
 Calculated from APHIS data 
 Calculated from APHIS data 
 
 (related to computers and science) 
 opportunity 
 Appropriability 
 Concentration 
 
 Sources: APHIS (1999). Seed sales are calculated using the value of seed (bought something for money) per area of land  when available from Gill (1996) and filling 
 in more the last few years using the value of seed (bought something for money) per area of land  in 1996 multiplied by the spread around area of the crop. Scientist years are 
 unpublished data from the Current Research Information System (CRIS) of USDA in different years. The number of issued science patents 
 by private firms is supplied by Derwent Information's Derwent World Patent Index. 
 a These include firms owned by huge company chemical or drug making companies, (in other words) Monsanto, DuPont, Novartis, Agrevo, 
 Astra/Zeneca and Dow. 
 
 clearly stated/particular crop will be influenced mostly by public 
 part/area research on that crop. Public scientists and labs 
 also carry out contract research for the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) 
 that is included in the CRIS data. 
 Second, we control for factors affecting Î³ or appropriability. We measure this by the number of science 
 patents on each crop. Firms' expectations of their ability to appropriate a share of the total cost savings due 
 to research will depend on the legal structure of IPRs, 
 the physical ease of copying the invention, and the 
 firms' abilities to stay ahead of competitors. Also, (one company that controls too much) power arising from factors other than 
 IPRs can also increase the ability of firms to take by force/take control of a 
 share of the market, and we include market size in the 
 research strength (number or thing that changes). Since corn is a combination crop, 
 it is hard for farmers to replant the seed. However, 
 companies still feel it is important to protect their blended varieties, breeding ways of doing things, inbred lines and 
 (tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things)  from copying by other companies. They do this 
 using utility patents whenever possible. 
 Cotton and soybean seeds are not F1 combinations. Companies producing these crops can only protect them by 
 means of plant person (who helps animals have babies)'s rights and utility patents--not 
 the technical protection given by combinations. Companies will only go to the expense of patenting if they 
 think that there is a market for their new technology, 
 and that the patents will actually reduce spill-overs. 
 Therefore the number of science patents on each crop 
 reflects in part, companies' tests of whether 
 IPRs really provide appropriability for their technologies or not. Instrumental (numbers that change/things that change) were introduced 
 
 to handle the (happening at the same time) in the possible model in 
 Section 3, but are also necessary because patents are 
 probably in a planned way related to R&amp;D through some 
 form of research production function. 
 
 5. Results 
 From previous research and other information that 
 we have collected on the farming-based input industry, 
 it is not clear whether increased concentration will 
 increase or decrease research strength, defined as 
 research output per unit of total GM and non-GM 
 industry sales. Concentration could increase appropriability, which could increase R&amp;D strength. 
 (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) and scope in conducting research, 
 and getting and defending IPRs on research results, 
 could increase the working well of a unit of research 
 and could increase research strength. However, concentration might also reduce the competitive pressure 
 to carry out research. (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) in research 
 received/got within a firm could be offset by diseconomies 
 of (had everything controlled by one central place) slow-working management. Also, 
 risk disgust may increase with increased concentration, as small, high-risk creative firms are 
 eliminated. 
 (in the opposite way), research strength may or may not lead 
 to increased concentration. An (reward or reason for doing something) for (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) and concentration may be to spread-out the sunk 
 cost of research, especially the large investments that 
 are needed/demanded to carry out research in basic science- 
 
 164 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 Table 3 
 Two-stage least squares (2SLS) guesses of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) equations for individual crops 
 Move backwardors 
 Corn (n = 9) 
 R&amp;D strength 
 Patentsa concentration 
 Public R&amp;D (5 year lag) 
 Constant 
 Durbin-Watson statistic 
 Akaike information judging requirement 
 Cotton (n = 10) 
 R&amp;D strength 
 Patentsa concentration 
 Public R&amp;D (15 year lag) 
 Constant 
 Durbin-Watson statistic 
 Akaike information judging requirement 
 Soybeans (n = 10) 
 R&amp;D strength 
 Patentsa concentration 
 Public R&amp;D (20 year lag) 
 Constant 
 Durbin-Watson statistic 
 Akaike information judging requirement 
 a 
 b 
 
 Industry concentration equation 
 
 R&amp;D equation 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-statistic 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-statistic 
 
 aˆ'0.48 
 
 aˆ'9.69b 
 0.04 
 0.0002 
 
 2.33a 
 1.76a 
 
 aˆ'3.99 
 
 aˆ'22.14b 
 
 1.99 
 0.48 
 aˆ'0.56 
 
 0.89 
 aˆ'2.72 
 aˆ'4.45b 
 0.07 
 0.0004 
 
 aˆ'2.56 
 
 aˆ'10.95b 
 
 1.12 
 0.46 
 
 1.41 
 aˆ'0.51 
 
 aˆ'0.81 
 
 aˆ'8.99b 
 
 aˆ'4.44 
 
 aˆ'13.88b 
 
 2.14 
 0.56 
 
 2.07a 
 1.79a 
 
 aˆ'0.007 
 0.0005 
 aˆ'0.04 
 
 aˆ'3.61a 
 4.65b 
 aˆ'1.43a 
 
 1.62 
 aˆ'5.17 
 
 Significant at 90% confidence level. 
 Significant at 99% confidence level. 
 
 nology. The growth of huge company farming-based firms 
 may have resulted from a desire to spread the cost of 
 science research over as large a share of the 
 seed industry as possible and, to span as many businesses and the largest areas possible. We 
 tested a huge company firm concentration (number or thing that changes), but 
 it was not significant. 
 To resolve these questions scientifically we guess 
 Eqs. (8) and (9) individually for each crop. Table 3 
 shows the results. Both the industry concentration 
 equation and the R&amp;D equations are correctly specified, as pointed to/showed by the disease-identifying statistics. The 
 evidence is that industry concentration and 
 R&amp;D strength are (at the same time) decided/figured out as in 
 the possible model. Also, the guessed R&amp;D 
 coefficients in the concentration equations are all 
 negative. This points to/shows an inverse relationship between concentration and research strength for corn, 
 cotton and soybeans in the US. These coefficients are 
 elasticities, so a one-unit decrease in R&amp;D strength 
 arising from one less field trial or a one-unit increase 
 
 in sales (in thousands US$_$), is connected a less than 
 one unit increase in concentration or a (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) 
 decrease in the number of firms. Because of this, fewer firms 
 do less research, or increased concentration reduces 
 R&amp;D strength. 
 The results for the three crops are almost the same, even 
 though the crops themselves are quite different. Cotton and soybeans are dicotyledons that could be (having characteristics that were changed by people) earlier and are still more easily and 
 cheaply changed and might therefore be expected 
 to display a higher research strength than corn, which 
 is a monocotyledon.8 In reality, great research efforts 
 were made to improve corn because of its large market 
 (possible greatness or power). The first field trials on GM cotton and soybeans were in 1989, but GM corn was not far behind 
 and appeared in the field in 1990. 
 8 Monocots have mostly been changed using the biolistic 
 gun, which was and still is much less (producing a lot with very little waste) and reliable than 
 the agrobacterium process, which has only (not very long ago) been changed 
 to be useful for monocots. 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 165 
 
 Table 4 
 Error parts/pieces panel data two-stage least squares (EC2SLS) guesses of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) equations (corn, cotton and soybeans combined) 
 Move backwardors (n = 29) 
 
 R&amp;D strength 
 Patentsa concentration 
 Public R&amp;D (4-year lag) 
 Constant 
 F-statistic (14,14) 
 Log Amemiya problem judging requirement 
 Akaike information judging requirement 
 a 
 b 
 
 ragedright Industry concentration equation without group dummy (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 ragedright R&amp;D equation 
 with period effects 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-statistic 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 t-statistic 
 
 aˆ'0.0006 
 
 aˆ'2.14a 
 
 aˆ'1.40 
 
 aˆ'4.54b 
 
 aˆ'0.0005 
 0.003 
 aˆ'0.44 
 
 aˆ'2.15a 
 2.65b 
 aˆ'1.08 
 
 0.172 
 3.009 
 
 8.9b 
 aˆ'4.96 
 aˆ'2.23 
 
 Significant at 95% confidence level. 
 Significant at 99% confidence level. 
 
 In the R&amp;D equation, patents and industry concentration are (completes/goes along with) for corn and cotton and 
 substitutes for soybeans. The more concentration in 
 the soybean industry, the fewer the patents and lower 
 the appropriability of private soybean science R&amp;D. 
 This result will be shown to hold up in the panel 
 model of the three crops combined (below). The reported coefficients for this appropriability (number or thing that changes) assume Cournot-Nash guesses (Î¸ = 1) which hints firms are not able to steal private research results 
 directly from their competitors. Assuming that firms 
 are subject to research free-riding (Î¸ &amp;lt; 1) increases 
 the size of the reported coefficient on the interaction 
 term (along with something else/related to something else).9 
 Public R&amp;D has a small positive and significant 
 effect on all three crops. The lag on public research for 
 soybeans is four times longer than the lag on public 
 corn R&amp;D. This result points to/shows the (compared to other things) quick 
 hit/effect that public R&amp;D has had on private corn R&amp;D 
 strength. Ignoring the falls behind, a public scientist-year 
 of research on cotton or soybeans has twice the hit/effect 
 of a almost the same  portion of research on corn, but the 
 effect takes three to four times longer. 
 There are some important differences between the 
 results for the individual crops, with different (and 
 large) R&amp;D elasticities and patents and concentration 
 that can be substitutes or (completes/goes along with). To (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) 
 the cross-crop effects of strength and concentration, 
 the results from guessing the model as panel data 
 9 We are unable to guess free-riding endogenously in a linear 
 model. 
 
 are presented in Table 4. These overall results provide reasonable guesses. A 100-unit decrease in R&amp;D 
 strength arising from one-hundred fewer field trials 
 or a 100-unit increase in sales (in thousands US$_$), is 
 connected with a 6% increase in concentration, or 
 a (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) decrease in the number of firms. The 
 concentration equation is guessed without group 
 dummy (numbers that change/things that change) and with an overall constant, as 
 pointed to/showed by the possible model.10 The negative 
 signs on the R&amp;D elasticities are confirmed, but by a 
 smaller but anyway significant coefficient in the 
 panel guess. 
 In the panel data form of the R&amp;D equation in 
 Table 4, the interaction term is also smaller than in the 
 individual equations. Overall, patents and concentration are substitutes. More concentration is connected 
 with fewer patents. One (understanding/ explanation) of this result is 
 that as firms develop market power, they have fewer 
 competitors to protect their copyright/patent from. 
 This result could also be related to the earlier finding 
 that concentration and R&amp;D strength are inversely related. More concentration could mean fewer patents 
 because there are fewer research results to protect. 
 Public R&amp;D still has a small positive sign in the 
 panel model and the cross-crop lag is only four years 
 in the overall model. Constants are included in the 
 models because of the indication of an overall constant 
 in the possible model (9), and individual and period 
 10 We (examined closely) the properties of the price elasticities of demand for corn, cotton and soybeans that make up the constant 
 in Eq. (8) and found them to be time invariant and quite almost the same 
 across crops. 
 
 166 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 fixed effects are pointed to/showed by disease-identifying statistics for 
 the guess of the panel version of (9). The overall constant is not significant in the R&amp;D equation, 
 but is maintained for (state of always working or appearing the same way) with the possible 
 model. The average simple relationship between the 
 extras/payments of the concentration and R&amp;D equations is 
 only aˆ'0.06 pointing to/showing the appropriateness of EC2SLS 
 for panel data over more complicated full information 
 other choices. 
 
 6. Ends/end results 
 The scientific results from the guess of a (happening together) research profit function point to/show an inverse 
 relationship between firm concentration in corn, cotton and soybean seed markets, and R&amp;D strength in 
 these US markets. One (understanding/ explanation) of this result is 
 that increased competition in R&amp;D, as pointed to/showed by 
 low levels of market concentration and the participation of more competing firms in the GM crop approval 
 process, is positively related to R&amp;D strength. As the 
 number of firms (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) through mergers and purchases, the strength of R&amp;D fell, holding appropriability and technical opportunity constant. 
 Schumpeter's early idea that concentration reduces 
 the (rewards or reasons for doing something) to do research may have been the correct one for the seed (companies that sell the most of certain items) in the US. We do 
 not find support for his later statement that the opposite 
 may be true. The levels of concentration in the seed 
 industry in the US raise concerns about maintaining or 
 increasing levels of research activity and a steady supply of productive new farming-based input inventions of new things. 
 The huge companies may have already begun a cycle of 
 removal (or sale) and spinning-off of farming-based divisions 
 that could lead to increases in research strength in the 
 future if the rebuilding results in more firms doing 
 farming-based research. 
 Added/more work is needed on energetic aspects 
 of these Schumpeterian relationships. These aspects 
 include the influence of intertemporal (related to a plan to reach a goal) behaviour, and how changing firm size and connected 
 access to (money-related) and (workers in general/hiring, training, and firing department) might affect 
 the rate of invention of new things, as mergers and purchases 
 cause both the number of firms in an industry and 
 their sizes to change. 
 We attempt to control for these factors in our static 
 model with measures of (related to computers and science) opportunity 
 
 and research appropriability. Public research representing the level of (related to computers and science) opportunity has 
 a small positive and significant effect in all of the 
 model (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required), pointing to/showing that public research 
 stimulates private science R&amp;D. The spoiling of 
 money available for public R&amp;D since 1978 may be a significant problem for a few reasons. The level of public 
 research might be less than best given the high 
 rates of return to public research, but the low level 
 may also limit the amount of private research. 
 Whether appropriability, measured by numbers of 
 patents, stimulates or reduces research strength depends on the crop. Concentration by itself is inversely 
 related to research strength, and concentration has 
 been increasing over the last few years in these valuable things. 
 Patenting is a complement to concentration for corn 
 and cotton, which hints that patenting works with 
 concentration to reduce the amount of research. For 
 soybeans and when the three crops are combined together, 
 patenting and concentration are substitutes which hints that patents are working to increase research 
 while concentration is pulling it down. The differences 
 in the way the individual crops react to patenting may 
 be because corn varieties are protected 
 from copying by being combinations. For cotton it is (compared to other things) easy to enforce plant people (who help animals have babies) rights because 
 all seeds have to go through a few seed plants. So, 
 patents are a substitute for concentration in soybeans 
 because they are a (compared to other things) more important means 
 of gaining appropriability than in the two other crops. 
 These results suggest a few policy effects/results/suggestions. 
 First, it appears to be important to secure/make sure of competition 
 in science invention of new things markets since reduced competition is related to reduced R&amp;D. Second, public 
 research can stimulate private research, which provides a reason for government investments in public 
 research in addition to high social rates of return. 
 Third, patents may be an important way to stimulate R&amp;D in valuable things where technical means of 
 protecting copyright/patent are weak. 
 
 Responses 
 (money-related) Support for this research was given 
 under Cooperative Agreement No. 43-3AEL-9-80050 
 between the USDA and Rutgers. We wish to thank 
 Sanjib Bhuyan, John King, Mike Ollinger, Robbin 
 
 D.E. Schimmelpfennig et al. / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 157-167 
 
 Shoemaker, and two referees for very useful comments. We also express appreciation to people (who were part of a study, etc.) in 
 (school) courses in the Department of Farming-based and Applied Money flow, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA; the 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow and Marketing, Rutgers University, NJ; the USDA Money-flow experts 
 Group workshop, Money flow of Farming-based Research, Issues 2000 (school) course Series, Beltsville, MD; 
 and the USDA (meeting to discuss things/meeting together) The American Person 
 in the Changing Food System, Rosslyn, VA. The 
 views expressed are not necessarily those of the US 
 Department of Farming. 
 
 References 
 Animal and Plant Health (careful examination of something) Service (APHIS), 1999. 
 Data retrieved December 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
 http://www.nbiap.vt.edu/. 
 Arrow, K.J., 1962. Money-based welfare and the portion of 
 useful things/valuable supplies for invention. In: Nelson, R.R. (Ed.), The Rate and 
 Direction of Clever Activity: Money-based and Social Factors. 
 Princeton University Press for the National Bureau of Money-based 
 Research, Princeton, NJ, pp. 609-625. 
 Baltagi, B.H., 1981. (happening together) equations with error 
 parts/pieces. J. Economet. 17, 189-200. 
 Barton, J., 1998. The hit/effect of modern patent law on 
 plant science research. In: Eberhardt, S.A., Shands, H.L., 
 Collins, W., Lower, R.L. (Eds.), Thinking-related Property Rights III, 
 Worldwide  (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) Useful things/valuable supplies: Access and Property Rights. Crop 
 Science (community of people/all good people in the world) of America, Madison, WI. 
 Cohen, W.M., Levin, R.C., 1989. Scientific studies of invention of new things 
 and market structure. In: Schmalensee, R., Willig, R.D. 
 (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. II. Elsevier, 
 pp. 1059-1107. 
 Cohen, W.M., Levin, R.C., Mowery, D.C., 1987. Firm size and 
 R&amp;D strength: a re-examination. J. Indus. Econ. 35, 543- 
 564. 
 Dasgupta, P., Stiglitz, J., 1980a. Doubt, industrial structure, 
 and the speed of R&amp;D. RAND J. Econ. 11, 1-28. 
 Dasgupta, P., Stiglitz, J., 1980b. Industrial structure and the nature 
 of new and interesting activity. Econ. J. 90, 266-293. 
 Frey, K.J., 1996. National plant breeding study I. Special Report 
 98. Iowa Farming and Home Money flow Experiment Station. 
 Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 51 pp. 
 Fuglie, K.O., 2000. Trends in farming-based research expenses 
 in the United States. In: Fuglie, K.O., Schimmelpfennig, D.E. 
 (Eds.), Public-Private Collabouration in Farming-based Research: 
 
 167 
 
 New Institutional Arrangements and Money-based Effects/results/suggestions. 
 Iowa State University Press, Ames, IA, pp. 9-23. 
 Gill, M., 1996. Seed use, costs, and trade. AREI Updates, 
 No. 10, Money-based Research Service, US Department of 
 Farming, Washington, DC, 4 pp. Retrieved 6 November 
 2002 from the World Wide Web: http://www.ers.usda.gov/ 
 (books, magazines, etc.)/arei/96upd/upd96-10.pdf. 
 Harl, N.E., 2000. The age of contract farming: results 
 of concentration in input supply. J. Farming 18, 115-127. 
 Hayenga, M., 1998. (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change in the science seed 
 and chemical (group of businesses or buildings). AgBioForum. 1, 43-55. 
 Retrieved 8 January 2001 from the World Wide Web: 
 http://www.agbioforum.missouri.edu/. 
 Huffman, W.E., Evenson, R.E., 1992. (things that are given/work that's done) of public and 
 private science and technology to US farming-based working well. 
 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 74, 751-756. 
 Jorgenson, D.W., Gollop, F.M., 1992. Working well growth in US 
 farming: a (after the war) (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Am. J. Agric. Econ. 74, 
 746-750. 
 Just, R.E., Hueth, D.L., 1993. Multimarket abuse: the case 
 of science and chemicals. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 75, 936- 
 945. 
 Kohn, M., Scott, J.T., 1982. Scale (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) in research and 
 development: the Schupeterian guess. J. Indus. Econ. 30, 
 239-249. 
 Levin, R.C., Cohen, W.M., Mowery, D.C., 1985. R&amp;D 
 appropriability, opportunity, and market structure: new (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 on some Schumpeterian guesses. Am. Econ. Rev. 75, 20-24. 
 Levin, R.C., Reiss, P.C., 1984. Tests of a Schumpeterian model 
 of R&amp;D and market structure. In: Griliches, Z. (Ed.), R&amp;D, 
 Patents, and Working well. The University of Chicago Press 
 for the National Bureau of Money-based Research, Chicago, 
 pp. 175-208. 
 Moschini, G., Lapan, H., 1997. Copyright/patent rights and the 
 welfare effects of farming-based R&amp;D. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 79, 
 1229-1242. 
 National Farming-based Statistics Service (NASS), 2000. Land. 
 Farming-based Statistics Board, US Department of Farming, 
 Washington, DC, 30 June. 
 Ollinger, M., Pope, L., 1995. Plant science: out of the 
 labouratory and into the field. Agric. Econ. Rept. No. 697, 
 Money-based Research Service, US Department of Farming, 
 Washington, DC, April, 13 pp. 
 Phillips, A., 1971. Technology and market structure: a study of the 
 aircraft industry. Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, 235 pp. 
 Rausser, G., Scotchmer, S., Simon, L., 1999. Thinking-related 
 property and market structure in farming. In: (series of events) 
 of the Paper Presentation to the Conference, The shape 
 of the Coming Farming-based Science Change: 
 (related to a plan to reach a goal) Investment and Policy Approaches from an Money-based 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Rome, Italy, 17-19 June 1999, 29 pp. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
