AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Controlling farming-based nonpoint water pollution: 
 costs of starting the Maryland Water Quality 
 Improvement Act of 1998* 
 Doug Parker* 
 Farming-based and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 The Maryland Water Quality Improvement Act of 1998 (WQIA) tries to create (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and other benefits to the 
 Chesapeake Bay through reductions in nonpoint source nutrient pollution. This paper carefully studies the money-based effects of the 
 WQIA on farming-based users of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) (commercial (material that makes plants grow better)s or animal poop/fertilizers) and on (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers in the state of 
 Maryland. The net money-based effects to each of these groups are guessed along with some discussion of the distribution of 
 the hits/effects. Recognition of the distribution of the hits/effects allows for the test of possible policies to address negative 
 hits/effects. Added/more sections of the WQIA are discussed in terms of their ability to shift the distribution of the hits/effects or 
 to provide partial payment to those most affected. The WQIA is the most (serving to severely limit or control) farming-based (pollution that comes from a wide area) 
 control law in the US. While the WQIA only controls nutrient use in the state of Maryland, other states, as well as the federal 
 government, are watching how this law is used. Many states are thinking about almost the same  laws. At the national level, the 
 United States Department of Farming and the United States (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Protection (service business/government unit/power/functioning) have issued draft guidelines 
 that will control (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) from animal operations in much the same way as the WQIA. Therefore, analyses of the money-based 
 hits/effects of the WQIA may be important in shaping policies in other states and at the national level. © 2000 Elsevier Science 
 B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: Q20 
 Keywords: Non point source pollution; Water quality; Nutrient management; Animal waste management 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 Runoff and leaking from farming-based fields are a 
 major source of nonpoint source pollution (US (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Protection (service business/government unit/power/functioning), 1996). Contaminated 
 (underground water that supplies wells) can have a bad effect when con- 
 
 i:c This project was partially supported by a cooperative agreement with the United States Department of Agticulture, Money-based 
 Research Service, #43-3AEL-8-80071. 
 *Tel.: +1-301-405-8042; fax: +1-301-314-9091. 
 E-mail n/dress{: dparker@arec.umd.edu (D. Parker). 
 
 sumed, or it can add/give to surface water worsening by moving sideways into streams, lakes or bays. 
 Direct runoff from fields also adds/gives to surface 
 water worsening. Excess (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) (nitrogen and 
 phosphorus) in surface waters cause (sudden, huge growths of seaweed, etc.) 
 and eutrophication, which can lead to problems with 
 odors, fish kills, and other (worries about the health of the Earth). 
 Control of nitrogen as an farming-based input has 
 been talked to/looked at for both commercial (material that makes plants grow better) and animal sources (Trachtenberg and Ogg, 1994). Methods 
 of control that have been talked about include input reduction, improved crop-watering/rinsing with water management, and cover 
 
 0169-5150/00/$- see front matter© 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PI!: SO 169-5150(00)00 112-2 
 
 24 
 
 D. Parker/ Farming-based Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 
 cropping in winter months (Helfand and House, 1995; 
 Wu and Segerson, 1995; Suppalla eta!., 1995; Lichtenberg et a!., 1994). Since most phosphorus from 
 farming-based lands is moved with (material that sinks in liquid), (material that sinks in liquid) control has been the major focus for phosphorus 
 control. What's more, because phosphorus binds to 
 the soil, phosphorus has not been a (underground water that supplies wells) concern. So, most research on phosphorus 
 management has focused on the control of (materials that sink in liquids). 
 (material that sinks in liquid) control measures that have been tested 
 include cover crops, buffer strips, no or low till, and 
 the use of polymers (Wu and Babcock, 1998; Hanson 
 eta!., 1993; Yiridoe and Weersink, 1998; Parker and 
 Caswell, 1999). 
 Increased densities in the (land-area-based/location) distribution 
 of animal production have led to excess amounts of 
 (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) in animal producing areas (Letson et a!., 
 1998). Since most animal waste is applied to the land 
 as a source of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.), the (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of the animal industry has created a situation of gross excesses 
 of certain (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) being land applied. Recent soil 
 science research has shown that very high phosphorus 
 levels can lead to (able to be dissolved in something) phosphorus runoff (Sims, 
 1998). So, phosphorus control in animal intense 
 areas must go beyond (material that sinks in liquid) keeping/holding onto/remembering. Recent 
 research on phosphorus management has focused on 
 current and other choice uses of animal wastes (Jacobs and Casler, 1979; Govindasamy and Cochran, 
 1995; Bosch and Napit, 1992; Parker, 1998). This 
 paper thinks about/believes nitrogen and phosphorus as part of a 
 (related to a large area) nutrient management plan. 
 
 2. Concerns for the Chesapeake Bay 
 In August of 1997, the Chesapeake Bay experienced 
 a few poisonous  outbreaks of the germ Pfiesteria piscicida. The germ was responsible for a few fish 
 kills (each killing thousands of fish) in rivers on the 
 Lower Shore of the Bay. Local fishermen and residents 
 complained of (feeling of spinning around and almost falling) and memory loss after exposure to those waters. The State of Maryland responded 
 by closing a few rivers and issuing health warnings 
 to local residents. Pjiesteria had been present in the 
 Neuse River in North Carolina for a few years and, 
 this way, there was the beginning of a scientific understanding of the germ. Maryland's fast response 
 to the germ helped scientific question (or investigation) into the life 
 
 cycle of the germ and the conditions under which it 
 becomes a poisonous  danger/risk to the waters in which it exists. 
 A scientific panel of experts was brought together to test the state of knowledge about the germ 
 (Cambridge Agreement, 1997). This panel ended/decided 
 that high levels of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) in the Bay's waters, especially phosphorus, had combined with warm waters, 
 high salinity levels, and high fish densities to create 
 an (surrounding conditions) good for the Pfiesteria outbreak. 
 Attention immediately focused on the large (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 industry in the area as the most probable source of 
 phosphorus pollution in the waters. 
 The Chesapeake Bay Program is a federal, state, 
 and local effort to coordinate clean up the Chesapeake Bay. This program has been working to improve 
 water quality throughout the bay area. One focus of 
 the program has been on farming-based nutrient management. In 1989, the Maryland Cooperative Extension 
 began a (something you choose to do, but is not required) program to get growers to adopt nutrient management plans for their land. Adoption of 
 nutrient management guidelines secures/makes sure of that growers 
 will credit all nutrient sources (commercial and animal waste), when making application decisions. Combining source information with information from soil 
 tests, growers only apply that level of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) necessary to reach their yield goals. If followed, this management plan would lessen farming-based nonpoint 
 source pollution from excess nutrient applications. 
 At the time the nutrient management program was 
 being put into use, concerns over excess nitrogen 
 applications were most important. Common soil science 
 wisdom was that phosphorus runoff could be controlled by controlling (materials that sink in liquids). So, nutrient management plans were written to limit the amount of 
 nitrogen applied (often resulting in over application of 
 phosphorus from animal waste by as much as 100%). 
 In the early 1990s, research began to suggest that in 
 very high phosphorus situations (material that sinks in liquid) control was 
 not enough to contain phosphorus. When the phosphorus level in the soil reaches high levels, dissolved 
 phosphorus could runoff fields, even when (materials that sink in liquids) 
 were controlled. For certain soils, nutrient management plans needed to address both nitrogen and phosphorus loads. To the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) industry, this meant that 
 application of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) as a nutrient source could 
 be greatly stopped. This could lead to excess amounts of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) on some farms. What's more, 
 many farms now using (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) would have 
 
 D. Parker/Agricultural Money flow 24 (2000) 23-3/ 
 
 25 
 
 to switch to commercial (material that makes plants grow better)s to (accomplish or gain with effort) the necessary nutrient balance. This would involve switching 
 from an mostly free source of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.), to having 
 to buy commercial nitrogen. There was a great 
 deal of (fighting force/bad feelings) by many growers to (without being forced) 
 putting into use phosphorus based nutrient management 
 plans. The Maryland Water Quality Improvement Act 
 of 1998 (WQIA) will require all growers to put into use nutrient management plans that think about/believe both 
 nitrogen and phosphorus in their recommendations. 
 
 already have nutrient management plans (Maryland 
 Cooperative Extension Service, 1997). So, the 
 WQIA will require that an added 1.2 million 
 areas of land put into use plans. These plans can be written by 
 private consultants, Maryland Cooperative Extension, 
 or growers that have been certified. The expected cost 
 to write these added/more plans is about $6.62 
 million. The plans will need to be updated every 
 few years. For some growers these added/more costs 
 may be offset by added/more (money made/good things received) from improved 
 management. 
 
 3. Farming-based hits/affects of water quality 
 regulation 
 
 3.2. (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers and users of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 
 The WQIA tries to create (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and 
 other benefits to the Chesapeake Bay through reductions in nonpoint source nutrient pollution. This 
 paper carefully studies the money-based effects of the WQIA 
 on farming-based users of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) (commercial (material that makes plants grow better)s or animal poop/fertilizers) for land computer program, and 
 on Maryland's (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers. The WQIA needs/demands 
 all growers to get and follow a nutrient management plan. The plans will control the amounts of 
 (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) (nitrogen and phosphorus) that may be applied to cropland. Maryland's large (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) industry 
 is mainly located in a small area on the Eastern Shore 
 of the Chesapeake Bay. The high densities of the industry will force it to find other choices to local land 
 application for some share of the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). This 
 paper thinks about/believes three other choices to local land application of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground): (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) for wholesale and 
 retail markets, energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), and transport to 
 alternative farming-based lands out of the area. The net 
 money-based effects for each of these other choices are 
 guessed along with some discussion of the distribution of the hits/effects. Recognition of the distribution of 
 the hits/effects allows us to test the (possibility of/possible happening of)  different policies to lessen the bad effects. Added/more 
 sections of the WQIA are discussed in terms of their 
 ability to shift the distribution of the hits/effects or to 
 provide partial payment to those most affected. 
 3.1. All crop growers 
 Almost all crop growers in Maryland will be 
 needed/demanded to have and put into use nutrient management 
 plans. Nearly 1 million areas of land of Maryland cropland 
 
 High concentration in the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) industry has lead 
 to county level excesses of the amounts of available 
 (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) from animal waste. As a base case, assume 
 that all (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is now applied as a crop nutrient source within the county of origin. (putting into) use of the WQIA will limit the amount of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 that can be used in any given county and, this way, require 
 that some (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) be put to alternative uses. The 
 other choice uses to in-county land application that will 
 be thought about/believed are: compost, energy production, and 
 transportation for land application outside the county 
 of origin. 
 The change in value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) resulting from 
 the WQIA can this way be broken into two parts; the 
 changes in value for in-county land applications, and 
 the added/more changes in value under each of the three 
 other choice use pictures/situations. The changes in value for 
 in-county land application will remain constant across 
 the three other choice use pictures/situations. 
 3.2.1. Guessing amounts of excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 Information on the total number of areas of land now 
 receiving (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is combined with guesses of 
 land restrictions under the WQIA to decide/figure out the 
 amount of excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) (that amount which can 
 no longer be used for in-county land application). Soil 
 test data from the University of Maryland's Soil Testing Lab are used to guess the number of areas of land of 
 cropland with lots of levels of phosphorus. There 
 is concern that the University of Maryland's Laboratory tests represent a (along with something else/related to something else) high number 
 of soils receiving animal poop/fertilizers and, therefore, this 
 data may overestimate the percentage of areas of land in 
 each county with high levels of phosphorus. So, 
 
 26 
 
 D. Parker/Agricultural Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 
 this analysis may overestimate the hits/effects of the 
 WQIA. 
 Since final rules are not yet available and 
 (good) enough information on the hits/effects of the proposed 
 rules are not available, some simplifying ideas (you think are true) concerning soil phosphorus test levels and 
 nutrient management recommendations are made. 
 For this analysis, assume that nitrogen based nutrient management plans will be needed/demanded for all land 
 with soil phosphorus test values below some pre-set 
 highest value. For land above this level, the addition 
 of phosphorus will not be allowed. 1 The money-based 
 hits/effects at five controlled soil phosphorus levels are 
 guessed: 50 (low), 100 (medium), 150 (best), 
 200 (high), 300 (too much/too many). 
 The first step in guessing the expected amounts 
 of excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is to guess how many areas of land 
 of in-county cropland will be (able to be picked/able to participate) to receive (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). This is combined with information on the 
 amount of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) produced in each county to 
 guess the amount of (trash or other things on the ground) that could be used for 
 in-county land application. This number is (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 
 to account for the fact that not every crop grower 
 will choose to use (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) over commercial 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s. For the Lower Shore (the major (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 production area), it is assumed that 20% of the 
 (able to be picked/able to participate) crop land will not use (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). This 
 number is increased to 40% for all other Maryland 
 counties. Fig. 1 shows the amounts of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 that will be used as an in-county crop nutrient source 
 under each controlled soil phosphorus level. As the 
 phosphorus restriction is relaxed (moving towards 
 300), the amount of in-county (layer of leaves, twigs, etc., on the ground) use increases. 
 Land with lots of soil phosphorus levels will 
 not be permitted to add any added/more phosphorus. 
 So, in the long run (15-30 years) land with lots of soil phosphorus levels will see phosphorus levels 
 drop. Eventually all cropland will again be available 
 for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground) (online or paper form that asks for a job, money, admission, etc.). The long run, in-county 
 It is expected that the final rules will require the use of a phosphorus index on lands above the pre-set soil phosphorus test level. Application of the phosphorus index is expected 
 to allow some unknown amount of land above this level to apply phosphorus. So, the ideas (you think are true) used in this analysis lead 
 to overestimates of the amount of land for which no phosphorus, 
 and so no (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) Jitter, will be allowed. Therefore, this analysis 
 overestimates the money-based effects at any given soil phosphorus 
 test level. 
 1 
 
 350000 
 "'300000 
 &#126; 250000 
 ill 200000 
 / 
 "" 150000 
 / 
 &#126; 
 &#126;/ 
 --Long Run 
 '§ 100000 
 0 
 -..a.-· 
 Short Run 
 il. 
 50000 
 0 +&mdash;&mdash;,&mdash;&mdash;_,,&mdash;&mdash;_,,&mdash;&mdash;_,, 
 0 
 100 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 Soil Phosphorus Regulation 
 
 Fig. l. In-county land application of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). 
 
 application of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) under a phosphorus based 
 nutrient management plan is also shown in Fig. I.e 
 (see/hear/become aware of) that, in the long run, the controlled soil phos-' 
 phorus level does not affect the result. The controlled soil phosphorus level does decide/figure out the amount 
 of time it will take to reach this long-run balance. 
 The amount of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) that must find an other choice use is equal to the amount produced, less the 
 amount that is land applied in-county. Fig. 2 shows 
 that the amount of excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) decreases from 
 a high of 270 000 t at a very (serving to severely limit or control) level to just 
 over 100 000 t as the controlled soil phosphorus level 
 is relaxed. For the long-run balance, there are still 
 some counties with excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter and so about 
 45 000 t would need to find an other choice use. 
 3.3. Changes in value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 For each of the three different (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 use pictures/situations, the same guess of net changes in 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground) value for in-county land application is 
 incorporated. 
 300000 
 250000 
 0 
 !::. 200000 
 j 150000 
 ....J 
 (British pounds)' 100000 
 ::; 
 &#126; 50000 
 
 --A- 
 
 &#126; 
 
 '' 
 
 ' ' A&mdash; .... 
 
 Short Run 
 
 --Long Run 
 
 -- .... &mdash;--_ :... 
 
 0+&mdash;-.&mdash;&mdash;_.,,..&mdash;--,&mdash;&mdash;_,, 
 
 0 
 
 100 
 
 200 
 
 300 
 
 Soil Phosphorus Regulation 
 
 Fig. 2. Excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). 
 
 400 
 
 27 
 
 D. Parker/Agricultural Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 
 1.0 
 
 3.4. Guessing the changes in value for in-county 
 land application 
 The changes in value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) depend upon 
 the current costs for land application of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). The cunent costs depend upon whether (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 growers use their own (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) or whether the 
 Joultry (trash or other things on the ground) is taken to another crop grower for 
 in-county land application. Now, 36% of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 growers use their own (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) on their own or 
 on rented land, while 64% sell, give away, or pay to 
 dispose of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) (Michel et al., 1996). 
 Under the WQIA, the use of some amount of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) for in-county land application will still be 
 tllowed. The change in value of the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) that 
 ' · · &amp;gt;tays within the county of origin will be the gains in 
 (material that makes plants grow better) savings from using the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) as a nutrient source on the in-county farms (calculated at the 
 rate recommended by a nutrient management plan), 
 less the losses in (material that makes plants grow better) savings from no longer 
 using (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) as a nutrient source (calculated 
 at the current average rate of (related to trash or other things on the ground) application in the 
 base case), less the costs of marketing the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter, less, for the share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) now 
 used on-farm, the costs of loading and moving 
 the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) to another in-county farm 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126;n1c 
 
 = 
 
 [FN- Fo- M- 0.36(L + TJc)]QMof3 (1) 
 
 where &#126;n1c is the change in value for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 to be land applied in-county, FN the (material that makes plants grow better) savings 
 under new law, Fo the (material that makes plants grow better) savings before new 
 law, M the marketing costs, L the loading costs, T1c 
 the transportation costs (in-county average), QMo the 
 amount of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) produced in Maryland, and 
 ;3 the share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) used in-county after new 
 law (;3 = l before law). 
 Note that for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) that is not now used 
 on the farm of origin there is no change in loading 
 and transportation costs. This is because the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter is already being loaded and moved otf-farm 
 and we are assuming an even (related to space or existing in space) distribution of 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) use within each county. The share of 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) that must find an other choice use can be 
 represented as (I - ;3). As the restriction represented 
 by the rules gets tighter, (I - ;3) increases. 
 The changes in value for the in-county land application are combined with the guessed net changes in 
 
 (1.0) 
 &amp;lt;17 
 
 (3.0) 
 
 &amp;lt;f) 
 
 c 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 (5.0) 
 (7.0) 
 
 &mdash;-Out-of-County Land Application 
 __.._Compost 
 
 (9.0) 
 
 --e-- Energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 
 (11.0) 
 0 
 
 100 
 
 200 
 
 300 
 
 400 
 
 Soil Phosphorus Regulation 
 
 Fig. 3. Once-a-year change in value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) from putting into use 
 the Maryland WQIA. 
 
 value from each of the three other choice use pictures/situations 
 to get a series of net changes in value. The three other choices are compost, energy production, and transport 
 for land application out-of-county. The net changes in 
 value for each picture/situation plus the net changes in value 
 for the long-run balance of land application in and 
 out-of-county are all shown in Fig. 3. Each will be 
 discussed separately below. 
 
 3.5. (apply fertilizer) 
 This picture/situation assumes a central compost facility is 
 set up in each county and (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) is sold in bulk form. 
 The information for the analysis comes from variety 
 of sources (Barker et al., 1990; Brodie et al., 1996; 
 (applying fertilizer) News, 1998; Fritsch and Collins, 1993) 
 and is changed to fit Maryland conditions. The change in 
 value for the compost option is the money/money income created 
 from compost sales, less the costs to produce (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.), 
 less the losses in (material that makes plants grow better) savings connected with the 
 litter that is no longer used as a crop nutrient source 
 (calculated at the average rate of application), less, 
 for the share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) now used on-farm, 
 the costs to load and transport the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) to the 
 compost facility 
 !':,nc 
 
 = [Rc 
 
 - Cc - Fo - 0.36(L +Tic)]_) 
 
 x QMo(l - ;3)ac 
 
 (2) 
 
 where !':,nc is the change in value for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 to be (applied fertilizer), Rc the money/money income from compost sales, 
 Cc the costs to produce (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.), and ac the share of 
 excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) going to (applying fertilizer). 
 
 D. Parker! Farming-based Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 
 28 
 
 The changeable ac represents the share of the excess 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) that is (applied fertilizer). If all excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter were (applied fertilizer), ac = 1. The net change in 
 value for the industry if all excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is 
 compos ted is &#126;nrc + &#126;nc (Fig. 3). As the strictness 
 of the restriction on soil phosphorus is increased (f3 
 decreases), the net costs of this option (ac = 1) 
 rises from about $3 million to nearly $11 million. As 
 the restriction is increased, more (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) must 
 be (applied fertilizer), more (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) is produced, and local 
 markets are saturated. This market saturation causes 
 a decrease in the price of (apply fertilizer). So, the decrease 
 in value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) results from the increase in 
 amounts of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) to be (applied fertilizer) and from 
 a decrease in the sale price of (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.). 
 3.6. Energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 This picture/situation assumes one central energy production facility is located in the center of the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 producing area, Salisbury, MD. The facility burns 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) for electricity production and sells the 
 phosphorus rich ash as an input to commercial (material that makes plants grow better) production. The information is taken from a 
 study of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground) energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) in the United 
 Kingdom (Dagnall, 1993), and changed to fit US conditions with information from the Maryland (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Services study of energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) options 
 at the Eastern Shore Correctional Facility (Maryland 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Service, 1998). 
 The change in value for the energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) 
 option is the money/money income created from the sales of 
 electricity and nutrient rich ash, less the costs to produce the electricity, less the losses in (material that makes plants grow better) savings 
 connected with the (trash or other things on the ground) that is no longer used as a 
 crop nutrient source (calculated at the average rate of 
 application), less, for the share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) now used on-farm, the costs to load and transport 
 the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) to a (controlled by one central place) facility, less, for the 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) now used off-farm, the difference 
 in the transportation costs between in-county use and 
 transportation to a (controlled by one central place) energy facility 
 &#126;nE 
 
 = [RE - CE - Fo - 0.36((British pounds) 
 
 + TE) 
 
 -0.64(TE- Trc)]QMo0- f3)aE 
 
 (3) 
 
 where &#126;nE is the change in value for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 from energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), RE the money/money income from energy 
 and ash sales, CE the cost to produce energy, TE the 
 
 transportation costs to energy facility, and aE the share 
 of excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) going to energy. 
 The changeable aE represents the share of the excess 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) that is used for energy production. If all 
 excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) were used for energy production, 
 aE = 1. The net change in value for the industry if all 
 excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is used for energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) is 
 &#126;nrc + &#126;nE (Fig. 3). As the strictness of the restriction on soil phosphorus is increased (3{ decreases), the 
 net costs of this option (aE = 1), rise from about $3.5 
 million to over $9 million. Because the price of electricity does not change (it only represents a very small 
 part of the US electricity market), the energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) option is good to the compost option in the 
 very (serving to severely limit or control) cases. 
 If we were allow the share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) that 
 goes to each option to change/differ (aE :::: 1, ac :::: 1), we 
 would expect that (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) would be used for the 
 production of (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) until it drove down the price of 
 (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) such that the value of another unit of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter (applied fertilizer) is just equal to the value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter as an energy source. 
 3. 7. Transport for out-of-county land application 
 This picture/situation uses a least cost travel model to distribute (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) to available lands in close-by 
 counties. It only looks at counties in Maryland. So, 
 for the (serving to severely limit or control) cases, (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is shipped to 
 Southern Maryland, Central Maryland, and, eventually, Western Maryland, and it is not thought about/believed possible to ship (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) to Delaware or Virginia. 2 
 As with the in-county land application, it is assumed 
 that 40% of the available land not on the Lower Shore 
 will choose not to use (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). 
 The change in value for out-of-county land application is the gains in (material that makes plants grow better) savings from 
 out-of-county land application (calculated at the nutrient management application rate), less the losses in 
 (material that makes plants grow better) savings from the (trash or other things on the ground) that is no longer used 
 in-county (calculated at the average rate of application), less the costs to market the (trash or other things on the ground), less, for the 
 share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) now used on-farm, the costs 
 to load and transport the (trash or other things on the ground) for land application 
 2 Both Delaware and Virginia have high concentrations of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 production in the area. So, shipment of any big amount 
 of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) across state lines is unlikely. 
 
 D. Parker/Agricultural Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 
 out of the county, less, for the share of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 now used off-farm, the difference in the costs to 
 transport the (related to trash or other things on the ground) in-county against/compared to/or out-of-county 
 &#126;7TL 
 
 = [FN- 
 
 Fo- ML- 0.36(L 
 
 +h) 
 
 29 
 
 cost of moving another unit of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) a 
 very long distance may become so high that the compost option may be best for some share of the 
 excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). This does not seem likely under 
 the set of rules (being thought about carefully). 
 
 -0.64(h- Tic)]QMoCl- (3) 
 x (1 - ac - aE) 
 
 (4) 
 
 where &#126;7TL is the change in value for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 land applied out-of-county, ML the costs to market out-of-county, TL the transportation costs to 
 out-of-county places/locations. 
 If all excess (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) were used for land application out of the county of origin, ac = 0 and eYE = 0. 
 The net change in value for the industry if all excess 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) is used for out-of-county land application is &#126;n 1 c + &#126;7TL (Fig. 3). For very low restrictions 
 ((3 close to 1), the net change in value from this option 
 (ac = 0 and eYE = 0), produces a net gain of about $300 000. This gain results from two forces. 
 First, at a low legal/law-based level very little (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 is moved further than is now the case. Second, the law needs/demands growers to stick to nutrient 
 management plans. Current rates of application are so 
 high as to mostly waste (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) in the (trash or other things on the ground). Under nutrient management plans, less (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) is 
 applied per area of land  and more areas of land benefit. As the strictness of the restriction on soil phosphorus is increased 
 . (3{ decreases), the net costs of this option (ac = 0 and 
 eYE = 0) rises to over $3 million .. 
 The 'long-run balance of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) transport for 
 out-of-county land application also produces a small 
 net gain (Fig. 3). Again, this is because long-run 
 application under phosphorus based nutrient management (producing more with less waste)ly uses the (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) available 
 in (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). 
 The in-county use equation can be combined with 
 the three other choice uses to create one decision model 
 for the industry 
 (5) 
 
 where &#126;n IN is the change in value of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) for 
 the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) industry. 
 Given the control of the out-of-county land application option over the other two options ((mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) 
 and energy (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another)), we would expect a corner 
 solution such that, ac = 0 and eYE = 0. If land application restrictions became very tight, the not important 
 
 4. Distribution of hits/effects 
 The distribution of costs between groups of growers may change/differ  significantly across the other choice use 
 pictures/situations. In the cases of (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) and energy production, most of the costs are almost certain 
 to be carried by the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers. A small number 
 of growers may still be able to use (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) on 
 their own fields and these growers may see little or 
 no hit/effect. What's more, some (trash or other things on the ground) will be used on 
 other fields within the county. This (trash or other things on the ground) will produce 
 (material that makes plants grow better) savings. It is unclear who will benefit from 
 those (material that makes plants grow better) savings. If a strong market for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter were to arise, the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers could capture 
 the (material that makes plants grow better) savings from the in-county use. If a weak 
 market exists, the benefits from the (material that makes plants grow better) savings 
 may go to the crop grower. 
 For the transport of (trash or other things on the ground) for land application outside the county option, it is less clear who will carry/hold the 
 costs and who will get the benefits (of (material that makes plants grow better) 
 savings). If a strong market rises, then (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers will (take control of) much of the (material that makes plants grow better) savings. Under 
 these market conditions, (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers would bear 
 the net costs shown in Fig. 3 (i.e. $50 000 for a phosphorus soil test restriction at 150), and crop growers 
 will mostly break-even. If there is a weak market 
 for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material), (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers could bear much higher costs, while crop growers could make 
 significant (money made/good things received). With a weak market for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (layer of leaves, twigs, etc., on the ground), at the phosphorus soil test restriction of 150 picture/situation, (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers could face costs of up to $4.7 
 million while crop growers would get benefits of 
 $3.8 million. This doubt suggests a need to provide (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers either money-based helper  or help in developing a competitive market for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter as a (material that makes plants grow better) source outside its county of origin. 
 
 5. Actions to lessen WQIA hits/affects 
 The WQIA has a few sections that partially 
 lessen the money-based effects of needing/ordering nutrient 
 
 30 
 
 D. Parker/Agricultural Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 
 management. To offset the costs of having nutrient 
 management plans written, growers can apply for a 
 cost share of 50%, up to $3 per area of land. What's more, 
 there are money to increase the number of Maryland 
 Cooperative Extension personnel who help in writing 
 plans. 
 The major expense to (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers will be buying added/more commercial (material that makes plants grow better) for producing 
 their crops (almost 75% of the net costs shown earlier). The WQIA provides for a 50% tax credit, up 
 to $4500 per grower per year for up to 3 years, to 
 help offset the costs of switching from (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) litter 
 to commercial (material that makes plants grow better). 
 The WQIA also does three things that attempt to help in the creation of a strong market for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). 
 (1) To help the flow of information in the market 
 (help willing buyers find willing sellers), an animal 
 poop/fertilizer matching service will be set up at the Maryland Department of Farming. This service will 
 allow buyers and sellers to call a toll free telephone 
 number and be matched with others in their area who 
 are looking to sell or buy (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). (2) To help offset the costs of converting from commercial (material that makes plants grow better) 
 to (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material), the WQIA provides a 100% tax deduction for the costs of poop/fertilizer spreading equipment 
 in their year of (instance of buying something for money). This should help reduce 
 the high entry cost (blocking thing) to use of animal poop/fertilizers. 
 (3) The WQIA provides money to match a (something you choose to do, but is not required) 
 industry (thing that's given/work that's done) to (help increase/show in a good way) (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground) movement. The (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) Litter Transport Pilot Project will 
 use these money to cost share, up to $20 c 1 , the costs 
 of moving (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) from (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growing 
 places/locations to alternative uses. These money should provide 
 an extra measure of (money made/good thing received) to the (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground) market 
 that may help to pay crop growers for some of 
 the doubt involved in changing (material that makes plants grow better) sources. 
 
 6. Ends/end results 
 Overall, the WQIA does a good job of balancing 
 the need for improvements in (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) quality 
 with the need for Maryland to maintain a healthy 
 farming-based (process of people making, selling, and buying things). While the Act tries to lessen some of its hits/effects on (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers with 
 cost share programs and market stimulation, there is 
 still the (possibility of/possible happening of)  some (compared to other things) large money-based 
 hits/effects on some growers. Some hits/effects not yet con- 
 
 sidered include; the possibility of changes in cropping 
 patterns that may arise as a result of a move/change in the 
 relative costs of different (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.), the hits/effects on 
 other animal operations (specifically dairy) in other 
 parts of the state, the hits/effects on organic producers, 
 and the hits/effects on the (plant-related) industry. 
 
 References 
 Barker, J.C., Carter, T.A., Safley, C.D., Safley Jr., L.M., Warren, 
 S.L., Westerman, P.W., Zublena, Z.P., 1990. (applying fertilizer) (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter - money flow/money-based studies and marketing (possible power or ability within/possibility of)  a renewable 
 useful thing/valuable supply. North Carolina Farming-based Research Service No. 
 8556122. North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC. 
 Bosch, D.J., Napit, K.B., 1992. Money flow of moving (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter to (accomplish or gain with effort) more effective use as (material that makes plants grow better). J. Soil Water 
 Conserv. 47 (4), 342-346. 
 Brodie, H.L., Carr, L.E., Steinhilber, P.M., Teffeau, K.M., 
 1996. (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (related to trash or other things on the ground) compost production, processing, test 
 and marketing for use as nursery growing media: a 
 means of distributing excess (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.). Final Report, CBIG 
 contract #_# 14-96-11 OCBGO 13. Mary land Department of Natural 
 Useful thing/valuable supply, Annapolis, MD. 
 Cambridge Agreement, 1997. Land-based pollution and poisonous  Dinoflagellates in Chesapeake Bay. Forum. University of Maryland, 
 Center for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Science, Cambridge, MD. 
 (applying fertilizer) News, 1998. National (mix of dead leaves, manure, etc.) Prices, Vol. 7, No. 5. 
 McEntee Media Corp., Cleveland, OH, p. 4. 
 Dagnall, S.P., 1993. (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material) as a fuel. World's (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) Sci. 
 J. 49 (2), 175-177. 
 Fritsch, D.A., Collins, A.R., 1993. The money-based (ability to be done) of 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (trash or other things on the ground) (applying fertilizer) facilities in Eastern West Virginia... , 
 Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev.. ?2 (2). 199-209. 
 Govindasamy, R., Cochran, M.J., 1995. The (ability to be done) qf (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) 
 litter transportation from (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) sensitive areas to delta . 
 row crop production. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 24 (1), 101110. 
 Hanson, J.C., Lichtenberg, E., Decker, A.M., Clark, A.J., 1993. 
 A money-making state of no-land corn following a hairy vetch cover 
 crop. J. Poke/encourage. Agric. 6 (3), 432-437. 
 Helfand, G.E., House, B.W., 1995. Controlling nonpoint source 
 pollution under blended conditions. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 
 77 (4), 1024-1032. 
 Jacobs, J.J., Casler, G.L., 1979. (felt inside of you) externalities of phosphorus discharges from crop production to surface water: 
 (dumped chemicals) taxes against/compared to/or uniform reductions. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 
 61 (2), 309-312. 
 Letson, D., Gollehon, N., Breneman, V., Kascak, C., Mose, C., 
 1998. Confined animal production and (underground water that supplies wells) protection. 
 Rev. Agric. Econ. 20 (2), 348-364. 
 Lichtenberg, E., Hanson, J.C., Decker, A.M., Clark, A.J., 1994. 
 A money-making state of (pea, bean, lentil, etc.) cover crops in the mid Atlantic area. 
 J. Soil Water Conserv. 49 (6), 582-585. 
 Maryland Cooperative Extension Service, 1997. Maryland 
 Cooperative Extension Service, Maryland Department of 
 
 D. Parker/Agricultural Money flow 24 (2000) 23-31 
 Farming, Maryland Nutrient Management Program, 1997. 
 Once-a-year Report. College of Farming and Natural useful thing/valuable supply, 
 University of Maryland, College Park, MD. 
 Maryland (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Service, 1998. Estomin, S., Walters, G., 
 Prasad, A., Ross, J. (Eds.), The Engineering and Money-based 
 (ability to be done) of Using (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) Litter as a Fuel to Create Electric 
 Power. Maryland's Eastern Correctional Institute, Annapolis, 
 MD. 
 Michel, K., Bacon, J.R., Gempesaw II, C.M., Martin Jr., J.H., 1996. 
 Nutrient management by Delmarva (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) growers: a survey 
 of attitudes and practices. FREC RR96-0 I. Department of Food 
 and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow, College of Farming-based Sciences, 
 University of Delaware, Newark, DE. 
 Parker, D., 1998. Other choice uses for (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) (bedding material). Money-based 
 Viewpoints 3. Department of Farming-based and Useful thing/valuable supply 
 Money flow, University of Maryland, College Park, MD. 
 Parker, D.D., Caswell, M.F., 1999. Inventions 
 to remove water (things that dirty the air, oceans, etc.). In: Casey, F., Schmitz, A., 
 Swinton, S., Zilberman, D. (Eds.), Flexible (rewards or reasons for doing something) for 
 the Adoption of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Technologies in Farming. 
 Kluwer School-related Publishers, Norwell, MA, pp. 249262. 
 
 31 
 
 Sims, T., 1998. Soil testing for phosphorus: (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) uses 
 and effects/results/suggestions. Announcement No. 389, SERA-lEG 17. University 
 of Delaware, Newark, DE. 
 Suppalla, R.J., Selley, R.A., Bredeweg, S., Watts, D., 1995. 
 Adoption of nitrogen and water management practices to 
 improve water quality. J. Soil Water Conserv. 50 (I), 77-82. 
 Trachtenberg, E., Ogg, C., 1994. (possibility of/possible happening of)  reducing nitrogen 
 pollution through improved (related to scientific farming) practices. Water Resom·. 
 Bull. 30 (6), 1109-1118. 
 US (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Protection (service business/government unit/power/functioning), 1996. (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 indicators of water quality in the United States. EPA 
 841-R-96-002. Office of Water, Washington, DC. 
 Wu, J., Babcock, B.A., 1998. The choice of land, rotation, and 
 soil testing practices: money-based and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) effects/results/suggestions. 
 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 80 (3), 494-5 1!. 
 Wu, J., Segerson, K., 1995. The hit/effect of policies and land 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) on potential (underground water that supplies wells) pollution in Wisconsin. 
 Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77 (4), 1033-1047. 
 Yiridoe, E.K., Weersink, A., 1998. Not important stopping costs of 
 reducing (underground water that supplies wells)-N pollution with intensive and long/big 
 farm management choices. Agric. Resour. Econ. Rev. 27 (2), 
 169-185. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
