 Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 Agent-based (related to space or existing in space) models applied to agriculture: 
 a (testing out) tool for technology diffusion, 
 useful thing/valuable supply use changes and policy analysis 
 Thomas Bergeraˆ-- 
 Center for Development Research, University of Bonn, ZEF-Bonn, Walter-Flex-Street 3, D-53113 Bonn, Germany 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper presents a (related to space or existing in space) multi-agent programming model, which has been developed for testing-related policy options in the 
 diffusion of inventions of new things and useful thing/valuable supply use changes. Unlike ordinary (testing out) tools used in farming-based money flow/money-based studies, the 
 model class described here applies a multi-agent/cellular robots (CA) approach by using blended farm-household 
 models and (taking by force)/(taking control of) their social and (related to space or existing in space) interactions clearly. The individual choice of the farm-household among available production, consumption, investment and marketing other choices is represented in recursive linear programming models. 
 Adoption restrictions are introduced in form of network-dividing line values that reflect the total amount of effects of experience and 
 (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) of peers' experiences. The model's money-based and hydrologic parts/pieces are tightly connected into a (related to space or existing in space) 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). The (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of money-based and hydrologic processes helps the (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) effects in the use 
 of water for crop-watering/rinsing with water. The (testing out) runs of the model are carried out with an scientific data set, which has been came/coming from 
 different data sources on an farming-based area in Chile. (testing out) results show that agent-based (related to space or existing in space) modelling makes up/is equal to 
 a powerful approach to better understanding processes of invention of new things and useful thing/valuable supply use change. Â© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. 
 All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: Q120; O330; Q150; C690 
 Keywords: Diffusion of inventions of new things; Inter-household linkages; Policy analysis; Multi-agent systems; Cellular robots 
 
 1. Introduction 
 (testing out) models are gaining importance as tools 
 for managing tomorrow's farming, since they allow the study of a wide range of price and trade 
 policy options. In farming-based money flow/money-based studies, (testing out) models that (describe the future) the behaviour of individual 
 decision-makers are usually based on mathematical 
 programming methods. In these models, individual 
 decision-making is usually grouped at the (related to a large area) 
 aˆ-- Tel.: +49-228-73-4964; fax: +49-228-73-1869. 
 E-mail address: t.berger@uni-bonn.de (T. Berger). 
 
 or part/area level in order to test policy options. The 
 advantage of such models is that they are strong and 
 less demanding about the availability of group data than econometric models. This makes them 
 attractive, especially for policy analysis in change 
 and developing countries. 
 However, apart from the well-known problem of 
 grouping error and the habit/desire to overspecialisation, ordinary (testing out) models based on mathematical programming suffer from two weaknesses. 
 First, they do not clearly take by force/take control of the interaction 
 between actors (i.e. the individual farm-families), 
 which is equal to the idea (you think is true) that there are no 
 
 0169-5150/01/$ - see front matter Â© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S 0 1 6 9 - 5 1 5 0 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 0 8 2 - 2 
 
 246 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 transaction and information costs. Second, these models do not fully take into account the (related to space or existing in space) dimension 
 of farming-based activities and, this way, neglect the role of 
 internal transport costs and the physical (being unable to move around) 
 of land. As a result, the explanatory power of these 
 models is rather medium-level for research questions that 
 involve the diffusion of inventions of new things or locally changed/ready 
 useful thing/valuable supply use where interaction and space usually play 
 a clear role. 
 Against this background, the study presented here 
 (Berger, 2000) tried to develop a new mathematical programming approach for the (statement about the future) of 
 diffusion processes, valuable thing from nature use changes and 
 policy responses. The model's (ability to be used for something) is tested 
 on an scientific policy-related research question in 
 Chile. The research was given money by the Deutsche 
 Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and carried out in 
 co-operation with the University of Talca and the 
 Center for Technology Test in Linares (Berger, 
 1997). The project draws on Balmann (1997), who 
 first discovered/used the use of farm-based linear programming 
 within a cellular robots (CA) (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). 
 
 2. Problem and goals 
 Demand for a new type of model rose up from the 
 search for (good) enough policies to improve the (wanting to beat others in contests) of Chilean farming in the big picture  of the 
 Mercosur free-trade agreement. 
 In 1996, taxes/import taxes were cut by 30% on the average. It 
 was also agreed to specify exceptions for some rather 
 sensitive farming-based products such as wheat, flour 
 and sugar. Taxes/import taxes on these products remained at the 
 level of 1996, until the end of the agreed (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 period, which will be around 2014. Going along with 
 the approval of the agreement (between countries) in 1996, a few studies 
 were used/paid that were aimed at reducing the 
 fears of the rather traditional Chilean farmers. The 
 overall result of these studies was that farmers will 
 in fact suffer income losses, but only if they continue 
 to produce import valuable things. However, Chilean 
 farmers do have a (large/relatively large) (serving to compare two or more things) advantage over other Mercosur countries if they produce 
 export valuable things. Hence, the challenge for Chilean 
 farmers is to invest in new technologies in order to 
 take advantage of increasing prices for export products (that are bought and sold). 
 Given that crop-watering/rinsing with water is needed/demanded for most export farm- 
 
 ing activities, useful thing/valuable supply use changes and water-saving 
 inventions of new things are a hot issue in farming-based extension. 
 Political bargaining started on how to support the 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) and modernisation process of Chilean 
 farming. (even though there is the existence of) the importance of invention of new things, 
 there exist only a few and rather informal studies 
 about the likely results of market-driven technical 
 and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) changes in Chilean farming. 
 The goal of this research was to develop a new 
 multi-agent modelling approach which (1) reduces the 
 weaknesses of mathematical programming talked about/said 
 above, and (2) provides ideas of the diffusion of 
 inventions of new things and water useful thing/valuable supply use. 
 The (testing out) tool should help to clear up the following questions: 
 - What will be the likely patterns of diffusion for 
 clearly stated/particular inventions of new things? 
 - Can we expect big changes in the use of 
 water as a result of water-saving crop-watering/rinsing with water methods? 
 - Will these inventions of new things create (good) enough incomes and 
 also reach traditional farmers? 
 - What will be the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) effects of a 'treadmill' 
 invention of new things process, to use Cochrane's (1979) words/word choices? 
 
 3. Hidden (under) model thinking 
 In Section 3.2, I outline some methodological 
 thoughts on model building, which favour the use of a (related to space or existing in space) farm-based programming approach to 
 the adoption of inventions of new things and useful thing/valuable supply use changes. 
 Since the ideas of multi-agent systems (MAS) and 
 CA are borrowed from the computer sciences, a short 
 explanation may be helpful. For an summary on these 
 and other (not made by nature/fake) life ways of doing things applied to social 
 science tests, refer to Gilbert and Troitzsch 
 (1999). 
 MAS are computer systems composed of self-ruling things/businesses or agents which have only limited 
 knowledge and information processing abilities (to hold or do something). 
 While agents can be as simple as subroutines of a 
 computer program, usually they are larger things/businesses 
 with some sort of (constant/not going away) control. Good examples 
 are personal electronic helpers that search for information on the internet, arrange their owners' time 
 schedules and help car drivers. In the same way/in that way, on a 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 less clear level, their purpose is to solve larger and 
 complex problems that one (had everything controlled by one central place) unit cannot 
 tackle, because too much information and computation power would be needed/demanded. In MAS, agents interact and exchange information in a decentralised and 
 somewhat 'social' manner instead, which explains 
 why the term 'Distributed (not made by nature/fake) Intelligence' was 
 created. Especially, this last aspect makes MAS an 
 interesting tool for social sciences. The idea is to use 
 computer tests with human like agents in order to study how an group of people leads 
 to complex macro behaviour. These in silicio experiments will help to test the guesses on the basic social (machines/methods/ways) in human (communities of people). CA 
 can be used to model the agents' interactions in the 
 physical or social space. Usually, the agents occupy 
 positions on a two-dimensional grid of cells and the 
 distances between them influence their interactions. 
 An long/big books has come out both on the 
 way(s) of doing things and the use of mathematical programming models in (describing the future) supply response in farming. Hanf (1989) provides an test of the 
 two extreme early models of farming-based part/area models, 
 which may be very shortly summarised as follows. 
 The 'simultaneous balance approach' generally 
 assumes a perfect co-(process where people are made priests, rabbis, etc.) (machine/method/way) and (makes as big as possible) a common part/areaal utility function. In contrast, 
 the 'representative independent farm approach' consists of some farm models which are independently calculated and then added up to a part/area result. 
 The second approach seems to be a preferred model 
 choice, if part/area development is seen as (1) 
 (not totally pure/not totally correct) markets, (2) different behaviour than pure 
 profit (biggest increase/best possible extent) and (3) (change to make better/related to changing something) processes. The 
 same arguments apply in way of thinking/basic truth/rule to the multi-agent 
 programming approach. As will be shown in the rest of this section, the multi-agent idea  also/and helps the (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of inter-household 
 linkages and of space. 
 
 2. 
 
 3. 
 
 4. 
 
 5. 
 3.1. Arguments for using a multi-agent 
 programming approach 
 1. A farm-based programming approach allows for a 
 practical treatment of data availability in change and developing countries where consistent group data hardly exist. Information from different 
 sources such as (related to scientific farming) results from experimen- 
 
 247 
 
 tal stations, official and unpublished farm records 
 and sample surveys, experts' opinions and direct 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) on field trips can be incorporated. 
 Policy makers and institutions chasing after technology 
 move (from one place to another) have a great interest in (describing the future) the diffusion of clearly stated/particular inventions of new things and in testing the 
 policy effects/results/suggestions for 'typical' farm-families. 
 Both technical and (money-related) restrictions on the farm 
 level can easily be introduced into a farm-based 
 programming approach. 
 The set of activities which are technically and 
 (related to money) (able to be done) for a farmer is influenced by 
 behavioural restrictions that reflect the total amount of effects of experience and (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) of his 
 neighbours' experiences. Therefore, one should 
 think about/believe some form of mixed-up nature of behaviour 
 in order to take by force/take control of time falls behind  in farmers' choices 
 among other choice technologies. For the programming approach, this hints that a few single 
 farm models with different behavioural restrictions 
 have to be solved (at the same time), which is possible 
 in a MAS. 
 A multi-agent model can take by force/take control of the most 
 important interactions between farm-families. 
 One type of interaction is the exchange of information about new technologies that is very important 
 for the individual invention of new things decision. As findings 
 from the invention of new things diffusion book-related show, a 
 'critical mass' of convinced users must be reached 
 before an invention of new things will spread. The finest approach to modelling this thing/event might be 
 to internalise the communication process between 
 the individual programming models, because otherwise one would have to establish the time of 
 adoption more or less 'ad hoc' for each model and 
 each policy picture/situation. (in this/within this), lies the real good quality/good qualities of 
 MAS, since it helps the solving of self-ruling 
 programming problems while exchanging (numbers that change/things that change) 
 between them. 
 Almost the same  (things to carefully think about) as in step 4 apply to another 
 type of interaction: the exchange of locally available useful things/valuable supplies such as water and land. These factors 
 of production are usually absorbed under the idea of 'non-tradable' products (that are bought and sold). Because of their importance for farm-related, including land 
 and water markets in MAS with an endogenous 
 price (creation and construction/ group of objects) represents a important/famous improvement 
 over ordinary models. 
 
 248 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 6. Different kinds of analysis can be done/tried 
 in a energetic model setting. The main research 
 interest of the project presented here is to analyse the path of farming-based development without 
 (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) the final result, as it is done in the 
 (serving to compare two or more things)-static models used in many studies. The idea behind this approach is to define 
 parts of an farming-based area and to 
 establish some rules about their patterns. 
 Having set up a starting situation, the model is run 
 and a kind of self-organising process can be watched/followed at the group (related to a large area) level. By difference/different version 
 of particular model (numbers that change/things that change), e.g. prices or interest 
 rates, one can explore the (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change over time) that 
 might unfold in response to changing policy conditions. So, the approach can be best described 
 as doing experiments in an (not made by nature/fake) world in 
 order to get ideas for policy development and 
 test. 
 3.2. Arguments for using a (related to space or existing in space) cellular 
 robots model 
 The next question to be raised in this big picture  is why 
 the (related to space or existing in space) dimension of farming-based activities should 
 be thought about/believed in farm models. 
 1. From the farm management explanation, it is well-known 
 that internal transport costs limit farm growth. 
 Farms mainly fight against their neighbours for 
 land and, therefore, depend on the local supply of 
 and demand for land. In areas away from cities, where many 
 farms with a high not important working well attempt 
 to expand their land, this can lead to too much/too many 
 land prices that may even prevent the (understanding/achieving a goal) 
 of (making a lot of an item so each item costs less). Ignoring these (related to space or existing in space) patterns by assuming perfect land portion among 
 farms is not always an (good) enough representation of 
 reality. 
 2. The particular role of (related to space or existing in space) relations in the use of 
 water for crop-watering/rinsing with water also needs/demands a (related to space or existing in space) model. 
 Technologies with low crop-watering/rinsing with water (measures of output versus waste/getting more with less waste) used 
 by upstream farmers create high return flows 
 that can be reused by downstream farmers. In the same way/in that way, the (related to space or existing in space) distribution of freshwater 
 use and reuse is very important for farm models 
 in developing countries where crop-watering/rinsing with water (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 is usually low. 
 
 3. Soils of different (producing crops/helping something grow) qualities and water 
 supply decide/figure out the (related to space or existing in space) difference/different version of particular 
 land use systems to a certain extent. Newly available technologies and policy helping actions may 
 change  this distribution, especially in the case of watered farmland. The same applies to organisational 
 inventions of new things such as both/together used (set of machines) or 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) practices with a high degree of (related to space or existing in space) 
 co-(process where people are made priests, rabbis, etc.), e.g. as (having different things working together as one unit) pest management. 
 (related to space or existing in space) models are needed/demanded to take by force/take control of these issues. 
 
 4. Model putting into use 
 The newly designed MAS-CA model consists of 
 two main parts/pieces: an money-based sub-model and a 
 hydrologic sub-model, which are tightly connected to 
 a consistent (related to space or existing in space) (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) (Fig. 1). This section 
 provides a short model description with focus on 
 the technology adoption process. For a listing of model 
 limits/guidelines and equations talk to Berger (2000). 
 4.1. Farm-based mathematical programming 
 As far as the money-based sub-model is concerned, a recursive linear programming approach is used 
 but with a clear (pretty, inexpensive toy/the quality of being new). Each farm-household in 
 the study area is (now under different control) in the model and solves its 
 decision problems over time (in a self-ruling way). A few 
 types of interactions between farms are carefully thought about/believed: 
 sickness of information, exchange of land and water 
 useful things/valuable supplies and return-flows of crop-watering/rinsing with water water. Equally, one might call this a highly disaggregated 
 farm programming approach with inter-household 
 linkages. The farm-families are assumed to look (for) 
 to (make as big as possible) expected family incomes without exhausting their land and water valuable things. Adoption of 
 inventions of new things is idea-basedised as a farm investment 
 problem under doubt. The agents' complex 
 decision-making processes are rotten into sequences of smaller linear programming problems that 
 are solved separately for each agent (Fig. 2). Following Day and Signo (1978), there is "sub-optimising 
 with (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information)", (in other words) the agents attempt to (make as big as possible) 
 their expected income in a (one after the other), local optimisation procedure that takes into account the agents' 
 previous experiences. In the case where the returns to 
 family-owned useful things/valuable supplies fall below certain dividing lines, 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 Fig. 1. Model parts/pieces. 
 
 Fig. 2. Flowchart of the (testing out) model. 
 
 249 
 
 250 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 the models' farm-agents are willing to give up farming-based production and leave the farm business. 
 4.2. Technical change 
 The invention of new things money flow/money-based studies books, as referred to in 
 Dosi et al. (1988), regards modern farm production 
 as a typical example of a supplier-ruled part/area. 
 Technical improvements are mostly incorporated in 
 process inventions of new things such tractors, fertilisers and bug-killers, which are created in the input supplying industry. The focus of this model approach is therefore, 
 placed on the adoption of farming-based inventions of new things by 
 farms. Specific supply factors of technical change are 
 neglected. This simplification can also be reasonable 
 by the commonly accepted guess that demand 
 factors are mostly responsible for the speed of diffusion in farming (Griliches, 1957). Technologies 
 that appear to be promising in the near future become 
 available to the farm-families in the (testing out) 
 runs and thinly spread through the farm part/area. Obviously, 
 two extreme pictures/situations define the 'possibility space' 
 for future technology diffusion in the farm part/area. 
 On one hand, farmers might (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) 'smoothly' to 
 (coming from the outside of something) technical changes as (stated or said earlier) in the standard money-based approaches. On the other hand, one 
 might assume conservative farmers who are unwilling to create something new and refuse any technology adoption. 
 Reality will probably lie somewhere between these 
 two edges. The model presented here helps to 
 explore the money-based (possible power or ability within/possibility of)  new technologies 
 along different development paths. 
 4.3. Mixed-up nature of behaviour 
 In decision-theoretic terms, two (numbers that change/things that change) affect 
 the behavioural mixed-up nature of farmers during the 
 diffusion process of a clearly stated/particular invention of new things. First, the 
 net benefits from adoption which traditional farm investment analysis can 'objectively' measure. Second, 
 all other costs that relate to the farmer's managerial ability (to hold or do something) and are usually referred to as adoption 
 costs. These include information and planning costs, 
 socio-mental (change to make better/related to changing something) costs, (lasting for a short time) production losses as well as 'subjective' risk premiums 
 and option values. Metcalfe (1988, p. 564) provides a 
 good illustration of how the diffusion process in the 
 farm part/area comes out from the frequency distribution 
 
 of these two (numbers that change/things that change). Following his idea, one 
 can classify the farm-families into three groups 
 relating to/connected to their timing of technology adoption: 
 "non-adopters" whose net benefits from adoption of 
 a clearly stated/particular invention of new things are negative (probably due 
 to indivisibility or not enough farm sizes), "possible adopters" who now face (way too much) high 
 adoption costs and "actual adopters" with positive net 
 benefits after adoptions costs. Diffusion of the invention of new things happens when relative price changes or technical 
 improvements change the distribution of net benefits 
 and/or adoption costs and because of this, more 'potential' 
 adopters become 'actual'. As Metcalfe (1988) notes, 
 the recognition of 'information sickness' or 'bandwagon effects' tells apart the following two diffusion models. Balance approaches assume that 
 information sets are given and (coming from the outside of something), while unbalance approaches admit/recognize/respond to an endogenous 
 chain-reaction type of 'contagion process'. A well-known/obvious example of the second approach is Cochrane's 
 (1979) treadmill model in farming, which is based 
 on different adoption costs. Farmers with a high management ability (to hold or do something) and low individual adoption costs 
 tend to adopt a new technology first; imitators follow 
 when their at first higher adoption costs decrease due 
 to information spillover. Much evidence, as 
 referred to by Rogers (1995), supports this idea. At the 
 most critical stages in their adoption decision process, farmers (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) depend on information brought 
 to them by the peers. 
 4.4. Dividing lines to adoption 
 If all farmers eventually adopt an invention of new things, the 
 result of the sickness process over time usually 
 approaches an S-shaped diffusion path. Usually the 
 (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) bell-shaped and the total amount of curve are separated into five adopter categories using the average 
 time of adoption and the standard moving away (Table 1). 
 Along the time path, the farmers behave as if they 
 had dividing lines to adoption. For example, the first 
 farmers of the 'early adopter' part adopt after 
 the 'innovators' part, which counts for 2.5% of 
 the farm population has. The 'early majority' follows 
 after the invention of new things has reached 2.5 + 13.5% of the 
 farmers, and so forth. In the same way/in that way, one can understand/explain 
 these total percentages as 'adoption dividing lines' 
 for the farmers of the later adopter category. If 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 251 
 
 Table 1 
 Adopter categories and dividing linesa 
 
 Frequency (%) 
 Total frequency (%) 
 a 
 
 Clever creators 
 
 Early users 
 
 Early majority 
 
 Late majority 
 
 Lazy people 
 
 2.5 
 0.0 
 
 13.5 
 2.5 
 
 34.0 
 16.0 
 
 34.0 
 50.0 
 
 16.0 
 84.0 
 
 Source based on Rogers (1995, p. 262) 
 
 one also/and assumes that relative prices remain 
 constant and no after-new and interesting (related to computers and science) improvements happen, the following decision rule at the 
 farm level leads to the same time path. 
 - Step 1: Monitor the present adoption level and compare it with the individual dividing line. 
 - Step 2: If the dividing line is reached, calculate the 
 farm's net benefits from the adoption. 
 - Step 3: If the net benefits are positive, adopt the 
 technology. 
 Introducing a few more ideas (you think are true) to this 
 frequency-dependent diffusion model make it possible 
 to (describe the future) the time path of the adoption of a few production technologies (at the same time). The most important of the ideas (you think are true) listed in Berger (2000) are: no 
 change of dividing lines over time; inventions of new things do not differ in their 'primary' attributes (cf. Downs and Mohr, 
 1976); the existence of a 'natural' time periods of time (or space) such 
 as (Table 1) planting seasons when adoption decisions 
 can only be made. As further extensions to this approach, one can (1) think about/believe separate communication 
 networks without information spillover by watching 
 only the farmers belonging to the same network and 
 (2) attribute higher weights to external information 
 sources by lowering the above talked about/said dividing lines. 
 4.5. Scientific guess of diffusion limits/guidelines 
 Net benefits of different production technologies 
 can be came/coming from experimental data and easily introduced into the whole farm programming models. 
 In contrast, the guess of adoption costs and their 
 changes over time usually presents/causes problems due to 
 poor data availability. Luckily, network-dividing lines 
 have in principal the advantage of a better scientific 
 measurability. As Valente (1995) (shows or proves), individual network-dividing lines can be honestly/easily 
 figured out/calculated from the network survey data. Since adoption dividing lines contain the same information about 
 
 the hidden (under) sickness process as adoption costs, 
 the dividing line approach is chosen for the research 
 presented here. However, a complete network survey 
 was not yet available for the Chilean study area 
 and the network-dividing lines had to be came/coming from 
 the data given by the extension service, an own 
 project survey and in-depth interviews. Based on the 
 intensive scientific work of Stallmeister (1995) and 
 Sauer (1995), two clear/separate communication networks 
 without information spillover were carefully thought about/believed. On 
 one hand, the campesino farms network consists of 
 small-scale family holdings between 2.5 and 12.0 ha. 
 On the other hand, the (what people commonly call a/not really a) 'commercial' farms 
 network with farm sizes of more than 12.0 ha. Certainly, this network analysis is rather (not definite) and 
 a follow-up study will have to managed and did/done to provide 
 more goal scientific network-dividing lines. 
 4.6. Other scientific data 
 The tests are carried out with an scientific data set that has been came/coming from different data 
 sources on an farming-based area in Chile. The scientific (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) (recorded on a camera or computer) both the main (related to scientific farming) 
 and (related to how much money and power people have) features of the (connected/related) area. 
 The (related to space or existing in space)ly disaggregated data set includes land of 
 different (producing crops/helping something grow) qualities and water as an added factor of production. A special module was 
 designed to process and store the (related to a large area) and individual farm data in a (related to space or existing in space) information file. In order to 
 think about/believe price changes due to the Mercosur agreement, price indices were figured out/calculated based on Muchnik 
 et al. (1996). In the different pictures/situations without the 
 association to the Mercosur, input and output prices 
 are fixed to their 1996 levels. Table 2 gives a summary 
 of all the model (numbers that change/things that change) and limits/guidelines. 
 4.7. (related to space or existing in space) dimension 
 As in most (land-area-based/location) information systems (GIS), 
 the data are (related to space or existing in space)ly organised in a grid of (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) 
 
 252 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 Table 2 
 Summary of model (numbers that change/things that change) and limits/guidelines 
 (coming from the outside of something)ly serious and stubborn (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 Endogenous (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 Limits/guidelines 
 
 Market prices for 'tradables' 
 Interest rates 
 Wages 
 Taxes and (things that are given/work that's done) 
 Minimum consumption level 
 Supply of land 
 Supply of freshwater 
 Supply of inventions of new things 
 Initial location of farms 
 
 Prices for 'non-tradables' 
 Lands of crops 
 Yields 
 Investment levels 
 Working capital expenses 
 Borrowing and saving levels 
 Labour use 
 Return-flows in crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 Portion of land and water 
 
 Input-output coefficients 
 (lowering of value) rates 
 Sunk costs for fixed valuable things 
 Unit transport cost 
 Network dividing lines 
 Expectation coefficients 
 
 units. Each cell or pixel has a few biophysical and 
 money-based attributes connected with it: soil quality, 
 water supply, land cover/land use, ownership, internal transport costs, not important working well or return to 
 land. While the first attribute, 'soil quality' here is assumed to be constant, all the other attributes are influenced by the self-ruling decisions made over the 
 time by the model agents, (in other words) the farm-families 
 and non-farm owners. For example, water supply depends on the amount of individual water user rights 
 traded on markets. Land cover/land use is taken from 
 the farm's linear programming problem, taking into 
 account the price expectations and technical and (money-related) restrictions. As far as ownership or (lengths of time at work or in power)hip 
 is concerned, the model (takes control of) their changes when 
 farmland is sold or rented. As a result, internal transport costs may also change/differ  because of a cell's location 
 and (pertaining to each person or thing) distance to the new farmstead. 
 4.8. Markets for land and water rights 
 As scientific findings show, land and water are 
 hardly ever sold in Chile, but rental markets may play 
 an important role in the local exchange of both the 
 useful things/valuable supplies. To (take control of) these features, rental markets 
 for land and water are carefully thought about/believed endogenously in 
 the model. An auction module was designed to model 
 two-sided trade between the agents. Farm-agents attempt to rent out land and water when their shadow 
 prices for a particular parcel are below part/area average. Since the internal transport costs between parcel 
 and farmsteads are carefully thought about/believed, it is mainly the neighbouring farm-agents that compete for the offered 
 land. The (lasting for a short time) land use right is then moved (from one place to another) 
 
 to the neighbour with the highest shadow price for 
 the clearly stated/particular parcel. For the purpose of simpleness, 
 (related to a plan to reach a goal) behaviour is not taken into account and the 
 individual level of rent is fixed at the average of the 
 corresponding offer and request. 
 4.9. Return-flows of crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 The water supplies sub-model is subdivided into 
 sections in order to take by force/take control of the locally available 
 freshwater supplies and return-flows. Equations and 
 limits/guidelines are taken from a water engineering 
 study for the Chilean Department of Public Works. 
 The sub-model establishes a monthly water balance 
 for each section, starting with the upstream sections. The farms receive their individual freshwater 
 and return-flows quota according to their water user 
 rights. They irrigate their farmlands, by that/in that way producing return-flows to users downstream. The farms 
 apply certain decision rules as far as the (lasting for a short time) 
 or permanent (being left alone, with no help) of crops is concerned. 
 The dividing line linear relationships are assumed with 
 respect to the crop-water production function. 
 4.10. (testing out) experiments 
 The research area covers an area of roughly 
 667 km2 and is represented in the model with a (ability to display or measure very small things) of about 158m Ã-- 158 m. Because of this, the size of 
 grid cell is 2.5 ha. Since each grid cell goes along with 
 a farm parcel, farm sizes are measured to the nearest 2.5 ha. The (related to space or existing in space) model is sub-divided in 20 
 sections in order to think about  the return-flows from 
 upstream to downstream farmers. Each of the 5400 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 farm-families (90% campesino) regarded in the 
 model solves its investment, once-a-year production and 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) decisions problems by the use of mixed-integer 
 programming (dimension of the LP matrix: 120Ã--240, 
 around 1.4 million problems solved per (testing out) 
 run). Based on the thorough field trials by the Center 
 for Technology Test, 32 new and interesting crops and 
 water-saving ways of doing things were chosen to be included 
 in the model and spread during the (testing out) runs. 
 The farm-agents select among these inventions of new things and 
 adopt according to their relative a money-making state. In the 
 (something that attracts lots of people) pictures/situations, however, farm-agents only 
 have access to those inventions of new things which have reached 
 their network-dividing line. The (related to computers and science) possibilities of the campesino and commercial holding types 
 differ for some farming activities due to indivisibilities. Heavy machinery, certain export fruit (large farms with crops) and crop-watering/rinsing with water methods are only available to the 
 large-scale commercial farms. Apart from the pure 
 market-driven pictures/situations with and without Mercosur, 
 policies on credit and payments to farm production are 
 analysed. 
 4.11. Software 
 This newly designed MAS-CA model has 
 MS-Windows 32 bit and UNIX portability. Input and output files are in ASCII-text format and 
 can be processed with common spreadsheet and 
 graphics programs. The source code is written in 
 C++ object-oriented programming language and 
 permits modular extensions to include, e.g. (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) restrictions or to create (connecting points/ways of interacting with something) with GISapplications. 
 
 5. Model adjustment and strength 
 The adjustment of a MAS-CA model is rather challenging since the model has to (pretty close) real-world 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) on the micro level (farm-families) as 
 well as on the macro level (research area). In this 
 study, a two-step approach is followed: first, validation experiments on the micro level, where typical 
 model agents are compared to real-world farm data; 
 and second, macro level experiments in order to test 
 the model's group representation. The adjustment-related 
 procedure is repeated until a (good) enough model fit at both 
 
 253 
 
 levels is (accomplished or gained). Unfortunately, only the real-world 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) on land use distribution in 1996 were 
 available for the micro level. Therefore, the model's 
 ability to copy reality can only be checked for the 
 initial (testing out) period. Land use results from the 
 model were moved backward on their watched/followed values to create a simple goodness-of-fit -- perfect association 
 would be pointed to/showed by an (stopping or interfering with something) of 0 and a slope 
 of 1. On the micro level, the moving backward produces /gives up a slope 
 of 0.977 (S.E. = 0.01, R 2 = 0.991) and on the macro 
 level of 0.704 (S.E. = 0.107, R 2 = 0.657). The model 
 probably overestimates the (producing crops/helping something grow) of maize and 
 some (peas, beans, lentils, etc.), and underestimates wheat (producing crops/helping something grow). 
 Given that gross margins for these crops are fairly 
 similar and their (related to a large area) values are only rough 
 guesses, the model fit seems (good) enough for this study. 
 Needless to say, the standard errors are only informal 
 judging requirements since the model results are not strictly independent. Change or watching and following/making footprints of experiments as suggested 
 by McCarl and Apland (1986) remain to be done in 
 a follow-up study, which will collect more field data. 
 However, local experts thought about/believed the model's (describe the future)ive ability to be reasonable. 
 Also, strength tests are important for (testing out) models that contain many 
 degrees of freedom and with highly recursive patterns. Especially in this study, where scientific data 
 were combined with rather informal (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) and 
 random-created (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) data, the model should 
 produce non-weird results within a wider range 
 of limit/guideline differences/different versions. Therefore, the model's strength was tested by using two (numbers that change/things that change), average 
 income and on-farm labour portion in different 
 adopter categories, which directly reflect changes in 
 the farm organisation. With identical starting conditions, these indicators show very little difference/different version 
 in repeated (testing out) runs (&amp;lt;1%, except for the 
 clever creators' group income where about 6% difference/different version 
 was found due to the small size of this group). In the 
 case of changing starting conditions, difference/different version was 
 obviously higher when the first gift with 
 fruit (large farms with crops) was changed by more than 100%. 
 Fruit production needs/demands (large/relatively large) labour input 
 and creates high incomes. Though (value of a number, ignoring its sign)s 
 of both indicators differ in these special pictures/situations, 
 the relative (popular things/general ways things are going) are uniform. As a result, 
 the model seems strong enough to compare different pictures/situations under identical starting conditions. 
 
 254 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 More details on the strength experiments and 
 supportive (related to studying numbers) tests can be found in Berger 
 (2000). 
 6. (related to computers and science) and policy pictures/situations 
 The MAS-CA model provides the opportunity to 
 carry out a wide range of (related to computers and science) and policy 
 pictures/situations by difference/different version of the following limits/guidelines: 
 - Input and product prices. Different (coming from the outside of something) price 
 governments make it possible to test out pictures/situations with 
 and without the association to Mercosur. 
 - Credit market conditions. Chilean extension clients 
 enjoyed special (and good) access to credit in the form of 
 give money tod loan rates and lower minimum shares of 
 equity capital. The model helps (putting into) use of such client-clearly stated/particular policies as well as special government investment programs for large- or 
 small-scale farm businesses/projects. 
 - Cash expenses. By difference/different version of farm and 
 non-farm cash expenses, either coupled or uncoupled to land, government helping actions such as 
 direct income moves (from one place to another), personal taxes and land 
 taxes can be taken into account. 
 - Labour opportunity costs. (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of specific labour opportunity costs provides ideas of 
 (away from cities)-city-based  traveling and generation cycles. It can 
 be assumed that families quit the farm business 
 when they reach certain dividing lines for off-farm 
 wages. Also younger farmers often have better 
 off-farm job opportunities and, as a result, farms 
 may close down when the older generation retires. 
 - Water supply. Differences/different versions of fresh water supplies and 
 distribution losses make it possible to analyse very 
 dry years as well as investments in improved crop-watering/rinsing with water (set of machines). 
 - Land and water markets. Patterns on rental markets can be driven by activity coefficients for special pictures/situations. Differences in shadow prices for a 
 clearly stated/particular plot may not reach certain dividing lines, this way, 
 preventing the transaction between possible (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.) 
 and landowners. 
 - Price and water supply expectations. It is possible to 
 think about/believe different forms of expectations, e.g. static, 
 (able to change and get better) and perfect intelligence, in order to analyse 
 the role of behavioural mixed-up nature in the process 
 of invention of new things and farm (change to make better/related to changing something). 
 
 - Adoption costs and network-dividing lines. These limits/guidelines are used to (describe the future) the diffusion of specific 
 inventions of new things under different ideas (you think are true) concerning communications between farm-families. 
 Pictures/situations with complete good  information 
 (zero adoption costs -- ideal technical change), 
 frequency-dependent sickness processes ((something that attracts lots of people) effect) or excess (slow or no movement/the force of something moving) ((way too much) high 
 adoption costs -- without technical change) can be 
 (like the real thing). 
 Policy options, which have direct effects on model 
 (numbers that change/things that change) such as prices or credit big plans/layouts/dishonest plans, can be 
 easily tested for their results on the supply response and farm incomes. It is by far more challenging 
 to test the hits/effects of indirect effects such as farming-based extension programs. One possibility is to run 
 the model with on-the-spot ideas (you think are true) about the effectiveness of extension on adoption dividing lines and then 
 examine the model's sensitivity. 
 
 7. Selected (testing out) results 
 In this section, some (testing out) results will be discussed to (show or prove) the model's (ability to be used for something) to 
 policy-related research questions. As pointed to/showed above, 
 resistance of the farm part/area and especially the Chilean 
 farmers association to Mercosur is rather strong. With 
 a view to this disagreement, a few policy options are 
 being discussed in Chile and attempts are being made 
 to modernise national farming by (helping increase/showing in a good way) the 
 diffusion of inventions of new things. The agent-based (testing out) 
 model tries to answer the questions listed in Section 2 and helps to identify winners and losers among 
 the farm holdings. 
 First, the (testing out) runs show/tell about a few typical diffusion patterns as shown in Fig. 3. Certain inventions of new things 
 such as 'contract farming' thinly spread quickly and reach 
 very high saturation levels among the commercial 
 farm holdings. Behavioural mixed-up nature and communication effects do not play an important as compared 
 to the example 'horticulture' in the case of campesino 
 farms. Here, we find amazing differences in diffusion speed and saturation level if less ideal (related to computers and science) conditions are assumed. Such patterns might 
 permit some form of government helping action in order to 'speed up' the diffusion (something that attracts lots of people). A third 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 Fig. 3. Selected diffusion patterns in Mercosur pictures/situations (share of adopters in %). 
 
 255 
 
 256 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 pattern shows the potentially path-dependent nature of diffusion processes as described by Cowan and 
 Gunby (1996). If a low degree of behavioural mixed-up nature is assumed, the invention of new things 'pear (large farm with crops)' 
 thinly spreads quickly and reaches almost 40% of the commercial farms. Once the (something that attracts lots of people) is moving, more 
 farmers are convinced to adopt than would be the 
 case with complete good  information. Under ideal 
 (related to computers and science) conditions, other inventions of new things appear 
 more money-making and no significant diffusion of 'pear 
 (large farm with crops)' happens. The fourth pattern for 'greenhouses with Chilean cinta-crop-watering/rinsing with water' underlines the 
 relevance of the multi-(related to computers and science) competition and 
 selection process proposed by Metcalfe (1988). Ideal 
 technical change would suggest an at first high level 
 of adoption, whereas, under behavioural mixed-up nature diffusion is delayed for a few years. Then the 
 (something that attracts lots of people) speeds up and leads to an even higher 
 level of saturation. (based on what's seen or what seems obvious), the relative advantage of this invention of new things changes among campesino 
 farms when fewer competing inventions of new things, as compared to the ideal (related to computers and science) picture/situation, are available for the less new and interesting farmers. As a result, 
 the usual two-part thing found in diffusion studies, old 
 against/compared to/or new technology, might (record by a camera or computer) only a small 
 piece of the complete picture and suggest sneaky and false recommendations for technology move (from one place to another) 
 programs. 
 
 A almost the same  argument applies to the public efforts 
 to (help increase/show in a good way) the adoption of modern water-saving crop-watering/rinsing with water ways of doing things as pointed to/showed by Fig. 4. The (possibility of/possible happening of)  water-saving technologies in both holding 
 types is high -- ideal technical change would set apart 
 about half of the total watered area to water-saving 
 ways of doing things within only 10 years. However, this seems 
 rather hopeful, at least if we trust the model results for the two (something that attracts lots of people) pictures/situations in which only 
 one-fifth of the total watered area is used for modern 
 ways of doing things such as drip, sprinkler or improved furrow 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water. 
 It is often stated that change (services businesses/government units) and policy 
 makers are best (gave opinions about what could or should be done about a situation) to increase their focus on 
 how the farmers perceive (related to computers and science) other choices 
 and which income these inventions of new things can create. As Fig. 5 confirms, association with Mercosur 
 offers a important/famous income (possibility of/possible happening of)  Chilean farming, at least in the research area with its (compared to other things) 
 good/willing agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) conditions. However, this 
 income potential will only be mistreated under the 
 idea (you think is true) of a very hopeful ideal invention of new things process. If behavioural mixed-up nature and (something that attracts lots of people) 
 effects are introduced, the model income results appear almost as modest as under the fully negative-minded 
 picture/situation without technical change. Huge government support, which was demanded by the Chilean 
 farmers association in 1996, may help to increase the 
 
 Fig. 4. Diffusion of water-saving crop-watering/rinsing with water methods in both the networks together in Mercosur pictures/situations (percentage of total area dedicated 
 to different methods). 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 257 
 
 Fig. 5. Group (related to a large area) income of farm-families in Mercosur pictures/situations (billion Chilean $_$). 
 
 farming-based incomes. Then, of course, the question is 
 whether the social net benefit is positive. More details on the income and policy analysis can be found 
 in Berger (2000). For instance, average household 
 incomes in the early and (a person or business who waits for a long time before trying something new) groups will 
 (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) grow apart and then stabilise. 
 Cochrane (1979) argued that technical change in 
 farming is a (related to people eating people) process in which the early 
 bird farmers soak up the land useful things/valuable supplies of lazy person farmers who have been driven out of business. The (testing out) runs also display a kind of 'treadmill' effect, 
 though in this case the less new and interesting families 
 (without being forced) close down their farm businesses/projects. Fig. 6 
 shows the once-a-year rate of change in the number of commercial and campesino farms over a 20 year (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet). 
 While under 'ideal' technical conditions, the average 
 once-a-year rate is about 0.1%, the idea (you think is true) of a (something that attracts lots of people) communication process leads to a (large/relatively large) 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change. Especially in the case of commercial farms, almost 6% of the 'laggard' adopter part disappears each year. Poorness is not the main 
 cause of closing down. Instead, increasing opportunity 
 costs for land (give a reason to do something) families to give up farming-based production. However, since scientific data were 
 not available on how farm-families respond to the 
 
 rising opportunity costs, model limits/guidelines are still 
 based on on-the-spot ideas (you think are true). A follow-up study will 
 aim at clearing up these (testing out) results. 
 Other results, given by the (testing out) experiments, relate to the (what people commonly call a/not really a) 'Schumpeter guesses' 
 of industrial patterns. According to these guesses, 
 large-scale businesses/projects are more new and interesting and, therefore, grow faster than their small-scale competitors. 
 Scientific opposite examples are often referred to in the books and the (testing out) runs suggest a less clear-cut 
 relationship between farm size and farm growth as 
 well. Fig. 7 shows the change of farm size classes 
 under 'ideal' and 'bandwagon' conditions. The first 
 number of farms in each class is (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ised to 100 
 and compared with values in the years 10 and 19. (based on what's seen or what seems obvious), the hidden (under) (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change in the (something that attracts lots of people) picture/situation leads to a decline in number of the 
 small-scale farms and rather energetic increases in the 
 middle farm size classes. Large-scale farms show less 
 habit/desire to growth when land is used as a measure 
 of farm size. 
 As far as the (change over time) of land and water rental 
 prices is concerned, the model seems to copy the 
 real-world prices and amounts of 1996 quite well. 
 For the later years, the model (describes the future) a small/short 
 
 258 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 Fig. 6. Average farm exits in Mercosur pictures/situations (% per year). 
 
 Fig. 7. Relative change in farm size classes in Mercosur pictures/situations (year 1 = 100). 
 
 upward habit/desire for land and water shadow prices. 
 However, differences between agro-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth)ly 
 favoured and not important locations are seen/obvious. The 
 rising number of parcels offered for rent in the (something that attracts lots of people) pictures/situations lessens increases in the level of 
 
 rent. Berger (2000) presents more results on the land 
 and water market issue. Informal once-a-year rental contracts do not offer an (reward or reason for doing something) to invest in repeating 
 crops and water-saving crop-watering/rinsing with water ways of doing things. As a 
 result, the (possible power or ability within/possibility of)  the market to (in a way that produces a lot with very little waste) 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 (give out things in a different way) useful things/valuable supplies among farm holdings is not fully used under the present conditions by far. In special 
 pictures/situations, with a high share of land and water (instances of buying things for money), diffusion speeds up a lot and income 
 increases. Much more research seems necessary to 
 improve our understanding of how (producing a lot with very little waste) land and 
 water markets come out, as Vogelgesang (1996) points 
 out. 
 
 8. Ends/end results and outlook 
 After at least 20 years of government rules, 
 most farming-based and development money-flow experts now 
 share the conviction that decentralisation, invention of new things and market solutions can help to overcome the 
 problems of the "critical triangle of development" 
 (Vosti and Reardon, 1997). As a result, energetic modelling ideas are needed/demanded which allow 
 the extension of money-based analysis to market-driven 
 invention of new things, useful thing/valuable supply use changes and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 (change over time). 
 The study presented here has shown that a (related to space or existing in space) 
 multi-agent approach offers an exciting opportunity 
 to model blended money-based behaviour and 
 policy responses from the farm-families' viewpoint. Including inter-household linkages 
 makes it possible to model money-based things in 
 which macrobehaviour comes out from micromotives, 
 as Thomas C. Schelling (Schelling, 1978) has put it 
 in his 1976 famous book. Such things are, 
 for instance, the diffusion of many inventions of new things, 
 transactions on (not totally pure/not totally correct) land markets, the use of 
 water for crop-watering/rinsing with water and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change in the farm 
 part/area. 
 A (related to space or existing in space) multi-agent model is applied to an scientific question in Chile in order to test its (ability to be used for something). 
 The (testing out) pictures/situations help to explore the possibility space for (related to a large area) farming-based development in the 
 big picture  of the Mercosur agreement. The usual 
 farm part/area strongly argues the trade agreement as 
 it expects extreme income losses. The model results 
 point to/show that Mercosur offers, in principal, higher 
 farm incomes through invention of new things and would also/and increase on-farm labour strength. However, if 
 frequency-dependent diffusion processes are carefully thought about/believed, modern farming practices (except maybe, supplier contracts with the agro-industry) will probably 
 
 259 
 
 not reach traditional farmers in a reasonable lapse of 
 time. (opposite from what's expected), the model hints that (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change will happen as traditional farmers will 
 experience convincing 'pull effects' to leave the farm 
 business. On the other hand, their income situation 
 probably would not have improved very much if 
 the trade agreement had not been signed. Therefore, 
 one might regard traditional farmers as relative but 
 not total losers of Mercosur. A follow-up study 
 based on an improved scientific data set will aim at 
 (checking for truth/proving true) these results. 
 The model consists of an money-based and a hydrologic part bound into a (related to space or existing in space) (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). The 
 integration of money-based and hydrologic processes 
 helps the (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) effects in 
 the use of water supplies. Although not presented 
 specifically in this paper, land use changes can easily be (described the future). The model's source code is written 
 in the C++ object-oriented programming language 
 and permits modular extensions to include (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) restrictions or to create (connecting points/ways of interacting with something) with GIS-applications. 
 Fully (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) money-based and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) models 
 for policy development and test remain an 
 high-reaching difficult project. In my opinion, the (describe the future)ive 
 ability (to hold or do something) of such models will be mainly restricted 
 by their built-in ideas (you think are true) relating to/connected to human 
 decision-making rather than by (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) limits/guidelines. 
 (related to space or existing in space) multi-agent models admit/recognize/respond to the fact that 
 (related to a large area) land use comes out from decentralised human 
 decisions. So, they can (take control of) very important features of 
 human-nature interaction. They are built on ideas 
 of microeconomic explanation that are usually not having enough 
 the current land-use models. Especially, they make it 
 possible to think about  the introduction of improved land 
 use practices as a farm investment decision to cope 
 with valuable thing from nature worsening. As argued by different authors, viewing land-improvement as (coming from the outside of something) 
 (related to computers and science) change may lead to sneaky and false policy 
 recommendations and certainly to an under-focus 
 on farmland investment as a policy issue. Further 
 testing of this model class and including 
 integrated (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and money-based modelling approaches is called for. The first results suggest that 
 once the practical problems of combining different 
 types of models are solved, GIS-based integrated 
 multi-agent models will become a powerful tool for 
 policy analysis and valuable thing from nature management. 
 
 260 
 
 T. Berger / Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 245-260 
 
 Responses 
 I am thankful to Stefanie Kirchhoff and especially 
 Regina Birner for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 
 The paper's structure and (the ease of reading something) has also benefited 
 from the suggestions made by David Colman. 
 References 
 Balmann, A., 1997. Farm-based modelling of (related to a large area) (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 change: a cellular robots<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
