239 
 
 THE 'NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS' 
 IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT: 
 INSIGHTS AND CHALLENGES 
 Michael Hubbard* 
 
 The ideas of the 'new institutional money flow/money-based studies' (NIE) and the 
 challenges it faces are discussed, using examples from farming-based 
 development. NIE has come out from the explanations of the firm,markets, 
 history and politics. It is seen as two suggestions (or plans): (i) the 
 nature of business contracts is figured out by/decided by uncertainties and 
 promises arising from market conditions and from winning/most common 
 institutions (property rights, conventions, authority structures); (ii) 
 winning/most common institutions are changed by social action responding (in the end) 
 to (move in a particular way/become popular) changes in relative prices. Scientific progress in NIE has 
 resulted from studies of contracting behaviour and has been greatest in 
 measurement of intraindustry transaction costs and relating them to 
 up-and-down (combination of different things together that work as one unit) among firms, But NIE is at an early stage in the 
 more complex scientific job  of analysing relations between markets 
 and winning/most common institutions. 
 
 The purpose of this paper is double. First, to provide a simple summary of 'new 
 institutional money flow/money-based studies' (ME) in the big picture  of farming-based development. This is 
 gave a reason for on the one hand by the width and complex difficulty of NIE and the increasing 
 interest in it, and on the other by the big part which the study of farming-based 
 institutions is playing in the development of NIE. Second, to focuse the 
 importance of understanding contracting behaviour to scientific progress in ME. 
 Section 1 outlines the coming into view of N E from the explanations of the fm, markets, 
 history and politics. Section 2 discusses two key suggestions (or plans) in NIE and the 
 (very important nature) of contracting. Section 3 ends/decides. 
 
 1. The Institutional Money flow Approach 
 Having set up as its market ideal an (surrounding conditions) of perfect information and 
 communication, microeconomics then long not paid attention to the actual costs of getting 
 business done - the delays, uncertainties, (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange), (blocking things) and cheating. 
 * Michael Hubbard is in the School of Public Policy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, 
 UK. Thanks to Bruce Trail1 and two unnamed referees for comments. This paper is an edited 
 version of a paper presented to the Farming-based Money flow (community of people/all good people in the world) Once-a-year Conference in 
 Cambridge, April 1995. 
 
 Journal of Farming-based Money flow 
 
 48 (2)(1997) 239-249 
 
 240 
 
 M.HUBBARD 
 
 Many textbooks still show typical business decisions as figured out by/decided by production 
 and distribution costs, prices and market structure alone, ignoring the costs 
 involved in making transactions. Farming-based money flow/money-based studies has been no less guilty of 
 this (something left out) than other branches of microeconomics, (even though there is the existence of) having long 
 incorporated risk and doubt of produce and price. 
 The costs of doing business and the social rights and responsibilities (institutions)
 which people plan to reduce them, are the focus of the 'new institutional 
 money flow/money-based studies' (NIE), which has attracted much attention (not very long ago), including that of the 
 Nobel (group that decides or promotes something). It differs from the earlier institutional money flow/money-based studies traditiont of 
 Veblen and Commons in its attempt 'to extend and generalise the explanation of price 
 and apply it to money-based and political institutions' (Eggertsson, 1990, p.3) or, in 
 other words, to endogenise institutions within the explanation of markets. TOthis extent 
 NIE is a neoclassical project, whereas the earlier institutional tradition tended to be 
 anti-neoclassical in its attacks upon the simplified 'rational' person assumed in 
 market explanation (Veblen, 1919, p.73). 
 At the heart of institutional money flow/money-based studies is the making, watching and enforcing of 
 contracts. The ease or difficulty of contracting, and the types of contract made, are 
 figured out by/decided by the level and nature of transaction costs, hidden (under) which is the 
 extent of (not totally pure/not totally correct) information involved in making a transaction. The contracts, 
 laws and conventions of a (community of people/all good people in the world) (its institutions) either change to reduce transaction 
 costs or do not do so. Institutions may benefit one group more thadat the expense of 
 another, they may outlive their usefulness, and - through being hard to change - lock a 
 (community of people/all good people in the world) onto an historical path which may or may not favour money-based development. 
 From this angle, money-based development is figured out by/decided by the extent to which a 
 country's institutions favour broad-based, (able to last/helping the planet) money-based growth. 
 This brief description points to/shows the width of institutional money flow/money-based studies. It comes out 
 from the explanations of the f i (transaction. costs), markets ((not totally pure/not totally correct) information), 
 politics (institutions used to favour interest groups) and history (institutional 
 change). Each of these aspects is introduced briefly. 
 Explanation of the Firm (Transaction Costs) 
 A key aspect of NIE is the role credited to transaction costs in deciding/figuring out 
 behaviour within and between organisations. Transaction costs are 'the costs of 
 arranging a contract ex ante and watching and enforcing it ex post' (Matthews, 
 1986). More generally, they are the 'costs of running the money-based system' (Arrow, 
 1969) or, figuratively, 'the money-based equal of friction in physical systems' 
 (Williamson, 1985). 
 NIE stems in part from Coase's 1937 argument that (making small) transaction costs 
 is the reason for the separate existence of the fm.A unique quality 
 of the firm, he suggested, is that market relations are suspended within it.$ So the 
 * 'Social rights and responsibilities' or 'rules of the game' is a broad definition of institution. Some writers, 
 e.g. Platteau, 1994. prefer to narrow the definition of institutions to those rules which are clearly 
 enforced, by that/in that way leaving out/keeping out conventions (normal behaviors). The broad definition is used in this paper, with 
 the subdivision of institutions into those which are (compared to other things) fixed (labelled 'prevailing 
 institutions') and contracts, which are more flexible. 
 t The former institutional money flow/money-based studies tradition saw institutions 'as settled habits of thought common to 
 the (statement that's not detailed) of man' (Veblen. 1919, p.239). Stein (1994) discusses further differences between the 
 'old' and 'new' institutional money flow/money-based studies. 
 $_$ Market relations refer to the ability to choose who to buy from or sell to in each transaction, whether 
 repeated or (like nothing else). A contract necessarily suspends market relations for its length of time, in return far 
 carrying out the exchange on the terms agreed. Only in spot markets do market relations win 
 continuously, since each agreed transaction is immediately complete. The firm is made up of 
 employment contracts of people, which tend to be longer term and incompletely specify the 
 output expected, in order to allow flexible use/military service. 
 
 THE 'NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS' IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 24 1 
 
 lower are transaction costs, the less reason for the non-market based integration 
 among related activities which makes up the firm; the greater are transaction costs, 
 ceteris paribus, the more it pays the firm to employ factors of production on a 
 longer-term basis to carry out a particular function. 
 This way the firm is seen in NIE as a flexible group - a 'nexus of contracts' designed to reduce transaction costs, rather than a fixed thing/business. Just as money-based 
 institutions, such as (system where farm workers were paid a share of crop profits), are a response to transactions costs, so too is the 
 nature of the contracts which make up the firm. The modem explanation of the f m ,with 
 its stress on explaining (combination of different things together that work as one unit) and coordination has been developed from this 
 basis. 
 Transaction costs enter into other, related aspects. of microeconomic explanation 
 clearly connected with or related to behaviour within organisations, namely the principal-agent (Jensen and 
 Meckling, 1976) and X-(wasting very little while working or producing something) (Liebenstein, 1966) books. The former 
 explores differences and (things that are almost the same as other things) in the interests of the principal (the owner of 
 the useful things/valuable supplies) and agent (employed to carry out a particular function) under different 
 conditions of doubt, where watching costs are too great for the principal to 
 watch/notice every detail of putting into use. The X-(wasting very little while working or producing something) debate focuses on 
 problems of (desire to do something/reason for doing something) and mood within the organisation, which can be partly 
 principal-agent problems. 
 
 Markets ((not totally pure/not totally correct) Information and Missing Markets) 
 
 Markets rather than firms are the starting point for the other main thin piece/string in the 
 development of the NIE. This has concerned itself with the behavioural 
 effects/results/suggestions of not enough and unequal (not mirror-images) availability of information to 
 possible buyers and sellers. The resulting risks might be reduced to back and forth/equal between people 
 advantage by non-market arrangements as maybe by (system where farm workers were paid a share of crop profits) agreements, or 
 by the coming into view of insurance markets (gave/given that the hidden (under) institutions 
 allow them to operate). This approach, connected with Stiglitz (1974, 1986) among 
 others, has been applied a lot in models explaining (away from cities) institutions (famously 
 (system where farm workers were paid a share of crop profits)), that come out  in response to needs to share risk and get useful things/valuable supplies 
 (Bardhan,1989). Markets may be missing either because of the low level of 
 development of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things), or because their coming into view has been blocked. Thin 
 or (not there; not present) markets mean less information and higher costs of getting it. 
 Specifically, they increase the costs of searching for information about buyers and 
 sellers, and about the amounts and qualities of products (that are bought and sold)  or services available; they 
 increase the costs of (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) to decide/figure out prices, the uncertainties in making, 
 watching and enforcing contracts, and the costs of enforcing property rights 
 (Eggertsson, 1990, p. 15). 
 The (quality of being liked a lot or done a lot) of the (not totally pure/not totally correct) information approach is pointed to/showed by the 
 widespread nature in current money-based analysis of (not totally pure/not totally correct) information ideas, such 
 as not mirror-images information, moral danger/risk, bad selection, bounded clear thinking, 
 first mover advantage and (grabbing at any easy opportunity). Further, the (not totally pure/not totally correct) information 
 approach has a well-known/obvious role in wider possible developments, such as total 
 action explanation and trade explanation. 
 The explanation of common property management has created an long/big 
 books since Olson's work on total action (1965) and Hardin's (1968) 
 'tragedy of the commons' statement that valuable things from nature held in common would 
 necessarily be insulted/be harmed. Information plays an important in the current agreement in 
 
 242 
 
 M.HUBBARD 
 
 that books, which has focused on common pool useful things/valuable supplies*: renewable useful things/valuable supplies 
 can be well managed under common ownership gave/given that the common users are 
 a group (good or well enough) small, (gave a reason to do something) and well-(based on knowledge and learning) to watch use, detect and 
 discourage  'free riders', and gave they know the hit/effect of use levels on the useful thing/valuable supply 
 (Wade, 1987). 
 In the case of trade explanation, textbook analyses of trade policy have focused the 
 benefits of free trade, and often assumed perfect competition in traded products (that are bought and sold) 
 markets, with domestic money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) the understood,objective of government. 
 Yet international farming-based markets tend to be (not totally pure/not totally correct), with (made different) 
 products, big protectionism, and little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) in commercial policy of 
 money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) as a policy priority. In trying to (cause agreement with) explanation and 
 reality, recent (things that are given/work that's done) (Maclaren, 1991, p.289) (show or prove) that in the 
 presence of (not totally pure/not totally correct) information, with risk disliking producers and/or people, 
 and incomplete markets for risk sharing, free trade is not necessarily the best 
 policy. Free trade is demoted from best to 'rule of thumb' and trade policy 
 (pflicularly use of protection (tools or objects used to do work or measure something)) becomes an institutional substitute for 
 rmssing insurance markets, a form of social insurance to importers, import 
 substituters or exporters against trade risks, for which they lobby politically. 
 History (Institutional Change) 
 The formal and informal rules which (communities of people) change or do not change in order to 
 reduce transactions cost, are argued in NIE to be a key factor deciding/figuring out 
 differences in money-based performance among (communities of people). As (communities of people)-become more 
 (money-based)/cheaply (having different things working together as one unit), unit production and distribution costs are reduced by 
 division of labour. But at the same time unit transaction costs increase, since the 
 face-to-face contact, knowledge and back and forth/equal between people (dependent on each other) of village life is lost, 
 creating greater doubt, opportunities for lie/lying and reducing enforceability 
 of contracts by two-way responsibilities. 'In Western (communities of people) over time complex 
 institutional structures have been figured out (skillfully defined and effectively 
 enforced property rights, formal contracts and (promises that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described), (related to big business) organization, 
 up-and-down (combination of different things together that work as one unit), limited (something you owe/something you're responsible for/disadvantage), (not having enough money to pay bills) laws . . .) . . . to prevent . . . 
 transactions from being too expensive and so to allow the working well gains of largerscale and improved technology to happen/be made real' (Bardhan, 1989 p.5-6). But money-based 
 institutions do not necessarily change in this way. To explain the different 
 performance of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) (in the past), North (1990) argues that institutional 
 arrangements (e.g. property rights, labour contracts) tend to be causing 
 ('path dependent'), until (popular things/general ways things are going) of change in relative prices so increase costs of 
 maintaining existing institutions, that pressure for (giving out things in a different way) of useful things/valuable supplies 
 becomes (so extremely attractive, sweet, etc., that you cannot resist) . 
 Politics (Institutions Used to Favour Interest Groups) 
 There is an added dimension of NIE, the political, referred to by Bates as its 
 'dark side'. Hidden (under) portion decisions is an initial distribution of wealth and 
 power. 'Lying behind the money-based explanation of institutions..is a political story . . 
 . w h i l e many kinds of institutions may provide improved (wasting very little while working or producing something) in markets . . . 
 [tlhose will be created that favour 'special interests' (Bates, 1989, p.90). Established 
 * Examples of common pool useful things/valuable supplies are shared fishing lakes and rivers and grazing areas, usually 
 
 classified as non-excludable, subtractable products (that are bought and sold). The management difficulty is in preventing 
 community members (and, more in a problem-filled way, nonmembers of the community) from over-using 
 the useful things/valuable supplies, and (giving a reason to do something) them to add/give to investment and maintenance. 
 
 THE 'NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS' IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 243 
 
 public organisations (e.g. marketing boards) become the focus for distributional 
 struggles between interest groups. 
 Four sources of power by sectional interests over markets can be identified 
 (White, 1993). Power came/coming from the state through its defence of particular 
 interests; associational power, coming from total action by market actors (e.g. 
 regulation by traders associations or farmers associations); power from market 
 structures (e.g.monopoly), and socially embedded power (i.e. power coming from 
 birth or status). 
 The (act of being taken control of by force) of markets by sectional interests (using changing/different combinations of 
 these sources of power) is stressed in the 'real markets' books (e.g. Hewitt de 
 Alcantera, 1992). This is a thin piece/string of institutional thinlung with its roots in social 
 (study of people), which attacks simplified neoclassical explanation for abstracting the 
 idea of markets from the realities of unfair exchange under which (away from cities) people in 
 poor countries live. It is argued that a local elite usually controls product 
 and factor markets and transport in an (connected, like chain links) manner, for their own benefit. 
 Under these facts or conditions (that surround someone) liberalisation of markets and withdrawal of state 
 services, it is argued, may decrease competition and increase suffering/difficult situation. The 
 recommendation is for case by case reform according to local facts or conditions (that surround someone), rather 
 than big changes. 
 
 2. Suggestions (or plans) of the New Institutional Money flow 
 From the discussion above, it is clear that NIE has (when one thing definitely causes another) flowing both ways 
 between markets and institutions. It is therefore important to distinguish types of 
 institution. Matthews (1986) identifies four: contracts, property rights, conventions 
 and authority. Of these, contracts are the most flexible institution, being the means 
 within which/by which parties design transactions to their back and forth/equal between people advantage under different degrees 
 of both market failure and institution failure. Transactions necessarily involve 
 understood or clear contracts specifying - to a greater or lesser extent - price, quality, 
 amount, timing of payment and delivery, penalties and rewards to encourage 
 contract fulfilment and distribute costs of failure. Property rights, conventions (the 
 unwritten moral rules) and social authority (governmental, associational and socially 
 embedded power, to use White's 1993 terms referred to earlier) make up winning/most common 
 institutions. They are 'prevailing' because they change only slowly. In sum, contracts 
 respond to market conditions, either helped by winning/most common institutions where these 
 are supportive (give promise), or interfered with where they are incomplete (creating 
 doubt) andor hateful to the transaction concerned. 
 Figure 1 illustrates the relation already described between contracts, markets and 
 winning/most common institutions. Contracts (which include firms as nexi of contracts) are the 
 helper (in an argument) institution through which markets and winning/most common institutions influence 
 each other. Market uncertainties and market promises (from repeated 
 transactions) partially decide/figure out the nature of contracts, which feed back to the 
 market as promise for further transactions. Winning/most common institutions also partially 
 decide/figure out contracts through the uncertainities and promises they provide 
 (related to/looking at/thinking about) clearness and enforcement of property rights, the conventions which must 
 be conformed with, and the social authority (who decides what) which must be 
 recognised in contracting. Contracts feed back into winning/most common institutions. They 
 leave winning/most common institutions unchanged if they are in similarity with them. Or they 
 slowly change winning/most common institutions, if the contracts do not obey those 
 institutions but enable transactions which are (money-based)/cheaply good to 
 (community of people/all good people in the world). 
 
 244 
 
 M.HUBBARD 
 
 Figure 1 Contracts as Helpers (in an argument)Between Markets and Winning/most common Institutions 
 uncertainties 
 
 7 
 
 uncertainties 
 
 1 
 PREVAILING 
 
 MARKETS 
 
 INSTITUTIONS 
 
 CONTRACTS 
 
 Business 
 Opportunities 
 
 Property rights 
 Conventions 
 Social authority 
 
 Including Firms 
 
 A 
 
 I 
 u 
 promise 
 
 E 
 
 I 
 
 pressure for 
 institutional change 
 
 There is (definitely/as one would expect) no mechanical relation between transactions, contracts and 
 winning/most common institutions. The idea of contract suggests a separate transaction 
 between independent parties, enforced (in the end) by access to help to the law. But the 
 reality of more complex and risky contracts (e.g. management contracts for large 
 farms) is that the transaction is not separate, not all (events that are dependent on other things that might or might not happen) can be (described the future) 
 and performance cannot be continuously measured. Success in such contracts 
 necessarily involves building a problem solving relationship between principal and 
 agent to spread risk and build trust. (in almost the same way), the reality of many contracts, large 
 or small, is that the parties are not independent, either because market power is 
 unequal (e.g. a small farmer dealing with a (related to one company having too much power) crop buyer) or social 
 authority is unequal (e.g. a (person or business who occupies a house, office, etc.) bound by tradition and (money owed)  to a land owner). 
 Final/best enforcement of contracts by the law depends on whether the contract is 
 legal or not, on the delays and (money-related) costs involved and sometimes on the legal 
 status of the parties. 
 The two central suggestions (or plans) of NIE, understood in Figure 1, are discussed here in 
 relation to some current issues in farming-based development. 
 Suggestion/possible plan I . The nature of business contracts is figured out by/decided by uncertainties and 
 promises arising from the transactions involved and from winning/most common institutions 
 (property rights, conventions, authority structures). 
 In farming-based development, there is lots of research recording/writing down differences 
 in contracts in different market conditions and institutional contexts. Examples from 
 the books on farm (living somewhere) and labour contracts include Happiness and Stem (1982), 
 Eswaran and Kotwal(1985), Newbery (1989), Zusman (1989), Platteau (1995) and 
 Sharma and Dreze (1996). 
 Transaction cost analysis has become the main means for analysing the hit/effect of 
 market conditions on contracting behaviour. It is criticised as weak on testability.* 
 But at the fm and industry level the scientific analysis of transaction costs is now 
 
 * 'IT10 the extent that the explanation depends on unobservable transaction costs, it often seems to fail the test 
 
 of falsifiability; just as the present set of money-based relations is (done for good reason) by current (unobservable) 
 transaction costs, changes in the nature of money-based relations are 'explained' by reference to 
 (in almost the same way) unobservable changes in transaction costs' (Stiglitz, 1986 p.263). 
 
 THE 'NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS' IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 245 
 
 (done or used by many people) in marketing explanation and practice (Moschandreas, 1994; Heskett et 
 al., 1994; Jaffee and Morton, 1995), especially relating to/connected to firms' decisions on 
 up-and-down (combination of different things together that work as one unit) or up-and-down co-(process where people are made priests, rabbis, etc.), and decisions on mode of entry into 
 new markets (Krishna Erramilli and Rao, 1993). It is founded on the possible 
 basis that firms prefer to (combine different things together so they work as one unit) and coordinate (up and down) the higher the 
 transaction costs they face. Studies (e.g. Honest  and Henderson, 1992; Jaffee, 1991) 
 examine production and trade arrangements and attempt to explain degrees of 
 integration among market actors, and the types of contracts they make, from the 
 size and nature of transaction costs. Transaction costs for a producer are argued to 
 be higher the less flexible and powerful is the producer and the less (expected/able to be known beforehand) the 
 market (surrounding conditions). This way transaction costs are higher the greater is valuable thing 
 level of detail,* the greater the doubt surrounding the exchange, and the less the 
 market power in relation to the buyers of the product and suppliers of the inputs. 
 The less competition in markets upstream and downstream, the less is the 
 producer's market power, meaning greater (ability to make smart decisions) for the producer's buyers and 
 suppliers to change  trading terms in their favour. 
 Jaffee's analysis of Kenya's (plant-related) exports is a recent example of a 
 transaction cost study in the farming-based part/area of a lower income country (Jaffee, 
 1991). Valuable thing level of detail was guessed by the need for (made to do one thing very well) equipment in 
 grading, storage and transport, and by processing (making a lot of an item so each item costs less). Indicators 
 used for doubt and market structure were (likelihood to go bad in a short time), seasonal restrictions on 
 the market, market concentration, (division of something into smaller parts), and brand name (using different things). 
 The study's results pointed to/showed the importance of up-and-down (combination of different things together that work as one unit) between 
 exporting and importing f m s , judged through long-term contracts and family 
 connections in the most successful (plant-related) export f m s , given the high degree 
 of doubt describing the industry. 
 A limitation of transaction costs analysis is that it now only provides tools 
 for examining the hit/effect of the market on contracts, not the hit/effect of winning/most common 
 institutions. This is maybe no disadvantage where the concern of the analysis is to 
 help firms make (related to a plan to reach a goal) decisions within a stable and developed institutional 
 (surrounding conditions). It is a big limitation where the institutional (surrounding conditions) is 
 unstable or undeveloped as is often the case in farming-based development. 
 Not enough or hateful winning/most common institutions increase transaction costs, especially in 
 insurance and finance which rely heavily on clear property rights. Higher contract 
 (back-and-forth conversation to agree on something) and enforcement costs (the other side of the rent searcher's (deal with a good price/agreement between people)) are 
 the consequence, needing/ordering political and (money-related) influence to be effective. 
 One important result of not enough or hateful winning/most common institutions, 
 combined with not enough market (set of machines) and (money-related) markets, may be low 
 (blocking things) to entry and high (blocking things) to growth, resulting in a bimodal industrial 
 structure. For example, in the institutionally bad business (surrounding conditions) of much 
 of Africa farming-based processing and trade often appears bimodal in structure. Large 
 operators tend to be (up and down) (combined different things together so they worked as one unit), most clearly in export production, 
 where a huge company may internalise every stage from input provision and 
 extension guidance to farmers, to processing and export. B.A.T. tobacco operations in 
 Uganda are an example.? At the other extreme of size, small informal farming-based 
 processors are together gaining sales but individually appear unable to 
 overcome (blocking things) to growth. Current changes in the milling and meat processing 
 businesses in Namibia (Hubbard 1989). Kenya (Lewa and Hubbard, 1993, 
 Zimbabwe and South Africa provide examples. (removal of controlling laws) of city-based  murdering 
 * The level of detail of an valuable thing is high when it cannot easily be used for different production, so that 
 
 t 
 
 investing in it allows less flexibility to the owner, whose operations are then locked into that type 
 of production and the similar input and sales channels. For example. the valuable thing level of detail of 
 h i t trees is higher than that of once-a-year crops, since they take a few years to mature. 
 From own interviews with B.A.T. Uganda in 1994. 
 
 246 
 
 M.HUBBARD 
 
 and milling there have resulted in strong growth of small scale slaughterhouses and 
 hammer milling of flour, But they face big (money-related) and market (blocking things) to 
 individual (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). Together these developments at the large and small ends of 
 the industry create a 'missing middle'. Much of the growing (cash transactions that aren't taxed or watched by the government) 
 looks like North's description (1990) of the 'bazaar (process of people making, selling, and buying things)' which comes out when 
 a (community of people/all good people in the world) does not develop (good) enough institutions for promise and finance: 
 seen as reliance on face-to-face contracts needing/ordering long (back-and-forth conversation to agree on something), 
 (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong), lack of access to capital, and little means of spreading risk. 
 Suggestion/possible plan 2. Winning/most common institutions are changed by social action responding to 
 (move in a particular way/become popular) changes in relative prices 
 
 As illustrated by Figure 1, winning/most common institutions (property rights, conventions 
 and social authority) stay steady limits/guidelines which, together with market 
 conditions, decide/figure out the nature of contracts. Their (slow or no movement/the force of something moving) is the 'path dependence' 
 which is argued to account for major differences between countries' money-based 
 development experience. The (slow or no movement/the force of something moving) may be partly caused by increasing returns 
 (positive or negative) to particular institutions (Arthur, 1988). In the case of 
 money-based growth 'an (able to change and get better)ly (producing a lot with very little waste) path . . . allows for no more than choices 
 under doubt, for the pursuit of different trial methods of doing activities, 
 and for an (producing a lot with very little waste) (reactions or responses to something/helpful returned information) (machine/method/way) to identify choices that are (compared to other things) 
 inefficient and to eliminate them . . . [U]nproductive paths . . create organizations 
 and interest groups with a stake in the existing restrictions . . . [and] . . . provide few 
 rewards from increases in the stock of (money-based)/cheaply useful knowledge' (North, 
 1990 p.99). 
 The guess of path dependence begs questions about institutional change: 
 how the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) gets locked onto one path and is eventually moved onto another. 
 One line of question/request for information (Schotter, 1981; Sugden, 1986; Runge, 1986; Axelrod, 1988) often focusing on associational contract issues (total action) in managing 
 common property forests, grazing lands and water - has used science to change 
 rules of behaviour from self-reinforcing, repeated games of plan. These lead to 
 confidence (promise) among the players in a well-tried plan. Another (Hayami 
 and Ruttan, 1985) has tried to endogenise 'secondary institutions' (mainly 
 property rights) in the explanation of markets via caused institutional invention of new things. 
 Changing relative prices of products and factors create a demand (from people 
 and producers) for change in institutions which is supplied by political clever creators.* 
 Boserup's classic statement/book (1965) of population pressure increasing farming-based 
 working well is of this type. 
 Ideas from both these lines of question/request for information lack completeness. Surrounded, 
 microlevel promise games do not explain the larger social picture seen as 
 (many different kinds of people or things) and doubt, to which 'prisoners two-headed problem' games with their Paretoinferior results often seem more appropriate, especially in the socially 
 mixed-up/disturbed conditions of many developing countries (Grabowski, 1988). Clearing the 
 'market' for (wasting very little while working or producing something)-improving inventions of new things in property rights must deal with 
 'the badness of the total action and free-rider problems that limit the ability 
 of possible gainers to get their act together, (Bardhan, 1989 p.7-8), with the 
 (many different kinds of people or things) of country experiences of institutional change, and with the fact that 
 institutional inventions of new things are often for (related to reducing big differences between people), political reasons which reduce 
 rather than increase (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 
 * 
 
 The caused invention of new things explanation builds on Hayami and Ruttan's earlier explanation of caused technical 
 invention of new things in farming, in which differences in relative factor prices bias technical change towards 
 land saving or labour saving inventions of new things (Hayami and Ruttan, 1985). 
 
 THE 'NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS' IN AGRICLTLTLlRAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 247 
 
 Experience with tries to bring about institutional change in farming-based 
 marketing in developing countries under (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) programmes 
 demonstrate the complex difficulty of the process.* For example, reform programmes for 
 grain marketing parastatals (e.g. in Kenya and Zimbabwe) usually involve phased 
 removal of restrictions on private marketing, greater (related to big business) independence for the 
 parastatals, introduction of price bands in place of fixed prices as the target for price 
 stabilisation by the marketing parastatal, performance contracts for staff to increase 
 their (wasting very little while working or producing something), and separation of the parastatal's commercial from its social 
 functions. 
 The social functions are defined as those which are begun/tried for 
 government to help farmers or people, usually involving buying at above the 
 market price, buying in remote areas, and selling at below market price. However, 
 uncertainties in the wider institutional (surrounding conditions) have created (problems, delays, etc.): 
 (i) 
 
 Marketing boards are not confident that governments will actually respect 
 their independence. There is a property rights problem here between boards 
 and governments. 
 
 (ii) 
 
 Marketing boards are not confident that government will meet the social costs 
 they get/cause  on government's behalf. The guidance to separate social from 
 commercial costs is standard, coming from welfare money flow/money-based studies. But this 
 breaks down on practical grounds if there is government failure, (in other words) if the 
 budget is unable to meet its (responsibility/duty) to fund the social costs. 
 
 (iii) as long as marketing boards have a large (your share of sales out of all sales) and hold large reserve 
 stocks, investment by private traders may be discouraged through fear that 
 marketing boards, under political direction, will drive marketing margins 
 down by buying above market price and selling below market price. 
 Suggestion/possible plan 2 is the more angry of the two NIE (makes suggestions to). The 
 (machine/method/way) called for/used by NIE people (who try to explain things) (e.g. North, 1990) finally to deliver 
 institutional change (i.e. that the trend change in relative prices (forces (on people)/causes an inconvenient situation) such great 
 costs that change becomes (so extremely attractive, sweet, etc., that you cannot resist) ) needs/demands total action to bring it about. 
 But total action has multiple social as well as money-based (things that decide other things) and is 
 hard to (describe the future). Very differently the hit/effect of winning/most common institutions and market 
 conditions on transactions (Suggestion/possible plan I), though complex, is (easy to get to, use, or understand) to study 
 through contracting behaviour. 
 
 3. End/end result 
 Ten years  ago RCO Matthews noted: 
 '[Iln the money flow/money-based studies of institutions, explanation is now outstripping scientific 
 research to an too much/too many extent . . . Possible modelling may or may not be 
 harder in this field than in others, but scientific work in it is argued with 
 by a special difficulty. Because money-based institutions are complex, they d o 
 not lend themselves easily to (numbers-based) measurement . . . There is a 
 challenge here to money-flow experts . . .' (Matthews, 1986:917). 
 The challenge is being met most effectively in the measurement and analysis of 
 intraindustry transaction costs, which have become a valuable tool in decision 
 making. But this most developed part of NIE is also its most limited. In the wider 
 
 * 
 
 Information on the experience with (putting into) use of marketing board reform from Jones and 
 Beynon (1993), Jiriyengwa (1993). Sankhani (1993). Sichinga (1993). Coulter (1994). Jones (1994), 
 Jaffee and Morton (1995) and Lewa and Hubbard (1995) plus own interviews with boards in 
 Zimbabwe. 
 
 248 
 
 M.HUBBARD 
 
 and more complex job  of measuring the effect of winning/most common institutions on 
 markets, NIE is at an earlier stage, Studies of contract enforcement (e.g. Fafchamps, 
 1996) are providing one way forward. 
 References 
 Arrow, K. (1969). The Organisation of Money-based Activity: Issues Important to the Choice of Market 
 Against/compared to/or Non-Market Portion, in The Analysis of and Test of Public Expense: The PPB 
 System, Volume 1. US Joint Money-based Committee, 1st Session. 59-73. 
 &amp;OW. 
 K. and Pines, 
 D. (eds.), The (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as an Changing Complex System Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley 
 
 Arthur, W. (1988). Self-Reinforcing (machines/methods/ways) in Money flow, in Anderson, P., 
 
 Axelrod, R. (1988). The Problem of Cooperation. in Cowen T. (ed.), The Explanation of Marker Failure. 
 Fai&#126;fax,George Mason University Press. The Cat0 Institute, 237-253. 
 Bardhan, P. (1989). Different Approaches to the Explanation of Institutions. in Money-based Development, in 
 Bvdhan, P. (ed.) (1989), The Money-based Explanation of Land-related Institutions. Oxford, Oxford 
 University Press. 3- 17. 
 Bates, R. (1989). Beyond the Miracle of the Market: The Political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of Land-related Development 
 in Kenya. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
 Happiness, C. and Stem, N. (1982). Palanpur: The (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of an Indian Village. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
 Boserup, E. (1965). The Conditions of Farming-based Growth: The Money flow ofAgrarian Change Under 
 Population Pressure. London, George Allen and Unwin. 
 Coase, R. (1937). The Nature of the Firm, Money-baseda (New Series), 386405. 
 Coulter. J. (1994). (easing government rules) of Cereals Marketing in Sub-Saharan Africa: Lessons From 
 Experience. Marketing Series 9. Chatham, UK, Natural Useful things/valuable supplies Institute. 
 Eggensson, T. (1990). Money-based Behnviour and Institutions. Cambridge Surveys of Money-based 
 Books, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
 Eswaran. M. and Kotwal. A. (1985). A Explanation of (based on a written agreement) Structure in Farming, American 
 Money-based Review, 75(3), 352-367. 
 Fafchamps. M. (1996). The Enforcement of Commercial Contracts in Ghana, World Development. 24(3), 
 427-448. 
 Honest. S . and Henderson, D. (1992). Transaction Costs as (things that decide other things) of Up-and-down Coordination in the 
 US Food Businesses, American Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 74,941-950. 
 Grabowski, R. (1988). The Explanation of Caused Institutional Invention of new things: A Opinion, World Development. 
 16(3), 385-394. 
 Hardin, G. (1968). The Terrible event of the Commons, Science, 162, 1243-1248. 
 Hayami, Y.and Ruttan, V. (1 985). Farming-based Development: An International (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), Baltimore, 
 Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Heskett, J.. Jones, T. O., Loveman, G. W., Sasser. W. E. and Schlesinger. L. A. (1994). Putting the 
 Service-(money made/good thing received) Chain to Work. Harvard Business Review, 72(2), 164-174. 
 Hewitt de Alcantera, C. (1992). Markets in Rule/basic truth and Practice. (related to Europe) Journal of Development 
 Research. 4(2), 1-17. 
 Hubbard. M. (1989). Current Issues in the Namibian Animals Part/area and Possible Development 
 Efforts in the Short and Medium Term. Development Management Group, University of 
 Birmingham. 
 laffee, S. (1991). Kenya's (plant-related) Export Marketing: A Transaction Cost (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Paper 
 Presented at the Globalisation of the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable System, at the University of 
 California, Santa Cruz, 1991. Reprinted in Leader, J. (ed.) (1993)Farming-based and Food Marketing 
 in Developing Countries: Selecred Readings. Wallingford, CAB International. 
 Jaffee. S. and Morton, J. (eds.) (1995). Marketing Africa's High-Value Foods: (serving to compare two or more things) Experience 
 of an Newly-seen Private Part/area: Dubuque. Kendall/Hunt Publishing. 
 Jensen, M. and Meckling, W. (1976). Explanation of the Firm: Managerial Behaviour, (service business/government unit/power/functioning) Costs and 
 Ownership Structure. J o u m l of (money-related) Money flow, 3(4), 305-360. 
 Jiriyengwa, S. (1993). Grain Market Liberalisation and Social Goals: The Grain Marketing Board in 
 Zimbabwe. Food Policy. August, 3 16-324. 
 
 THE 'NEWMSllTUTlONAL ECONOMICS' IN AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 249 
 
 Jones, S. (1994). Farming-based Marketing in Africa: (turning things over from the government to private companies) and Policy Reform. Oxford, Food 
 Studies Group. 
 Jones, S. and Beynon, J. (1993). Public and Private Parts/areas in Reformed Food Markets in Africa. 
 Oxford, Food Studies Group. 
 Krishna Erramilli, M. and Rao, C. (1993). Service Firms' International Entry-Mode Choice: A Changed 
 Transaction Cost Analysis Approach. Journal of Marketing, 57, 19-38, 
 Lewa, P. and Hubbard, M. (1995). Kenya's Cereal Part/area Reform Programme: Managing the Politics of 
 Reform. Food Policy, 20(6), 573-584. 
 Liebenstein, H. ( 1966). Allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) vs. 'X-(wasting very little while working or producing something)'. American Money-based Review, 56, 392415. 
 Maclaren. D. (1991). Farming-based Trade Policy Analysis and International Trade Explanation: A Review of 
 Recent Developments. Journal of Farming-based Money flow, 42(3), 250-297. 
 Matthews. R. C. 0. (1986). The Money flow of Institutions and the Sources of Growth. Money-based 
 Journal, 96,903-918. 
 Moschandreas, M. (1994). Business Money flow. London and New York. Routledge. 
 Newbery, D. (1989). Farming-based Institutions for Insurance and Stablisation, in Bardhan, P. (ed.) (1989). 
 The Money-based Explanation of Land-related Institutions. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 267-298. 
 North, D. (1 990). Institutions, Institutional Change and Money-based Performance. Cambridge, Cambridge 
 University Press. 
 Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Total Action. Cambridge, Mass., Haward University Press. 
 
 Platteau, J.-P. (1994). Behind the Market Stage Where Real Societies Exist: Part I: The Role of Private 
 and Public Order Institutions. Journal of Development Studies, 30(3), 533-577. 
 Platteau, J.-P. (1995). A (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for the Analysis of Changing Customer/financial supporter-Client Ties in Land-related 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). World Development, 23(5), 767-786. 
 Runge, C. (1986). Common Property and Total Action in Money-based Development. World 
 Development, 14, (June), 623-635. 
 Sankhani. D. (1993). Grain Marketing in Change: T h e ADMARC Case. Paper Presented to AFMESA 
 Workshop on Grain Marketing in Change, October 1993, Harare. Network and Centre for 
 Farming-based Marketing Training in Eastern and Southern Africa (FAO). 
 Schotter, A. (198 1). The Money-based Explanation of Social Institutions. Cambridge, Cambridge University 
 Press. 
 Sharma. N. and Dreze, J. (1996). (system where farm workers were paid a share of crop profits) in a North Indian Village. Journal of Development 
 Studies, 33(1), 1-39. 
 Sichinga, C. (1993). The Future Role of Grain Marketing (services businesses/government units) in the Light of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 Policy Changes: The Case of Zambia. Paper Presented to AFMESA Workshop on Grain Marketing 
 in Change, October 1993, Harare. Network and Centre for Farming-based Marketing Training in 
 Eastern and Southern Africa (FAO). 
 Stein, H. (1994). Explanations of Institutions and Money-based Reform in Africa. World Development, 22(12), 
 1833-1849. 
 Stiglitz. J. (1974). (rewards or reasons for doing something) and Risk-Sharing in (system where farm workers were paid a share of crop profits). Review of Money-based Studies. 41,219255. 
 Stiglitz. J. (1986). The New Development Money flow. World Development, 14(2), 257-265. 
 Sugden, R. (1986). The Money flow of Rights, Cooperation and Wel$are. Oxford, Blackwell. 
 Veblen. T. (1919). The Place of Science in Modem Civilizarion and Other (written opinions). New York, Huebsch. 
 Wade, R. (1987). The Management of Common Property Useful things/valuable supplies: Finding a Cooperative Solution. 
 World Bank Research (person who watches something), 2, (July), 229-234. 
 White, G. (1993). Towards a Political Analysis of Markets, in White G. (ed.). The Political Analysis of 
 Markets, IDS Announcement. 24(3), (July), Sussex. Institute of Development Studies. 
 Williamson, 0. (1985). The Money-based Insrirurions of (a system where people own money and valuable things). New York, Free Press. 
 Zusman, P. (1989). Poor people' Risk Disgust and the Choice of Marketing Helpers (in an argument) and Contracts: 
 A (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) Explanation of Balance Marketing Contracts, in Bardhan, P. (ed.), The Money-based 
 Explanation of Land-related Institutions, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 297-3 16. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
