 Farming-based Money flow, 1 (1987) 195-207 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 195 
 
 On Why Farming (Lowers in number/gets worse) with Money-based 
 Growth 
 Kym Anderson 
 Department of Money flow, University of Adelaide, Adelaide S.A. 500 1 (Australia) 
 
 (Accepted 15 April 1987) 
 
 Abstract 
 
 Anderson, K., 1987. On why farming declines with money-based growth. Agric. 
 Econ., 1: 195-207. 
 When money-based growth is seen as a slow rise in the demand for food 
 and fast growth in farm relative to non-farm working well, it is understandable 
 that farming in a closed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) declines in relative terms as that (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 develops. But why should agriculture decline in almost all open growing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) also, including those able to keep/hold a (serving to compare two or more things) advantage in farming-based products? A important part of the answer is that the demand for non-tradable 
 products (that are bought and sold)  tends to be income elastic, so useful things/valuable supplies are (changed to flow or route differently) to their production 
 . 
 . 
 even m open economLes. 
 
 Introduction 
 
 One of the most in control/most common changes that describes a growing (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is the 
 (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) decline in the farming-based part/area. This thing/event is commonly attributed to two facts: the slower rise in the demand for food as compared with other products (that are bought and sold)  and services, and the fast development of new farm 
 technologies which lead to expanding food supplies per hectare and per worker 
 (Schultz, 1945; Kuznets, 1966; Johnson, 1973). 
 It is true that such conditions could lead to a relative decline of farming 
 around the world, or in a smaller closed (process of people making, selling, and buying things). But why does farm-related decline in 
 almost all open growing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things)? Might not some countries with fast 
 growth in farming-based relative to non-farming-based working well improve their 
 (serving to compare two or more things) advantage in farming (good or well enough) to prevent their farming-based 
 parts/areas from (lowering in number/getting worse) in relative terms? 
 The purpose of this paper is to use standard explanation and scientific realities 
 0169-5150/87/$03.50 
 
 © 1987 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 196 
 TABLE 1 
 The (lowering in number/getting worse) importance of farming, 1960 to 1981 
 
 GDP 
 
 Employment 
 
 Exports 
 
 Relative labour 
 working well 
 in farming 
 
 Low-income countries 
 1960 
 1981 
 
 48 
 37 
 
 77 
 73 
 
 70 
 31 
 
 0.62 
 0.51 
 
 Lower middle-income countries 
 1960 
 1981 
 
 36 
 22 
 
 71 
 
 54 
 
 76 
 39 
 
 0.51 
 0.41 
 
 Upper middle-income countries 
 1960 
 1981 
 
 18 
 10 
 
 49 
 30 
 
 46 
 18 
 
 0.37 
 0.33 
 
 6 
 3 
 
 18 
 6 
 
 23 
 15 
 
 0.32 
 0.52 
 
 Share of farming (%) in 
 
 Industrial (systems where supply and demand controls prices and production) 
 1960 
 1981 
 
 "Agriculture's share of GDP divided by its share of employment. 
 Source: World Bank (1983, 1984, 1985). 
 
 to explain why farming tends to (lower in number/get worse) even for (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) able to keep/hold a 
 strong (serving to compare two or more things) advantage in farming. 
 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of decline 
 The relative decline of farming is clear from both thin sliceal and 
 time-series data for the major country groupings shown in Table 1. The negative relationships between agriculture's shares of gross domestic product 
 ( G D PSH), employment ( EMPSH) and exports ( EXPSH) on the one hand, 
 and income per person ( YPC) on the other, are very significant (related to numbers). 
 These shares are also negatively connected with population density per unit 
 of farming-based land ( PD), although significantly so only for EXPSH. This is 
 clear from the following OLS moving backward equation guesses, which are based 
 on World Bank data for 1981 for 70 countries with (groups of people/animals/things) more than 1 
 million ( t-values in parentheses): 
 GDPSH = 87 
 
 9.2ln YPC 
 ( 6.7) 
 
 EMPSH= 179 
 
 18.5ln YPC 
 (16.6) 
 
 197 
 A'" 
 Food 
 
 F' 
 
 F" 
 
 0 
 
 M 
 
 B 
 
 M' 
 
 B'" M" 
 
 B' 
 
 B" 
 
 Manufactures 
 
 Fig. 1. The world (or closed) (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 
 EXPSH 
 
 = 152 
 
 - 
 
 9.5ln YPC 
 ( 5.1) 
 
 8.5ln PD 
 ( 4.7) 
 
 The measured rates of decline in agriculture's importance would be even faster 
 were it not for the fact that poor countries tend to underprice farming-based products while high-income countries tend to overprice them. 
 Reasons for agriculture's relative decline 
 Republican(s) share 
 
 To understand why farming declines, it is simplest to go ahead in stages, 
 beginning with the GD P share. Think about/believe first the worldwide (or a closed) (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 producing with available useful things/valuable supplies only two final products (that are bought and sold), food (F) from the 
 farming-based part/area and non-food manufactures (M) from the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). If AB in Fig. 1 represents the production possibility edge of something/unexplored area for the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in the first period and U a consumption (not caring) curve, then tangency 
 point E will be the point of balance where supply equals demand for both 
 products (that are bought and sold). The balance price ratio is the slope of price line 1. 
 Suppose that with money-based growth the production possibility curve moves 
 out equi-(along with something else/related to something else). Then because the income ability to stretch of demand for 
 food is less than one (Engel's Law), the new balance pointE' will be to 
 the southeast of the ray OE extended and the new price line 2 will be steeper 
 
 198 
 
 than price line 1 (assuming, as is reasonable, that the move/change in the production 
 possibility curve is not only due to population growth, so that per person income 
 rises). That is, the ratio of food to non-food production falls and so too does 
 the ratio of food to non-food prices. Because of this agriculture's share of GDP must 
 fall as a result of this pattern of money-based growth (where GDP is the summed 
 product of price and amount for the two parts/areas in this simple model with no 
 intermediate inputs). 
 If non-food manufactured products (that are bought and sold)  are the numeraire and pis the price of food 
 in terms of manufactures, then from Fig. 1 gross domestic product in this model 
 increases from Fp + M to F'p' + M', where ' points to/shows the new amounts and 
 price ratio. Since M/F &amp;lt; M' /F' andp&amp;gt; p', agriculture's share ofGDP decreases 
 from Fp/ (Fp+ M) to F'p' / (F'p' + M') or, equally, from 1/ (1 + M/Fp) 
 to 1/ (1 + M' /F'p'). 
 Under what facts or conditions (that surround someone) would the GDP share of this (process of people making, selling, and buying things)'s food part/area expand with money-based growth? There are two extreme possibilities, both 
 shown in Fig. 1. One involves working well growth being heavily (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) in favour 
 of non-food, as with a move/change to E"; the other involves the opposite extreme 
 condition, as at E "'. In both cases the part/areaal working well bias has to be (good or well enough) extreme for the effect on the price ratio to more than offset the opposite effect on relative amounts ofF and M. In terms of Fig. 1, the pointE" 
 and the slope of price line 3 would need to be such that M/Fp&amp;gt; M" /F"p". 
 Since M/F &amp;lt; M' /F' &amp;lt; M" /F", a very large increase in the price of food relative 
 to non-food- that is, a very skewed move/change in the production possibility curve 
 in favour of non-food- would be needed/demanded to prevent agriculture's share of 
 GDP from falling as this (process of people making, selling, and buying things) grows. Even if there were to be no working well growth in farming, it is still possible that the skewed effect of income 
 growth on demand could outweigh the skewed effect of working well growth on 
 supply so that the price of food relative to non-food, and because of this agriculture's 
 share of GDP, falls in this growing worldwide (or closed) (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 The other extreme case, atE"', seems even less likely: if growth were to be 
 (good or well enough) (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) in favour of the food part/area to secure/make sure of a new balance at 
 E 0 on the ray OE extended, for example, so that the relative amounts ofF and 
 M produced were the same as at E, the lower relative price of food at E 0 would 
 still secure/make sure of a drop in the food part/area's share of GDP. That is, E "' has to be even 
 further to the northwest corner of Fig. 1 than E 0 - 
 Two reasons can be given as to why an result such as E"' is unlikely. One 
 is that since farming usually is the more labour-intensive part/area of a developing country, the collection of capital per worker as money-based growth go aheads will tend to encourage (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) ofthe more capital-intensive part/area at 
 the expense of the more labour-intensive part/area. This is a standard trade true idea due to Rybczynski (1955). The second reason is based on an scientific 
 (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement). While the evidence on the long-run (popular thing/general way things are going) in the price 
 of first (or most important) products relative to manufactures is still subject to debate, partie- 
 
 199 
 200 
 150 
 
 100 
 75 
 
 1900 
 
 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1960 
 
 Fig. 2. Real international prices of farming-based products, 1900-1985 (1979-81 = 100). Weighted 
 average of international prices in US dollars for grains, animals products, sugar, drinks, vegetable oils, bananas, fibres, rubber, tobacco, hides and skins, and timber, (lowered/flattened from losing air) by the qualityadjusted US producer price index for industrial products (that are bought and sold), with weights based on the share of each 
 valuable thing in the value of world trade in 1979-81. When the logarithm of this relative price index 
 (P) is moved backward against time ( T), the equation received/got is P= 0.25-0.0051 T UP= 0.48; tvalue= -8.8). (Collected by the author from data given in Grilli and Yang (1986) and increased/added with updated data from World Bank files for which the author is owing M.C. 
 Yang.) 
 
 A, 
 Food 
 
 A" 
 
 A 
 
 I 
 
 I 
 
 F' 
 
 &mdash;&mdash;+&mdash;1 
 
 I 
 I 
 
 I 
 0 
 
 B" 
 
 M 
 
 Manufactures 
 
 Fig. 3. A small, open (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 
 ularly on the extent to which quality changes/recalculations have been made to available 
 price indexes of manufactured products (that are bought and sold), the weight of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) seems to support 
 the view that farming-based prices have (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) relative to industrial product 
 prices (see, for example, Spraos, 1980; Sapsford, 1985; Grilli and Yang, 1986). 
 One complete series, developed by the World Bank for the period 
 1900-1985, is shown in Fig. 2. The rate of decline is (a) little faster if drinks 
 are left out/kept out, and (a) little slower if non-food farming is left out/kept out, but in all 
 
 200 
 
 cases the guessed coefficients for the time (number or thing that changes) in the log-linear moving backward equations are much less than zero at the 0.1% level. Together these 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) suggest that results to the northwest of E 0 such as E"' in Fig. 
 1 are most unlikely, and so will be ignored. 
 The above model is appropriate for the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a whole, and for a 
 closed national (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Think about/believe now a small country in an open (world-wide process of people making, selling, and buying things), with again only two parts/areas producing the tradable products F and M. 
 Suppose that money-based growth in the rest of the world is not strongly (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 against farming, so the international price of food relative to manufactures 
 is falling as Fig. 2 suggests. If there is no growth in this small country then the 
 decline (in other countries) in the relative price of food from p to p' will result in a 
 decline in the share of farming in this (process of people making, selling, and buying things)'s GDP. This is clear from 
 the movement from E to E' in Fig. 3, since both the price and the amount of 
 food relative to manufactures fall. 
 What if this small (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is also growing? If its growth is such that the 
 production possibility curve moves out equi-(along with something else/related to something else), then agriculture's share of GDP must still (lower in number/get worse). This is because in Fig. 3 F" /M" would 
 then equal F' /M' ( &amp;lt;F/M) and, since p' is still the ruling international and 
 domestic price ratio, it follows that 1/ (1 + M/Fp) &amp;gt; 1 (1 + M" /F"p'). Only if 
 the move/change in this country's production possibility curve is skewed in favour of 
 farming, such as from AB to A"' B"', would it be possible for the increase in 
 production of food relative to manufactures to more than offset the decrease 
 in the relative price of food. 
 Three points are this way worth stressing so far. First, in a growing world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) (or a closed national (process of people making, selling, and buying things)) agriculture's share of total product is 
 likely to (lower in number/get worse) because the income ability to stretch of demand for food is less than 
 one. Only if the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) in production possibilities is heavily too nice tos 
 non-farming is it possible that the price of food relative to other products (that are bought and sold)  will 
 rise - and even then this price change may not be (good) enough to offset the 
 opposite change in relative production levels and in that way increase agriculture's 
 share of total product. Second, in a small open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) faced with a decline 
 in the relative price of food because of money-based growth in other places, agriculture's share of GDP will fall unless growth in this (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) in favour 
 of farming (unlike for the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a whole). The pro-farming-based 
 bias in its growth (or in its price distortions - see below, "some qualifications") would have to be greater for agriculture's share of national product not 
 to (lower in number/get worse), the larger the fall in the relative price of food (in other countries). And 
 third, the pattern ofdomestic consumption in this model with only two tradable products (that are bought and sold)  is not relevap.t in deciding/figuring out the production pattern in the small 
 open (process of people making, selling, and buying things), again in contrast to the situation for the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a 
 whole; however, as will become clear below, domestic consumption does affect 
 the trade pattern. 
 In reality, a large part of each (process of people making, selling, and buying things) involves the production and con- 
 
 201 
 
 sumption of non-tradable products (that are bought and sold)  and services ( N). These are items for which 
 the costs of overcoming (blocking things) to trading (in other countries) (especially transport costs) are way, way too expensive. If it can be shown that the share of 
 tradables in GDP declines with money-based growth, then this increases the chance even more that agriculture's share of GDP will (lower in number/get worse) in growing 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 To examine this possibility, combine the F and M parts/areas into a super-part/area 
 of tradables, T. The price ofT for our small open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is given by the 
 international prices ofF and M. The price of non-tradables (N), however, is 
 figured out by/decided by domestic demand and supply conditions because, in balance, domestic demand for non-tradables has to equal domestic supply. 
 Given that the non-tradables part/area is roughly equal to the services 
 part/area (some services are tradable but some products (that are bought and sold)  are non-tradable), and that 
 services make up about one-third of expense in poor countries 
 and two-thirds in high-income countries, it is reasonable to assume that the 
 income ability to stretch of demand for non-tradables goes beyond one, and so the corresponding ability to stretch for all tradables (including food) is less than one. [_( Lluch 
 et al. (1977, table 3.12) received/got guesses of expense elasticities in the 
 range 1.3-1.8 for major groups of services. More recent thin sliceal studies 
 support the expectation of an income ability to stretch of demand for services of well 
 above togetherness for poor countries but slowly approaching togetherness as countries get richer ( Kravis et al., 1983; Summers, 1985).] 
 Figure 1 can be used to illustrate what happens when a small open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 with a tradables part/area grows, if on the axes F is replaced by T and M by N. 
 Then E is the first balance point (when demand for and supply of nontradables are equated) and price line 1 represents the first price of nontradables relative to tradables. Now assume the price ofT remains unchanged 
 for the moment but there is money-based growth which moves/changes out the production 
 possibility curve. If the curve moves out equiproportionately from AB to A' B' 
 then necessarily both the price and amount of non-tradables relative to tradables must increase (a real exchange rate appreciation), given that E' must 
 be to the southeast of the ray OE extended because of the income effect. That 
 is, tradables add/give a (lowering in number/getting worse) proportion of GDP in an (process of people making, selling, and buying things) whose 
 working well growth is not part/areaally (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) but whose consumption growth 
 pattern is (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) against tradables. 
 As with the earlier discussion of the (world-wide process of people making, selling, and buying things) without non-tradables, 
 there are two extreme sets of conditions in which, mentally, the nontradables part/area of a growing (process of people making, selling, and buying things) would not expand its share of GDP. One 
 is represented by point E", the other by E "'. To reach E", growth would have 
 to be heavily (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) in favour of non-tradables production and the ability to stretch of 
 substitution in consumption between T and N low for the relative price of nontradables to fall (good or well enough) to offset the increase in production of non-tradables relative to tradables. Or, to reach E"' growth would have to be 
 
 202 
 
 heavily (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) in favour of tradables production and again the ability to stretch of 
 substitution in consumption between T and N low for the relative price ofnontradables to rise (good or well enough) to offset the decrease in production of non-tradables relative to tradables. The first possibility seems most unlikely, given that 
 working well growth has, if anything, been (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) against the non-tradables 
 part/area (Clark, 1957). The second possibility is less remote, but recall that it 
 needs/demands an extreme bias in working well growth against non-tradables to offset 
 the consumption bias in favour of tradables: it is not (good) enough, for example, 
 to be only (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) enough for point E 0 to be reached. 
 So, since agriculture's share ofthe tradables part ofGDP is likely to (lower in number/get worse), 
 and the tradables' share of GDP is also likely to fall, introducing a non-tradables part/area into the model to make it more closely represent a real (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 makes it even more likely that agriculture's share of GDP will (lower in number/get worse) with 
 money-based growth. 
 Employment share 
 
 The above thinking is also (good) enough for explaining the decline in agriculture's share of employment, except in cases where farming-based labour working well grows very slowly relative to labour working well in other parts/areas. 
 Where labour working well is growing more quickly on farms than in non-farm 
 jobs, as appears to have been the case in industrial countries during recent 
 20 years (Table 1) , there is even more reason to expect farming to become 
 a less important employer. In fact, the number of people employed on farms in 
 industrial countries has (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) totally, the rate of decline averaging 2.8% 
 per year during the period 1960-1981 (Organisation for Money-based Cooperation and Development, 1983). 
 Export share 
 
 Why is agriculture's share of exports less strongly related to per person 
 income than is agriculture's share of GDP or employment, as shown in the 
 above moving backward equations? Think about/believe again a small (process of people making, selling, and buying things) within an open 
 (world-wide process of people making, selling, and buying things) in which the international price of food relative to other tradables is (lowering in number/getting worse) over time because working well growth in the rest of the world 
 is not strongly enough (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) against farming to offset the effect of a relative 
 decline in food demand. If this small (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is not growing, then clearly the 
 share of farming in exports will (lower in number/get worse): the price change would discourage 
 domestic food production and encourage domestic food consumption, while the 
 opposite would happen in the domestic market for non-foods. If this small (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is growing and if its working well growth is part/areaally fair, then this 
 habit/desire for agriculture's share of exports to fall would be weakened because 
 domestic demand would grow less quickly for food than for non-food. And it 
 
 203 
 
 would be weakened further if working well growth grew faster in farming 
 than non-farming in this small (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 This way it is understandable that the share of farming in exports is less 
 strongly (negatively) related to per person income than agriculture's 
 shares of GDP and employment. A negative relationship anyway is likely, 
 both for (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) which are growing only slowly and, especially, for (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) where working well growth is fastest in the industrial part/area; a positive 
 relationship will happen only for those (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) where working well growth in 
 farming is (good or well enough) greater than in manufacturing to be able to 
 create added/more food export amounts/quantities to more than offset the long-term 
 decline in the real international price of food. Note, however, that a declining 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) to the country's exports from farming does not necessarily suggest 
 a (lowering in number/getting worse) farming-based (serving to compare two or more things) advantage as showed by the pattern of 
 its export (focusing on doing one thing very well). This is because agriculture's importance in world trade 
 may be falling even faster than its importance in this country's exports. 
 Some qualifications 
 
 The above discussion has (thought about (or related to) ideas and possibilities) from the fact that many (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 seriously distort (rewards or reasons for doing something) faced by producers and people. Especially, 
 it is common for poor (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) to tax farming relative to manufacturing, for high-income (especially food-shortage) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) to give money to farming relative to manufacturing, and for growing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) to slowly 
 change from the former to the last thing just mentioned as they industrialise. [See, for example, 
 Little et al. (1970), Balassa et al. (1971), Anderson and Hayami (1986) and 
 Tyers and Anderson (in press). The last thing just mentioned two studies also suggest reasons for 
 the growth of farming-based protection in industrialising countries.] Any one 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) following this pattern after having taxed farming would slow the 
 pace of decline of its farming-based part/area, both because of the direct effect of 
 price changes on part/areaal output levels and on their changing per unit (putting a value on something) at twisted/partially untrue/lied about domestic prices, and because ofthe indirect effect those changes 
 have in boosting investments in new farm technology. In fact the last thing just mentioned can be 
 large enough to actually reverse the (process of people making, selling, and buying things)'s net food trade position, as has 
 been the case in Western Europe and China during the last few years. When many 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) obey this distortions pattern (at the same time), the effect on 
 international food prices depends on the proportion of world food markets that 
 is low priced as compared with the proportion that is high priced. Over time, 
 however, as each (process of people making, selling, and buying things) industrialises and so moves towards the farming-based 
 protection camp, the net effect will be to add to the downward pressure on the 
 international price of food relative to other tradables. As a result, the farming-based part/area of (clear and appearing as it should/without any changes from the truth)  (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) will be under pressure to (lower in number/get worse) even 
 faster than would be the case in a distortion-free world. 
 The above models have also ignored the fact that (middle-position) products (that are bought and sold)  and 
 
 204 
 TABLE2 
 Value added share (%) of farming-based (manufacturing) production measured at domestic prices, 
 Industrial Market (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), 1963-1983" 
 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Canada 
 EC-IOb 
 Japan 
 Korea 
 New Zealand 
 Norway 
 Sweden 
 Taiwan 
 United States 
 Weighted averagec 
 
 1963-65 
 
 1970-73 
 
 38 (41) 
 
 33 
 70 
 38 
 57 
 62 
 80 
 63 
 52 
 54 
 56 
 43 
 49 
 
 43 
 65 (39) 
 (33) 
 
 59 
 55 
 64 
 42 
 48 
 
 (40) 
 (39) 
 (44) 
 (46) 
 (40) 
 
 (40) 
 (40) 
 (33) 
 (41) 
 (34) 
 (39) 
 (38) 
 (37) 
 (38) 
 (46) 
 (41) 
 
 1975-78 
 33 
 68 
 29 
 51 
 62 
 77 
 53 
 52 
 53 
 54 
 37 
 43 
 
 (42) 
 (37) 
 (33) 
 (40) 
 (32) 
 (36) 
 (33) 
 (31) 
 (37) 
 (43) 
 (41) 
 
 1980-83 
 30 
 66 
 22 
 46 
 54 
 67 
 45 
 50 
 48 
 50 
 34 
 39 
 
 (38) 
 (35) 
 (33) 
 (39) 
 (30) 
 (33) 
 (33) 
 (28) 
 (34) 
 (42) 
 (38) 
 
 "Manufacturing part/area shares are shown in parentheses; in the final column they refer only to 
 1980. Because of different (related to studying numbers) methods used, shares are not as similar across countries 
 as they are over time for each country. 
 bWeighted average for France, Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom for manufacturing shares, with weights based on 1980 value of manufacturing production. 
 cweights based on 1980 value of farming-based (manufacturing) production at domestic prices. 
 Source: Manufacturing data are from United Nations (1985a, b and earlier issues). Farming-based 
 data for Austria, Japan, Norway and Sweden are from United Nations (1985a and earlier issues), 
 for the (related to Europe) Community are from Eurostat (1985 and earlier issues) and for other countries 
 are from the following national sources: Australian Bureau of Farming-based Money flow (1986), 
 Farming Canada (1980 and 1984), Korean Ministry of Farming and Fisheries (1981 and 
 1985), New Zealand Department of Statistics (1985 and earlier issues), Group of people for Money-based 
 Planning and Development (1985), Department of Farming and Forestry (1985 and earlier 
 issues) and U.S. Department of Farming (1984 and earlier issues). 
 
 services are used in the production process. To include them needs/demands two changes. One is to recognise that agriculture's share of GDP then refers to a 
 percentage of value added rather than of total value of production. This would 
 not matter if the value-added share of output was constant or changed at the 
 same rate in each part/area. But, as Table 2 shows, that share has been declining 
 much more quickly in farming than in manufacturing: during the twenty years to 1983, the share for industrial countries (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) from 48 to 39% for 
 farming but only from 40 to 38% for manufacturing, measured at domestic 
 prices. [The relative decline in agriculture's share would have been even greater 
 if measured at international prices, given the gradual growth in farming-based 
 protection talked about/said above.] This adds to the reasons for the decline in agriculture's share of GDP. The second change is to think about  the part/areaal 
 source of (middle-position) products (that are bought and sold)  and services. Casual scientificism suggests the nonfarm parts/areas usually/(in the past) have supplied a surprisingly more large and 
 
 205 
 
 increasing share of those inputs, so this again strengthens the expectation of 
 a decline in agriculture's share of GDP. 
 Throughout, the discussion has used the term food to describe farming-based 
 output. While non-food farming-based products are (a) little different in that the 
 income ability to stretch of demand for them is not necessarily below one and falling, 
 they are (compared to other things) small contributors to total farming-based output, so the ends/end results are unlikely to be changed if they had been specifically included in the 
 analysis. 
 End/end result 
 
 This analysis allows the following ends/end results to be drawn. First, in a growing world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) (or a closed national (process of people making, selling, and buying things)), agriculture's shares of 
 GDP and employment are likely to (lower in number/get worse) because the income ability to stretch of 
 demand for food is less than one; to avoid this would require a heavy bias in 
 working well growth towards the non-farm part/area. A result/resulting/statement is that the world 
 price of food relative to non-food is likely to (lower in number/get worse) with worldwide  money-based 
 growth. 
 Second, in a small open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) faced with a decline in the relative price of 
 food because of money-based growth in other places, agriculture's shares of GDP, 
 employment and exports are likely to (lower in number/get worse). This is so even if this small 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is itself not growing, because of the decline in international food prices. 
 If it is growing, then agriculture's shares of GDP and employment, if not of 
 exports, are even more likely to (lower in number/get worse) because of the low domestic income 
 ability to stretch of demand for food. To avoid (lowering in number/getting worse) needs/demands either a strong bias 
 in working well growth towards the farm part/area (in contrast with the worldwide  or 
 closed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) case) and/ or a heavy distortion of (rewards or reasons for doing something) towards farm-related. Experience hints that even then the decline in agriculture's shares of 
 GDP and employment are unlikely to be arrested: Western Europe and China 
 provide recent examples of reversing the downward (popular thing/general way things are going) in agriculture's share 
 of exports, but not GDP and employment, through price policy changes which 
 improved (rewards or reasons for doing something) for farmers. 
 Third, the fact that many countries tend to distort (rewards or reasons for doing something) more and more 
 in favour of farmers as their (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) industrialise, which further depresses 
 the real international price of food, only adds to the chance of farming 
 declining in (clear and appearing as it should/without any changes from the truth)  (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 Finally, it should be stressed that it does not follow from this analysis that 
 farmers necessarily lose from money-based growth. Part of the reason for declining 
 real food prices is increased working well on farms, and part of the reason for 
 labour moving out of farming is improved income-earning prospects in nonfarm parts/areas. So farm families may well be sharing in the fruits of money-based growth either through new farm technologies which raise farm labour 
 and land working well and/or through household members taking higher-pay- 
 
 206 
 
 ing jobs in other parts/areas. Nor does it follow that policies should be put into use to 
 speed up useful thing/valuable supply movements away from the (lowering in number/getting worse) farming-based part/area. On 
 the opposite, the policy response (fought for/pleaded for) by Prebisch (1964) and others to 
 declining terms of trade for countries exporting first (or most important) products, namely, protecting the import-competing manufacturing part/area to (change to flow on a different path/change to point to, or focus on, something else) useful things/valuable supplies 
 away from first (or most important) production, would only make things worse for farmers and 
 the total (process of people making, selling, and buying things), as it would worsen the domestic terms of trade for nonmanufacturing parts/areas as well as reduce national income and because of this non-farm 
 job prospects for farm household members. 
 
 References 
 Farming Canada, 1980, 1984. Selected Farming-based Statistics for Canada. Ottawa. 
 Anderson, K. and Hayami, Y., 1986. The Political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) of Farming-based Protection: East Asia 
 in International (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Allen and Unwin, Sydney. 
 Australian Bureau of Farming-based Money flow, 1986. Valuable thing (related to studying numbers) Announcement. Australian 
 Government Publishing Service, Canberra. 
 Balassa, B. and Associates, 1971. The Structure of Protection in Developing Countries. Johns 
 Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. 
 Clark, C., 1957. The Conditions of Money-based Progress. Macmillan, London, 3rd edn. 
 Group of people for Money-based Planning and Development, 1985. Taiwan (related to studying numbers) Data Book. Taipei. 
 Department of Farming and Forestry, 1985. Taiwan Farming-based Yearbook. Taipei. 
 Eurostat, 1985. Yearbook of Farming-based Statistics. Brussels. 
 Grilli, E.R. and Yang, M.C., 1986. Long-term Movements of Non-fuel First (or most important) Valuable thing Prices: 
 1900-83. Money-based Analysis and Projections Department, The World Bank, Washington, DC 
 (mimeograph) . 
 Johnson, D.G., 1973. World Farming in Confusion. Fontana, London. 
 Korean Ministry of Farming and Fisheries, 1981, 1985. Yearbook of Farming and Forestry 
 Statistics. Seoul. 
 Kravis, I.B., Heston, W. and Summers, R., 1983. The share of services in money-based growth. In: 
 F.G. Adams and B.G. Hickman (Editors), Worldwide  Econometrics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
 Kuznets, S.S., 1966. Modern Money-based Growth: Rate, Structure and Spread. Yale University 
 Press, New Place, CT. 
 Little, I., Scitovsky, T. and Scott, M., 1970. Industry and Trade in Some Developing Countries: 
 A (serving to compare two or more things) Study. Oxford University Press (for OECD), London. 
 Lluch, C., Powell, A.A. and Williams, R.A., 1977. Patterns in Household Demand and Savings. 
 Oxford University Press, New York. 
 New Zealand Department of Statistics, 1985. Official Year Book. Wellington. 
 Organisation for Money-based Cooperation and Development, 1983. Historical Statistics 1960-1981. 
 OECD, Paris. 
 Prebisch, R., 1964. Towards a New Trade Policy for Development. United Nations, New York. 
 Rybczynski, T.M., 1955. Factor gifts and relative valuable thing prices. Money-baseda, 22: 
 336-341. 
 Sapsford, D., 1985. The (related to studying numbers) debate on the new trade terms oftrade between first (or most important) valuable things and manufactures: A comment and some added/more (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). Econ. J., 95: 781-788. 
 Schultz, T.W., 1945. Farming in an Unstable (process of people making, selling, and buying things). McGraw-Hill, New York. 
 
 207 
 Spraos, J., 1980. The (related to studying numbers) debate on the net trade terms of trade between first (or most important) valuable things and manufactures. Econ. J., 90: 107-128. 
 Summers, R., 1985. Services in the International (process of people making, selling, and buying things). In: R.P. Inman (Editor), Managing 
 the Service (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Cambridge University Press, New York, pp. 27-48. 
 Tyers, R. and Anderson, K., (in press). Distortions in World Food Markets. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
 United Nations, 1985a. National Accounts Statistics: Main Groups and Described/explained Tables. United 
 Nations, New York. 
 United Nations, 1985b. (related to studying numbers) Yearbook. United Nations, New York. 
 U.S. Department of Farming, 1984. Money-based Indicators of the Farm Part/area. USDA, Washington, DC. 
 World Bank, 1983, 1984, 1985. World Development Report. Oxford University Press, New York. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
