 Farming-based Money flow, 3 (1989) 1-22 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 1 
 
 Farming-based Supply Response: A Survey 
 J. Mohan Rao 
 Department of Money flow, Boston University, 2 70 Bay State Road, Boston, MA 02215 (U.S.A.) 
 
 (Accepted 30 August 1988) 
 
 Abstract 
 Rao, J.M., 1989. Farming-based supply response: a survey. Agric. Econ., 3: 1-22. 
 This paper surveys the books on farming-based supply response to prices in developing countries. Scientific guesses of elasticities depend both on the way(s) of doing things adopted and on countryspecific factors relating to technology, money-based structure and macro restrictions. The paper looks (for) 
 to establish some general ends/end results on supply (quality of quickly responding to things) within these limits. Supply 
 response to output prices at the group and at the crop levels is carefully thought about/believed first. Crop-specific 
 land elasticities range between zero and 0.8 in the short run while long-run elasticities tend to 
 be higher- between 0.3 and 1.2. Yield elasticities are smaller and less stable than land elasticities. Clearly, inter-crop pricing can be relied upon to produce moves/changes in the valuable thing composition 
 of farming-based output. (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) also hints that supply elasticities change/differ  in a planned way with such 
 factors as price and yield risks, multiple-cropping, the importance of the crop, farm incomes, farm 
 size, (living somewhere) and reading and writing ability. The most argument-causing and important aspect of supply response is the 
 effect on group farming-based output of agriculture's terms of trade. Ordinary time-series 
 guesses range from 0.1 to 0.3. A major cross-country study reports an group ability to stretch as high 
 as 1.66. It is argued that cross-country guesses are likely to (state that something is much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is) group (quality of quickly responding to things) 
 while time-series studies underestimate it somewhat. For LDCs, a uncertain/not definite range of 0.4 to 0.5 
 seems reasonable. Because of this, the distributive effects of the terms of trade are likely to be more significant than the allocative effects. Asian (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) shows that only a third of the inter-country differences in (material that makes plants grow better) use can be attributed to (material that makes plants grow better) price policies. Gave/given new technologies 
 and (set of machines) are in place, (material that makes plants grow better) payments can help in technology diffusion and in overcoming credit restrictions. The choice between price supports and input payments will depend on 
 a variety of country- or situation-clearly stated/particular factors. Anyway, a significant general factor favoring price supports is that they can more easily be joined with price (making steady/making firm and strong) goals than input 
 payments. Though thinly distributed, the available (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the response of marketed extra hints that 
 price policy is not a reliable test/list of questions for controlling inter-part/areaal trade. 
 
 1 . Money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) and supply response 
 
 The importance of farming-based price policies in money-based development comes from three key (features/ qualities/ traits) of farming: (a) it is the most in control/most common production and employment part/area in LDCs, especially at low levels of devel0169-5150/89/$03.50 
 
 © 1989 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 2 
 
 opment; (b) it has significant supply and demand linkages with the rest of the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things); and (c) most of useful thing/valuable supply use decisions in farming are directed 
 by (without having one central area of command) market forces. Hence, the prices of food and other farming-based 
 valuable things are often subject to government helping action. The effectiveness of such 
 helping action in terms of whatever goals may be valued depends on its 
 effects on private (rewards or reasons for doing something). The extent to which farm decisions respond to 
 money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) should, therefore, be of central concern to policy-makers 
 and is the focus of this paper. 
 The policy debate about the effect of the extra food disposal program of 
 the United States (Public Law 480) upon farming-based production in receiver 
 countries illustrates the important  role of guesses of farming-based supply response. 
 The program reduced food prices in receiver countries by increasing supply 
 relative to demand. On the reason that supply response was positive and significant, Schultz (1960) decided that the program was harmful to farming-based production in these countries. Dantwala ( 1963) maintained that the 
 program was not related to farming-based production performance because he believed supply response to be zero or unimportant. Finally, Fisher ( 1963) argued 
 that if the (more than what's needed) were used as buffer stocks to (make steady/make firm and strong) producer prices and 
 if farmers hate price ups and downs, then, even though the average price 
 was lowered by the program, the reduced price (quality that shows weakness because important things aren't steady or strong) would increase 
 production. 
 From the farmer's point of view, within limits set by his own goals and by 
 institutions, (set of machines), technology and market structure, a given set of 
 input and output prices makes some courses of action more desirable than 
 others. More than that, farm prices are an important (thing that decides something) of farm incomes 
 which, in turn, affect the farmer's ability to increase the amount and improve 
 the quality of useful things/valuable supplies available to him. These latter effects of farm prices 
 operate in the medium to long run through private investments in the farm 
 part/area. So, the (reward or reason for doing something) content of prices consists in: (a) their effect on the 
 choice of production other choices with available useful things/valuable supplies, and (b) their hit/effect on useful thing/valuable supply collection. Maybe, the more important issue here is the 
 extent to which long-run (change to make better/related to changing something) via investment and changes in technology 
 can be attributed to price policies. 
 The scientific (formal statement about something) of this issue is complicated by the fact that important useful thing/valuable supply changes/recalculations in the long run - such as the increased availability 
 of (set of machines), the pace of (related to computers and science) change, institutional and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 changes, changes in foreign exchange and money-related restrictions - are conditioned 
 by government policies and programs that may be (compared to other things) independent of 
 farming-based prices. These big-picture related factors may not be (able to reply or react/quick to respond) to the private actions of farmers themselves, and because of this, to price (rewards or reasons for doing something); many of 
 them may be influenced only by direct government non-price helping actions. 
 The analysis of long-run response must therefore distinguish changes in supply conditions that are brought about by (without having one central area of command) private actions from 
 changes that result from (controlled by one central place) public actions. 
 
 3 
 
 Supply response may be thought about/believed at different levels depending on the type 
 of useful thing/valuable supply use question the policy-maker is immediately concerned with: 
 ( 1) Group farming-based output. If the object of concern is the pace of farming-based output growth or some other (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide goal, the (connected/related) idea 
 is the response of an index of farming-based output to some index of the relative 
 price of farming such as its trade terms of trade with non -farming. 
 (2) Valuable thing (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) of output. Policy-makers may wish to change  the 
 valuable thing (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) of farming-based output by changing intra-farming-based 
 valuable thing price relations: food products against/compared to/or raw materials, cereals against/compared to/or 
 non-cereal foods, export products against/compared to/or import substitutes, employment-intensive against/compared to/or capital- or land-intensive products, etc. 
 (3) Marketed extra. The immediate goal of policy may be to promise a flow 
 of food and raw materials to city-based  areas (good) enough to meet (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) 
 targets. Here, the (connected/related) idea  of supply is the marketed extra and the 
 (connected/related) price is an index of the price relatives between farming-based and nonagricultural consumption products (that are bought and sold). 
 For both (related to computers and science) and money-based reasons, supply response will be different at each of these levels. An important job  of scientific analysis is to identify 
 each of them separately and account for their differences. 
 For many purposes of policy, group data may be (good) enough to measure 
 supply (quality of quickly responding to things). However, farm-level or micro studies are also important for two related reasons: (a) farm-level data permit disaggregation by areas, farm size, income and other (connected/related) factors which may influence supply 
 response; such disaggregation can be used to fine-tune policy to the needs and 
 potentialities of different types of farms, crops and areas; (b) micro studies 
 allow better tests of some guesses (related to/looking at/thinking about) farmer (desire to do something/reason for doing something) which can 
 provide a deeper understanding of supply behavior. Also, macro studies 
 often do not tell apart the  clearly stated/particular role of price (rewards or reasons for doing something) from the effects of big-picture related factors due to methodological limits. Coming apart/untangling some 
 of these effects will have to rely partly on micro-level studies. 
 While the results of some micro studies will be referred to where (connected/related) in 
 the later sections, it is related to to think about  here some general germhavioral factors in supply response which underlie the results received/got from 
 group data. Behavioral mixed-up nature in farm-related comes from the uneven distribution of ownership and operational holdings of land and from the 
 breaking (up) and mistakes of land, labor, credit and product markets. 
 For convenience, small and medium farms may be showed as poor (person) 
 farms, and large land- holders as either commercial farmers or (managers of apartment buildings). Poor (person) farms are distinguished also by their reliance on family labor and their 
 'subsistence' information meeting. That is to say, their production decisions are (very deeply/very closely) related to their money-based goals through their labor supply behavior; their marketing decisions are significantly influenced by their natural tendency 
 
 4 
 
 to consume their own output; and their risk attitudes govern their desire 
 to (branch out into different things) production and accept new inputs. So, a positive relation between prices and sales may be the result of tradeoffs between fun and 
 income, own consumption and (bought something for money) products (that are bought and sold), and income and security. For 
 commercial farmers, (money made/good thing received) tends to be the most important reason (for doing something). For (managers of apartment buildings) 
 who rent out their lands to (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.), supply response will reflect the interaction 
 between their own goals and their (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.)' goals. The same macro supply response may therefore reflect very (many different kinds of people or things) behaviors depending on the relative 
 importance of poor (person) production, commercial production and (living somewhere). 
 When credit markets are (not totally pure/not totally correct), the long-run response of supply depends 
 on the natural tendency of farmers to save and invest out of their incomes. There is 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) to suggest that these natural tendencies change/differ  with farm income and wealth. 
 Therefore, an (process of people making, selling, and buying things) with a (compared to other things) important large-farm part/area may be 
 expected to have a higher rate of farming-based investment. At the same time, it 
 has been watched/followed that large farms face higher effective costs of wage-labor 
 and supervision and therefore tend to substitute capital for labor. Land-related 
 structure, then, is of obvious relevance for the pace of output and employment 
 growth. On the other hand, small farms tend to face greater costs of capital 
 than large farms. Given this restriction on small farms, higher farm prices for 
 them can be expected to (help increase/show in a good way) investment by increasing the supply of equity 
 finance. Clearly, these different behavioral guesses have different effects/results/suggestions for the (quality of quickly responding to things) of supply to prices. 
 Most of the books (shows or proves) that farmers are usually (able to reply or react/quick to respond) to money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something). The above statements suggest that this general finding 
 should not be allowed to hide the very real (desire to do something/reason for doing something)al and behavioral 
 differences among different types of farms. These differences rarely show up 
 as such in macro studies while they can be detected in carefully designed micro 
 studies. 
 In the rest of this paper, available evidence on supply response to 
 prices will be examined with a view to beginning and building on some general ends/end results 
 on the subject. In Section 2, we think about/believe supply response to output prices at 
 the group and at the crop levels. In addition to a critical evaluation of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from studies employing different ways of doing things, this section also thinks about/believes the money-based and (related to computers and science) factors deciding/figuring out differences in supply 
 (quality of quickly responding to things). Section 3 thinks about/believes supply response to input price changes. 
 The factors that should enter into the choice between output price supports 
 and input payments are also discussed in the light of scientific and possible 
 findings. Section 4 sums up the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the response of crop-specific and 
 group marketed extra to prices. The final section provides a pretty/interesting summary of the main ends/end results. 
 2. Response to output prices 
 
 It is useful first to think about  some methodological (problems, delays, etc.) in the guess of supply response. Supply ability to stretch should properly refer to the speed 
 
 5 
 
 and importance of changes in planned output in response to expected output 
 prices. But neither planned output nor expected price is (capable of being seen and known): the first thing just mentioned, because weather and other (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) factors can make watched/followed output move away from planned output; the last thing just mentioned, because the farmer only knows 
 past and current prices. Proxies for these (numbers that change/things that change) have, therefore, to be employed and the choice of substitute influences the results received/got. 
 Most time-series studies are for particular crops and use land as the substitute 
 for output because land is thought to be more subject to the farmer's control 
 than output. If this single input index of output is employed, land elasticities provide lower bounds to output elasticities. However, insofar as land area 
 grows independently over time, they overestimate output ability to stretch if this is 
 not clearly allowed for. On the price side, most (people who work to find information) assume that 
 farmers expect prices from their knowledge of current and past price (following Nerlove, 1958). But farmers' expectations may not change with all 
 short-lived price changes; clearly, the (related to studying numbers) measurement of price expectations is filled with problems. 
 The price (number or thing that changes) used is usually a measure of relative prices: prices paid 
 relative to prices received; output prices relative to input prices or crop price 
 relatives. These are different measures of (rewards or reasons for doing something) and the choice among 
 them is often commanded (or spoke so someone copied down what was said) by the availability of reliable price data. Measures of 
 price risk which are properly thought about/believed an element in price (rewards or reasons for doing something) are 
 often not included. 
 A major source of differences among studies has to do with properly controlling for non-price factors affecting production such as weather, (set of machines) and (related to computers and science) changes which may be related to prices. This is 
 especially serious for studies of yield response to prices. Studies change/differ  in this 
 regard depending on the availability of data and on the authors' judgments as 
 to the relevance of particular non-price (numbers that change/things that change). While thin slice analyses 
 avoid some of the (typical and expected) problems of time-series studies, their use in 
 country studies is limited by the small (quality of changing over time or at different places) in prices across farms or 
 areas. Their use in studies of supply response across countries, on the other 
 hand, raises hard questions in allowing for country-specific non-price 
 influences. 
 Most time-series studies of supply response report positive output elasticities for clearly stated/particular crops with respect to relative price changes. Short-run land 
 elasticities range between 0.0 and 0.8 while long-run elasticities tend to be 
 higher - between 0.3 and 1.2. The few available guesses of crop yield response are smaller and display much less (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) than land elasticities. 
 This may be, at least in part, due to the methodological (problems, delays, etc.) relating to 
 yield response guess in time-series studies (Askari and Cummings, 1974). 
 A well-designed study of Bangladesh (Ahmed, 1981) found that a 10% increase 
 in the price of rice raises output between 1.8 and 2.6%. Half of this increase 
 
 6 
 
 was (named after/discovered by/caused by) produce and the other half to area increases- the last thing just mentioned arising mostly at the expense of jute. 
 Although clearly stated/particular crop elasticities reflect inter-crop moves/changes in useful things/valuable supplies and 
 are not especially large, they are of (large/relatively large) policy interest. A steady 
 (worsening / rusting, crumbling, etc.) in the relative price of cash crops can, for example, bring about 
 significant long-run reductions in their production relative to food crops. The 
 hit/effect of prices depends not only on the price ability to stretch of supply but also on 
 the total amount ofland and other useful things/valuable supplies gave/reserved to a crop. So, intercrop price relations set by policy can be relied upon to produce more than not important moves/changes in the valuable thing composition of farming-based output. 
 In China as in India, the greater part of the increase in farming-based working well in the fifties was accounted for by moves/changes in the cropping pattern from 
 food to non-food crops. This was due to the higher (rewards or reasons for doing something) to farmers resulting from the generally higher value of output per hectare for the last thing just mentioned. 
 However, moves/changes in Chinese farming-based price policy in the sixties in favor of 
 (related to a large area) food independence appear to have been responsible for the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of foodgrains at the expense of non-foodgrain valuable things. (serving to severely limit or control) 
 price policies prevented the Chinese farming-based (process of people making, selling, and buying things) from securing the 
 gains arising for inter-(related to a large area) (focusing on doing one thing very well) and trade (Raj, 1982). Within 
 the food crops category, recent experience with relative crop price policies in 
 India and Bangladesh has preferred the fast (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of wheat land at the 
 expense of other crops, mainly pulses and oilseeds (Tarrant, 1982). Given the 
 important  role of pulses in the diet of the poor and the high cost of imports of vegetable oils, such policies should be re-carefully thought about/believed. 
 While one reason for different (statements about the future) of the output response to price 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) may be methodological (many different kinds of people or things), another lies in the fact that elasticities can differ among crops and among countries in a planned way. The 
 study by Askari and Cummings (1977) is the only one talked to/looked at to this important issue of the planned (things that decide other things) of supply response. The authors 
 set out some guesses about these (things that decide other things) and tested them 
 using multiple moving backward. They employed a total of 320 supply elasticities guessed for a variety of individual crops from studies of Thailand, Chile, India 
 and the United States. Although their guesses and results make up/be equal to only 
 early/incomplete exploring things of the question, they are (good or well enough) important to permit reporting them here: 
 ( 1) Crop-clearly stated/particular price and yield risks will dampen supply (quality of quickly responding to things) 
 especially of poor people whose job may be threatened by down -side risks. 
 Such a bad effect was found to be important in the case oflndian poor people. 
 (2) Where multiple-cropping is possible and stiff patterns of land use are 
 not commanded (or spoke so someone copied down what was said) by survival/income needed things, the farmer's set of choices is wider; 
 hence (quality of quickly responding to things) is likely to be greater. Crop-watering/rinsing with water, which is closely connected with multiple-cropping and wider production other choices, was found to 
 
 7 
 
 (use/put into action) a significantly positive effect on supply response. (in almost the same way), it was found 
 that the extent of plantable land available was a positive influence. 
 ( 3) The relation between supply response for a crop and its relative importance in the crop mix is a rather complex one. The less most in control/most common the crop the 
 more easily may useful things/valuable supplies be shifted into and out of its production in response 
 to prices. On the other hand, the more powerful the crop, the larger will be 
 the risk connected with proper response to prices: even small price changes 
 will warrant large useful thing/valuable supply shifts. The study reported that while the supply 
 response was large for (compared to other things) minor crops and for almost completely important crops (as with rice in Thailand), the response was small in the case of 
 'major' crops occupying the middle ground between these extremes. 
 (4) The average income level of farmers and farm size are both expected to 
 positively/well affect supply ability to stretch to price signals since they are both good indicators of the ability to bear risks and of access to credit. This guess was 
 validated by the study. 
 (5) (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.) will be less (able to reply or react/quick to respond) to price (rewards or reasons for doing something) than owner-growers because the former do not usually get the full benefit of responding to price 
 changes. The authors found a significant negative effect of the (number of times something happens) of 
 (living somewhere) on supply (quality of quickly responding to things). 
 (6) Finally, the authors guessed a positive relation between supply 
 (quality of quickly responding to things) and the level of farmer education. This guess was confirmed when supply elasticities were related to the (away from cities) male reading and writing ability rate. 
 Guess methods other than the (related to studying numbers) derivation of supply functions 
 have also been employed with sometimes (different/branching out into different) results. Guesses of supply 
 ability to stretch received/got from profit function studies, for example, differ much across countries: 0.35 for China, 0.42 for Malaysia, 0.52 for Turkey, 0.90 
 for Thailand and 0.98 for Japan (summarized in Lau and Yotopoulos, 1979). 
 A disturbing aspect of these guesses is that the lower elasticities were for 
 single crops as with rice in Malaysia and wheat in Turkey while the higher 
 elasticities were for multi-crop groups. Using linear programming models 
 for the farming-based part/area of Sudan, Chhibber and Hrabovszky ( 1983) report 
 very low elasticities for important farming-based products ranging form 0 to 0.05 
 with the exception of (grass grown for food) which had a supply ability to stretch of 0.16. While 
 these studies add to the (many different kinds of people or things) of guesses of crop supply response, they do 
 not change the (before that/before now) stated ends/end results totally. 
 The most debated aspect of price policy is the response of group farming-based production to changing relative prices or to the movements in the terms 
 of trade for farming. The arguing is especially intense for two reasons: 
 (a) guesses of group supply elasticities change/differ  much with a small 
 minority of studies reporting even negative supply response to prices; (b) even 
 small differences in group response guesses suggest (affecting lots of things in many ways for a long time) disagree- 
 
 8 
 
 ments over the useful thing/valuable supply allocative hit/effect of the terms of trade. Two broad 
 positions have been taken: 
 ( 1) Some money-flow experts have argued that in most developing countries, farming as a whole faces bad/unhelpful prices (Schultz, 1978; Peterson, 1979). In 
 the belief that both private and public useful things/valuable supplies gave out to farming are 
 highly (able to reply or react/quick to respond) to prices, they claim that bad terms of trade are mostly 
 to blame for slow farming-based growth and the resulting problems of poorness, 
 balance of payments unbalance and slow overall growth; 
 ( 2) Others have been far less willing to give/to peace  the terms of trade such a 
 important role in farming-based development. While admitting/recognizing/responding to the importance 
 of price policies, they have maintained that farming-based change is 
 brought about through a complex combination of price (rewards or reasons for doing something) and public 
 investments in crop-watering/rinsing with water, research, technology diffusion and changes in the 
 social and institutional structure (Krishna, 1982, Raj, 1969). 
 That these differences over the role of price policy are basic should 
 be obvious. That they come from different tests of group supply 
 elasticities to prices is not open to question. Especially for land-rare/not enough  (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), good  (things to carefully think about) would suggest lower group output elasticities 
 than crop-clearly stated/particular elasticities. Inter-crop land shifts are unavailable, by definition, for farming as a whole. More than that capital and labor are likely to be 
 less mobile between parts/areas than within farming. 
 In an important comparison between farming-based policies in China and India over the past thirty years, Raj ( 1982) has argued that the differences in 
 farming-based performance have to do with differences both in terms-of-trade 
 and non-price policies: "The resumption of high rates of growth in farming-based 
 production in China from 1970 can in fact be attributed to the big 
 (set of machines) that was built up in the course of the 1960s through investments 
 in water and soil (protecting something from harm) (as well as in chemical (material that makes plants grow better)s)." Although 
 the terms of trade for farming improved during the 1970s and were necessary for higher growth, they were not (good) enough. Raj draws the lesson that 
 India's much lower land yields compared to China's can only be increased with big public investments and organizational changes in 
 farming. 
 The actual guess oflong-run group supply elasticities using country 
 time-series data presents/causes (large/relatively large) (problems, delays, etc.) in building production and 
 terms-of-trade indices and in the (understanding/ explanation) of (related to studying numbers) results. Not prevented by/not part of the issue these (problems, delays, etc.), a few guesses are available for particular countries. For Argentina, Reca ( 1976) found that the short-run group ability to stretch 
 ranged between 0.21 and 0.35 while the long-run ability to stretch was between 0.42 
 and 0.52. A (related to studying numbers) study of the Philippines found that while land elasticities to relative crop prices were significant, yield responses were not (Mangahas et al., 1966). It decided that price changes were not "an effective de- 
 
 9 
 
 crime  for influencing group output... now levels of technology." For 
 the Indian Punjab, Herdt ( 1970) guessed group elasticities ranging between -0.06 to 0.42. That time-series guesses are very much sensitive to 
 the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of how farmers form price expectations was (not very long ago) showed by a study of Ajmer district in India (Bapna, 1980). For some (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required), supply elasticities ranged between 0.2 and 0.25 while for others, they 
 were as high as 0.5 to 0.6. 
 The guesses received/got from thin slice studies not only conflict with 
 time-series guesses but also among themselves. Cross-country elasticities are 
 much higher than time-series guesses. Cross-farm elasticities are either 
 negative or not very different from zero. 
 Peterson (1979) guessed long-run supply (yield per hectare) (quality of quickly responding to things) from cross-country data for 1962-64 and 1968-70 from 53 (developed and 
 developing) countries. Farming-based output was measured in wheat equals. 
 The (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) in the supply function were 'price' (measured by 
 the amount of commercial (material that makes plants grow better) that could be (bought something for money) with 100 kg of 
 wheat equal), once-a-year average (rain, snow, etc.) and the number of research 
 (books, magazines, etc.) per hectare (as a substitute for technology). The guessed group 
 supply ability to stretch ranged from 1.27 to 1.66- about 8 to 10 times larger than the 
 commonly accepted 0.15 received/got in time-series analyses. He further noted 
 that real prices received by farms in LDCs have been (in a big way) lower than 
 farm prices in developed countries. Prices in the top 10 countries (mostly developed) were, on average, 3.7 times greater than prices in the bottom 10 (all 
 LDCs). Peterson guesses that if the LDCs in his sample had set prices at the 
 mean value for all the countries, they would have produced an added 140 
 million tons of wheat equal and gained 3.76% per year of their combined 
 national income after accounting for the costs of the useful things/valuable supplies that would be 
 diverted to agriculture by higher prices. 
 Peterson has searched for/tried to get support for his findings from available studies of group supply response for the United States. Griliches ( 1959) used guessed 
 input demand functions to indirectly arrive at the group supply ability to stretch 
 for U.S. farming. He found that the suggested group supply ability to stretch is 
 about 0.30 in the short run and about 1.20 in the long run. Based on his findings, Griliches guessed that the up until now common "zero ability to stretch of supply 
 view of U.S. farming" could be thrown out. But his guesses were based on 
 the idea (you think is true) that useful things/valuable supplies supplied to agriculture were perfectly elastic at 
 going prices. With the (typical and expected) useful thing/valuable supply supply stiffities of LDCs, one 
 would expect a much lower value than Griliches' guess of 1.20. 
 A recent study tried to (cause agreement with) the obviously large differences in group guesses between time-series and cross-country studies ( Chhibber, 
 1982). The good  arguments favoring cross-country guesses are: (a) that 
 they (pretty close) true long-run supply response to prices because they are not 
 sensitive to short-lived price changes as are time-series guesses, and (b) that 
 
 10 
 
 they fully includes all responses of technology, public investment and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) (numbers that change/things that change) to price changes. On the other hand, cross-country analyses 
 usually do not control for country-clearly stated/particular supply factors and, if the price (number or thing that changes) is acting as a substitute for these, overestimate the price effect. Peterson's 
 study is believed to greatly (state that something is much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is) response to prices by poorly allowing for supply factors that cannot be thought about/believed (in a way where one thing is directly responsible for another) (able to reply or react/quick to respond) to prices. 
 (Peterson himself admits that the long-run response drops from 1.69 to 
 1.27 when only one other factor- research expense levels- is controlled 
 for). To establish this, Chhibber carried out two separate econometric analyses. First using the same FAO data as in Peterson's study but allowing for an 
 independent crop-watering/rinsing with water (number or thing that changes), he found that the ability to stretch was further reduced from 1.27 to 0.97. Second, using Indian time-series data and a more 
 fancy (or smart) creation of price expectations (creation and construction/ group of objects), he found that the 
 long-run group response was between 0.29 and 0.46. He decided that 
 group elasticities were rather greater than had been found from previous 
 time-series analyses and much smaller than Peterson's cross-country 
 guess. Chhibber's study provides an important first step in the much-needed 
 making up (from an argument) between disagreeing results on group response. 
 Added/more support for these results is available from the result of a related debate in Asian farming. Timmer and Falcon ( 1975) found that 85% 
 of the differences/different versions in (material that makes plants grow better) use in major rice-producing Asian countries was 
 explained by the rice-to-(material that makes plants grow better) price ratio. Very differently, when appropriate 
 controls for crop-watering/rinsing with water, credit and technology were introduced in the analysis, 
 only one-third of such differences/different versions could be explained by prices (David, 1976). 
 Insofar as rice was the most in control/most common crop in most of these countries, this last 
 finding appears to be closely related to the question of group supply ability to stretch and, because of this, reinforces Chhibber's findings. An added point of relevance should be noted. Peterson's study uses the output-to-(material that makes plants grow better) price ratio 
 while Chhibber's time-series analysis is based on data for the trade-related terms of 
 trade for farming. Given the low (number of times something happens) of (material that makes plants grow better) usage in LDCs, the 
 latter price (number or thing that changes) seems to be the more appropriate one to use in guess. 
 To complete this review of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), reference should be made to two crossfarm studies that reported negative group elasticities. Yotopoulos and Lau 
 (1974) found that the total output ability to stretch in Indian farming was -0.15. 
 In a almost the same  application to data from N.W. Malaysia, Barnum and Squire ( 1979) 
 found the ability to stretch to be - 0.02 for rice. Since this area of Malaysia has 
 almost a mono-crop system, this guess may be taken to be an appro ximation to the group ability to stretch. Both results were attributed to the negative 
 response of farming-based labor supply to the higher farming-based incomes resulting from higher output prices. But it should be noted that other studies using 
 identical way(s) of doing things based on profit-function analysis received/got positive elasticities (Lau and Yotopoulos, 1979). 
 
 11 
 
 3. Hit/effect of input payments 
 
 The prices of inputs facing farmers are an important aspect of money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) to farming-based production. Input price policies try to change output and/ 
 or to guide farmers to the socially best input mix in the presence of market 
 mistakes. An important issue of policy is the choice between output price 
 increases and input price payments. 
 Most of the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on input price policies relates to (material that makes plants grow better)s, studies 
 of tractor prices, interest rates and wage rates being much less long/big. A few writers, in fact, have focused on the importance of the output-to-(material that makes plants grow better) 
 price ratio as the key measure of money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) in farming. The studies by Timmer and Falcon (1975) on rice and on total farming-based output by 
 Peterson ( 1979), discussed earlier, argue that the very large differences in yields 
 across countries are explained mostly by the (in almost the same way) large differences in 
 the ratio of output prices to (material that makes plants grow better) prices. In effect, they suggest that raising 
 output prices or, equally, reducing (material that makes plants grow better) prices will bring about fast 
 farming-based growth. 
 The general argument against these (made to appear much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is) (understandings/ explanations) of the role 
 of price (rewards or reasons for doing something) has been presented in Section 2. Specifically, in the big picture 
 of (material that makes plants grow better) demand studies, David ( 1975) has expressed large amounts of doubt and distrust about approaches that do not incorporate non-price (things that decide other things) of input 
 demand. Her study showed that a 10% increase in (material that makes plants grow better) application would 
 increase rice production by 1.43% when all (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and (related to computers and science) 
 factors have (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) upwards- that is, when good varieties, cultural practices and (good) enough water supplies have all been developed. The ceteris paribus 
 response rate is only 0.7%. She also found that countries differed very much 
 this way. 
 For the United States Griliches ( 1958) found that if (material that makes plants grow better) prices rise by 
 10% then (material that makes plants grow better) use drops by 5% in the 1st year and by about 20% in the 
 long run. Timmer ( 1976) has summarized available guesses using Griliches' 
 way(s) of doing things for Brazil, India, Japan, Korea and the Philippines. The guessed long-run decline in (material that makes plants grow better) use for a 10% price rise ranged from only 
 3.4% to 66.3%, the average being about 20%. To understand/explain these results, think about/believe the effects of a 10% helping payment on (material that makes plants grow better). Given long-run (change to make better/related to changing something) of 
 varieties, water supply and ways of doing things, this will lead to a 20% increase in (material that makes plants grow better) use and a 2.86% increase in supply. An important difficulty with this 
 way(s) of doing things in the LDC big picture  is that the long-run ability to stretch for (material that makes plants grow better) is 
 a (thing made up of different things) of the effect of prices and of changes in different (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 factors. They do not measure the effectiveness of a (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment taken alone. 
 David (1976) has talked to/looked at this issue using a more policy-(connected/related) way(s) of doing things. Her study reported the results on (material that makes plants grow better) price elasticities based on 
 a complete analysis of data received/got at three different levels: group 
 data for ten Asian countries, thin slice farm-level data for six Asian coun- 
 
 12 
 
 tries, and thin slice and time-series farm-level data for Laguna (Philippines) farmers. This study had the (like nothing else) good thing/excellence/advantage of in a planned way allowing for 
 (material that makes plants grow better) demand differences due to non-price factors. The long-run (material that makes plants grow better) 
 demand ability to stretch was very steady and solid at about -0.9 for all three sets of 
 data. This ability to stretch, it should be cautioned, is again a (made up of different things) figure when 
 all other conditions are allowed to change. When neither (surrounding conditions) nor 
 varieties is permitted to change, the ability to stretch drops to -0.3 - which may be 
 compared with the guess of about -2.0 received/got using Griliches' way(s) of doing things. So, only one-third of the long-run (material that makes plants grow better) response can be explained 
 by price changes alone. David also found that the total/totally/with nothing else mixed in price-response of (material that makes plants grow better) was greater in countries with larger levels of (material that makes plants grow better) consumption- a 
 finding that makes exclusive reliance on (material that makes plants grow better) payments harder to 
 permit in poorer countries. 
 Historical studies of long-term (popular things/general ways things are going) in Japan and other East Asian countries support these ends/end results. Over the past century or so these countries 
 experienced high rates of farming-based growth going along with successful money-based development. According to Hayami ( 1972), between 1880 and 1960, the 
 price of rice (lowered/flattened from losing air) by the general price index showed no (popular thing/general way things are going). This reflected 
 government policy designed to keep the wage costs of labor-intensive (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) stable without lowering the living standards of farming-based producers. However, important inventions of new things in the (material that makes plants grow better) industry led to (material that makes plants grow better) price reductions. Between 1883 and 1937, the price of commercial (material that makes plants grow better) 
 fell by more than 60% (Hayami, 1967). Along with falling (material that makes plants grow better) prices, 
 non-price efforts to improve yields- through improving technology and (set of machines) - served to maintain the growth of farming-based production. Falling (material that makes plants grow better) prices may have been especially important in (reducing/ slowing/ slowly moving) the working capital restriction of Japanese poor people (Ishikawa, 1967). 
 Some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from micro-level studies further reinforces the above ends/end results. Dobbs and Foster (1972) tested farm-level (rewards or reasons for doing something) to invest in 
 packages of yield-raising inputs (water-seed-(material that makes plants grow better)) for grain production in 
 north India. They tested the private rate of return to investments in added 
 inputs using farm-level data rather than guess elasticities (related to numbers). Even 
 at output prices 25% below the winning/most common market levels, they found rates of 
 return changing/different between 77 and 1196% -well more than any measure of the 
 social opportunity cost of capital. Their end/end result was that input prices did 
 not seem unreasonably high to discourage  the adoption of these packages. Private 
 investment in yield-raising but lumpy inputs such as tube-wells appeared to 
 be effectively held back by factors such as small size of land-holdings, land 
 breaking (up) and credit availability. 
 Rosegrant and Herdt (1981) built a described/explained farm-level decisionmaking model to test out the joint and independent yield-raising effects of 
 credit and (material that makes plants grow better) payments. Using Philippines data, they found that: (a) the 
 (atomic) of credit available was far more effective in increasing yield than the 
 
 13 
 
 price of credit, and (b) (material that makes plants grow better) payments served to raise yield by increasing 
 the effective availability of credit. This study hints that (material that makes plants grow better) payments 
 and efforts to increase available credit are policies that strongly complement 
 each other. Credit market failures appear to be quite (existing all over a large area) especially in 
 small-holder farming of poor countries. 
 The hit/effect of price policies on tractorization has been talked about in anumber of studies although their focus has been on capital-labor substitution rather 
 than supply response. In Brazil, for instance, the operative tractor stock rose 
 from 8372 in 1950 to 165 870 in 1970. According to Sanders and Ruttan (1978), 
 this was brought about in different ways including special (and good) exchange rates 
 during the 50s and, paid-for credit with very low (often negative) interest 
 rates and long repayment periods in the 60s. The authors found that the ease 
 of substituting tractors for labor was very high so that the labor displacement 
 effect was big. This displacement also took the form of a (related to a large area) shift 
 of production away from areas with cheap labor (the northeast) to areas with 
 large farms and high labor costs. It was noted that the lack of labor for the 
 large farms of the Brazilian South caused/brought about/reminded the use of their political influence 
 to give money to the substitution of capital for labor. 
 In the South Asian experience with the new yield-raising technologies, an 
 important issue is whether mechanization of land preparation and collecting 
 operations was a response to the relative prices of labor and capital or whether 
 it was technically (completing/matching) to the bio-chemical inputs. For the Pakistan 
 Punjab, Mcinerney and Donaldson ( 1975), found that tractor subsidization 
 was related to a more than doubling of farm size and with a decrease in 
 labor use per area of land  of 40% but with an increase in cropping strength of only 
 7%. Rao ( 1974) found no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of technical (when two things work together equally well) for the Indian 
 Punjab. He explained tractorization as an undesirable result of changing relative prices (falling tractor to wage costs and rising product prices to 
 tractor costs) in the big picture  of unequal land structure. (in almost the same way), in Mexico, 
 the employment hit/effect of the green revolution was greatly restricted because 
 of the labor-saving mechanization preferred by the large farm part/area which was 
 able to grow quickly because of cheap government credit and (set of machines) provision (Stevenhagen, 1970; Johnston and Cownie, 1969). 
 These experiences suggest that small farms and large farms often do 
 not face identical wage and capital costs due to a variety of market and institutional mistakes. This makes for a capital-using bias on large farms which 
 may be further reinforced by inappropriate government price policies. 
 How does the policy-maker decide between supporting output prices against/compared to/or 
 giving money to inputs? The guesses of demand and supply elasticities for inputs 
 and outputs are very important to this choice but the hits/effects on foreign exchange and 
 budget balances may be equally important. The decision has to rest on the 
 relative social and money-related costs of these different policies. 
 What people believe now is that output payments are superior because they 
 
 14 
 
 do not distort the mix of inputs used when raising production. Input payments, 
 in this view, are (done for good reason) only when there are input market mistakes. According to Barker and Hayami (1976), the use of (material that makes plants grow better) payments in the 
 Philippines to (accomplish or gain with effort) rice independence was more cost-(producing a lot with very little waste) than price 
 supports because of different (problems, delays, etc.) in its diffusion ((having no knowledge), risk, etc.). 
 Their calculations allowed for an important difficulty with input payments: 
 unlike a price support for, say, rice, input payments for (material that makes plants grow better), water, credit, 
 etc., may not be agreeable to targeting for clearly stated/particular crops. For instance, the 
 spillover of (material that makes plants grow better) payments (meant for rice growers) in the Philippines 
 to sugar producers greatly increased the total cost of the helping payment program 
 (though not by enough to tilt the balance in favor of price supports). 
 Ahmed ( 1978) extended the study of Barker and Hayami to Bangladesh. He 
 found that the net social benefits would be larger and the net cost to government smaller with a (material that makes plants grow better) helping payment than a price support program for a targeted increase of 0.5 m tons in rice. This was because: (a) the price ability to stretch 
 of rice supply was small; (b) such as it was, the rice output response weaken(ed)/(offer(ed) lower prices than) 
 jute production, a major foreign exchange earner; and (c) increased (material that makes plants grow better) 
 consumption could be domestically met. It may be added that Ahmed judged 
 the distributional effects to be also superior for (material that makes plants grow better) payments because the 
 fraction of output marketed was more unequal across farmsize groups than the 
 fraction of (material that makes plants grow better) ate/destroyed. 
 (based on facts and other evidence), the choice between output and input price (rewards or reasons for doing something) will depend 
 on a variety of country- or situation-clearly stated/particular factors. Two studies, anyway, 
 provide possible and practical pointers of a general nature. 
 (1) Krishna (1976) has argued that, usually/(in the past), input payments are preferred on political grounds because food prices do not have to be raised and on 
 money-related grounds because only farmers using the input benefit. However, he 
 favors output price supports, because: (a) farmers are more familiar and sensitive to them at low levels of development, and (b) output price supports are 
 more easily joined with price (making steady/making firm and strong) than input payments. This general 
 recommendation is supported by practical (things to carefully think about). 
 ( 2) A possible argument, which has yet to be tested, favoring 
 input payments, has been given by (area controlled by a church) and McLaren ( 1982). If average 
 costs rise with production due to technical diseconomies, the cost of a helping payment 
 to a changeable input such as (material that makes plants grow better), which substitutes for fixed factors such as 
 land and (completes/goes along with) other (number or thing that changes) factors, will be lower than the cost of an 
 output price support. The (things that are assumed to be true) of this argument are supported by scientific (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) in the case of (material that makes plants grow better). 
 4. Marketed extra 
 
 Prices for farming-based valuable things can have (not numbers-based) different effects 
 on the extra of farming sold to the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) than on the volume 
 
 15 
 
 of production. This difference between production and sales is not of importance for non-foodgrain farming-based products. The problem of securing/making sure of an 
 (good) enough flow of food (more than what's needed) to city-based  areas to (accomplish or gain with effort) targeted rates of 
 growth of industry has been at the center of debates about money-based development. When countries try to (accomplish or gain with effort) domestic food independence either for 
 non-money-based reasons of because of acute foreign exchange restrictions on food 
 imports, the marketed extra issue is a especially serious one. 
 Other linkages between farming and the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) are closely 
 related to the marketed extra. The volume of marketed extra will go beyond 
 the reverse flow of industrial (middle-position) and consumption products (that are bought and sold)  (instances of buying things for money) 
 by farming to the extent that farming-based savings finance non-farming-based 
 investments. In India, for example, roughly two-thirds of total foodgrains output is kept/held for self-consumption within farming while, at the same time, 
 (away from cities) demand for industrial consumption products (that are bought and sold)  is nearly two and one-halftimes 
 that of city-based  consumption (Rangarajan, 1982). Bell (1974) selects/names the 
 flow of marketed extra due to (instances of buying things for money) of industrial inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better) 
 as the 'obligatory' extra and that going along with/matching up to (instances of buying things for money) of industrial 
 consumption products (that are bought and sold)  such as fabrics as the 'optional' extra. In the course of 
 money-based development, farming-based technology usually develops in ways which 
 increase the required extra and the growing income of the farming-based producer-person will permit (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) in consumption away from food so 
 that the optional extra is also expected to rise. 
 Very differently, in the short to medium run, an increase in farming-based prices 
 may actually reduce the flow of marketed extra out of farming. As prices 
 rise, farming-based incomes will rise and so will, following the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) presented 
 in Section 2, output. However, the hit/effect on own-consumption is uncertain. 
 Since farming-based product prices rise, (away from cities) producers will substitute away from 
 farming-based consumption to industrial products (that are bought and sold). On the other hand, the increase 
 in their incomes as sellers will permit them to keep/hold more of their own production. On balance, the effect on marketed extra may turn out to be negative depending on the price and income elasticities of own consumption, the 
 price ability to stretch of supply and the fraction of output marketed. A 'perverse' 
 response is, of course, agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with clear, self-interested behavior on the 
 part of the farmer. If farms have a high natural tendency to consume more of their 
 own production as output prices and, because of this, their incomes rise, and such income effects rule the habit/desire to substitute different consumption products (that are bought and sold) 
 for the own-produced products (that are bought and sold), then policies trying to increase the extra sold 
 of food should favor 'low' rather than 'high' food prices. 
 Three factors increase the chance of a negative response. First, with low 
 income levels in farm-related, keeping/holding onto/rememberings will be high and consumption is likely 
 to respond positively to prices. Second, where non-food (products normally found in stores) are 
 not widely available in areas away from cities or where person preferences remain conservative, (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) in consumption will be slow to respond. Third, the 
 
 16 
 
 chance of a negative response is greater for an (process of people making, selling, and buying things) where the small 
 poor (person) part/area is most in control/most common. 
 Scientifically, the marketed extra response to prices remains one ofthe major disturbed/not finished/not decided issues (Krishna, 1967). Marketed extra elasticities have been 
 guessed through direct and indirect means and, for clearly stated/particular food crops and 
 for foodgrains as a whole. Such studies remain few, and some them have 
 been for India. 
 Bardhan's (1970) was the first study to guess the marketed extra ability to stretch directly. She guessed the behavior of total foodgrains marketed using 
 thin slice village-level data for India and found a marketed extra ability to stretch ranging between -0.33 and - 0.60. Haessel ( 1975) (after that) employed 
 the same data but allowed for the interaction between, and because of this, (happening together) desire/decision of, marketings and prices. The guess of the short-run 
 ability to stretch ranged between 2.7 and 3.3. He also found that the ability to stretch guesses for small farmers were somewhat lower than for large farms. 
 Haessel's results received/got for village-level data were (not very long ago) argued 
 by a macro-econometric model in which the foodgrains marketed extra and 
 food prices were (at the same time) decided/figured out along with many other (numbers that change/things that change) 
 relating to the farming-based and manufacturing parts/areas (Ahluwalia, 1979). 
 Marketed extra of foodgrains was specified to be a function of foodgrains 
 output, current and fell behind, and of foodgrain prices and income from commercial crops, both expressed in terms of the price of manufactures. Relative foodgrain prices were figured out by/decided by the marketed extra, government food distribution and non-farming-based real income. The study found a negative and 
 significant response of marketed extra in the short to medium run. (testing out) results from this study showed that without (P .L.480) imports 
 of foodgrains, agriculture's terms of trade would have been more good and 
 domestic production offoodgrains greater; however, the marketed extra would 
 have been lower by an average of 2.5% per year. 
 In a time-series study using Indian macro data, it was reported that the 
 response of marketed extra was positive for different measures of price (rewards or reasons for doing something) (Bardhan and Bardhan, 1971). But the guess did not permit 
 interactions between prices and sales. The ability to stretch of the fraction of foodgrains marketed was positive and close to togetherness with respect to the price of 
 foodgrains relative to the non-food parts. The ability to stretch with respect 
 to the ratio of food prices to non-food farming-based products was also positive 
 but much less than one. What's more, possible analysis showed that 
 given a (compared to other things) high<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
