 Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Farm size and the (things that decide other things) of productive (wasting very little while working or producing something) in 
 the Brazilian Center-West 
 Steven M. Helfand*, Edward S. Levine 
 Department of Money flow, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 This paper explores the (things that decide other things) of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), and the relationship between farm size and (wasting very little while working or producing something), in the 
 Center-West of Brazil. This is the area where farming-based production and total factor working well have grown the fastest since 
 1970. It is also a area seen as unusually large farms. Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is studied with Data Envelopment Analysis 
 and county level data disaggregated by farm size and type of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment). The (wasting very little while working or producing something) measure is moved backward on a set of 
 explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) which includes farm size, type of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment), (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) of output, access to institutions and indicators 
 of technology and input usage. The relationship between farm size and (wasting very little while working or producing something) is found to be non-linear, with (wasting very little while working or producing something) first 
 falling and then rising with size. Type of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment), access to institutions and markets, and modern inputs are found to be 
 important (things that decide other things) of the differences in (wasting very little while working or producing something) across farms. 
 #_# 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: Q100; O300 
 Keywords: Brazil; Farming; Working well; (wasting very little while working or producing something); DEA 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Most studies of farming-based working well 
 in developing countries support the view that there is 
 an inverse relationship between working well and farm 
 size (Berry and Cline, 1979; Barrett, 1996). If correct, 
 land reform could add/give to improving both equity 
 and (wasting very little while working or producing something) in farming. Most of these studies, 
 however, are based on partial measures of working well 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 909 827 1572. 
 E-mail addresses: shelfand@mail.ucr.edu (S.M. Helfand), 
 tedlevine@earthlink.net (E.S. Levine). 
 
 such as yield which are (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) in favor of small 
 producers. It is likely that the inverse relationship 
 would be less obvious, or maybe even reversed, if 
 a measure of total factor working well (TFP) were used 
 instead. It has also been suggested that the inverse 
 relationship might weaken in a area seen as 
 fast modernization. This paper explores the relationship between farm size and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in 
 exactly this type of (surrounding conditions). The Center-West 
 (CW) is the area of Brazil where production and 
 TFP have grown the fastest since 1970. Gasques and 
 Conceic¸a˜o (2001) and Vicente et al. (2001) both 
 guess once-a-year TFP growth rates for the CW to be in 
 
 0169-5150/$ - see front matter #_# 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2004.09.021 
 
 242 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 the 4-5% range for the period 1970-1995, or about 
 twice the national average. It is also a area 
 seen as unusually large farms: the average 
 farm size in the CW is about six times the national 
 average. 
 A second goal of this paper is to extend the 
 recent Brazilian books on total factor working well 
 growth in farming to an analysis of the (things that decide other things) of working well. We do this in two ways. First, 
 latest studies have limited themselves to the 
 measurement of TFP. Only one has tried to analyse 
 the (things that decide other things) of TFP in an econometric (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 (Vicente et al., 2003). In this paper we move backward a 
 measure of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) on a set of explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change) which includes farm size, type of land 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment), (combination of different substances, objects, people, etc.) of output, access to institutions, 
 and indicators of technology and input usage. Second, 
 previous studies have been based on national or state 
 level data. These have given a valuable first 
 guess to working well change in the past 
 at least 20 years. The Brazilian farming-based part/area, 
 however, is far too blended for us to be made happy 
 with studies done at this level. In this paper, we 
 use data from 426 counties, 15 farm size classes and 
 four types of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment). This permits us to avoid 
 many of the issues of grouping bias present in 
 previous studies, and creates a far richer set of data 
 for studying the (things that decide other things) of (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly 
 presents the Data Envelopment Analysis way(s) of doing things 
 that is used to guess technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Section 3 
 describes the data and the construction of the 
 (numbers that change/things that change). Section 4 analyses the scientific results, 
 with a focus on farm size and Section 5 provides 
 ends/end results. 
 
 DEA is a non-parametric way of doing things and that it can 
 change something (to help someone)/take care of someone many outputs and inputs. Also, 
 the econometric explanation has yet to be developed for 
 including (related to space or existing in space) relationship into a (random/including random data points) 
 edge of something/unexplored area model. 
 We use output distance functions to describe the 
 edge of something/unexplored area of a multiple-input multiple-output production 
 technology, and the (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) distance of each 
 (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) from the edge of something/unexplored area. The following note 
 is used. The production possibilities set P is the 
 combination of all pairs of inputs x and outputs y that 
 are (able to be done), where x and y are vectors. Inputs and 
 outputs are assumed to be freely disposable, and P is 
 assumed to be non-empty, closed, and curving out. The 
 output distance function D0 is 
   
  
  
 1 
 (1) 
 D0 ðx; yÞ ¼ inf u : x; y 2 P 
 u 
 where u is a non-negative scalar that measures the ratio 
 of the watched/followed vector of outputs to the maximum 
 vector that could be (accomplished or gained), given the input vector, if 
 all outputs were expanded (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else)ly. The inverse 
 of the output distance function, the Farrell outputoriented measure of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), is used here 
 as a measure of (wasting very little while working or producing something). The Farrell measure equals 
 one for (producing a lot with very little waste) firms on the edge of something/unexplored area, and then 
 increases with inefficiency. 
 Farrell (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures can be found as the 
 solution to a linear programming problem under 
 other choice ideas (you think are true) about returns to scale. With K 
 farms, N inputs, M outputs and the idea (you think is true) of 
 constant returns to scale (CRS), the following linear 
 program must be solved for every (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement): 
 ½D0 ðx; yÞÀ1 ¼ max u 
 ðz;uÞ 
 
 s:t: 
 2. Way(s) of doing things 
 We use Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) to 
 calculate productive (wasting very little while working or producing something) (Fa¨ re et al., 1994). 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) is defined in a relative sense, as the distance 
 between watched/followed input-output combinations and a 
 best practice edge of something/unexplored area. DEA is one of a few 
 ways of doing things that can be used to calculate a best practice 
 production edge of something/unexplored area (Coelli et al., 1998; Kumbhakar 
 and Lovell, 2000). The principal advantages of DEA, 
 instead of (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area guess, are that 
 
 uk ymk 
 
 K 
 X 
 zk ymk ; m ¼ 1; . . . ; M 
 
 (2) 
 
 k¼1 
 K 
 X 
 
 zk xnk 
 
 k¼1 
 
 zk ! 0; 
 
 xnk ; 
 
 n ¼ 1; . . . ; N 
 k ¼ 1; . . . ; K 
 
 where the zk are (numbers that change/things that change) which show the strength 
 with which each farm is used in order to construct 
 the edge of something/unexplored area of the production possibilities set. The 
 linear program solves for the highest value 
 of u given the restrictions that the (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else)ly 
 expanded vector of outputs and the vector of inputs 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 are in the (able to be done) set, and that the strength (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are non-negative. 
 Two warnings are in order. First, the (wasting very little while working or producing something) scores 
 may be very sensitive to measurement error for the 
 farms that define the best practice edge of something/unexplored area. We explore 
 this issue in the scientific application. Second, we use 
 the term 'inefficiency' only to mean the distance 
 between a given farm and the best practice edge of something/unexplored area. 
 There are many reasons why a farm might not be 
 operating on the best practice edge of something/unexplored area, and most of 
 these are unlikely to relate to x-inefficiency. Left out/kept out 
 (numbers that change/things that change) such as land quality, market failures that lead 
 to non-separatable household decisions, credit market 
 restrictions that lead farms to choose input-output 
 bundles that appear inefficient in relation to (free to move around/without rules or restrictions) farms, and different wines of technology 
 are all possible reasons why clear farmers might not 
 be operating on the edge of something/unexplored area. The challenge, it seems to 
 us, is to identify the relative importance of these 
 different sources of 'inefficiency'. 
 
 3. The data 
 The data for this study come from the 1995/1996 
 Farming-based (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  in Brazil (IBGE, 1998). For the 
 DEA analysis, we use group output and five 
 inputs. We briefly explain the construction of these 
 (numbers that change/things that change) here. In Section 4, which presents the results 
 of the econometric analysis, we explain the (numbers that change/things that change) 
 that are used in the second stage to study the 
 (things that decide other things) of (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Output (Y): This (number or thing that changes) is defined as the gross 
 value of farming-based output net of three categories of 
 items. First, to avoid the double counting of animals 
 that happens when animals are (bought) and sold 
 at different stages of the production process, we 
 deducted the value of (instances of buying things for money) of (cows, bulls, etc.), hogs, 
 chickens and fertilised eggs. (cows, bulls, etc.), hogs, and 
 chickens account for over 99% of the value of animal 
 production in the CW. Second, we deducted the value 
 of production of 'rural industry', which accounts for 
 2% of the value of farming-based production in the CW. 
 Early/incomplete guesses showed/told about that for most products 
 the value added in (away from cities) industry was very close 
 to zero. Because of data limits, it was much 
 simpler to leave out/keep out (away from cities) industry than guessed 
 intermediate inputs. Finally, we left out/kept out the value of 
 
 243 
 
 'extractive' and 'forestry' products to be consistent 
 with our decision to leave out/keep out forest and (natural area with trees) 
 areas. These products only accounted for 1.6% of the 
 value of farming-based output in the area, while forest 
 and (natural area with trees) represented 29% of the used area. 
 Used area (X1): 90% of the value of output in the 
 CW comes from (lasting for a short time) crops and (cows, bulls, etc.). With this 
 in mind, we built the area (number or thing that changes) to include 
 natural and permanent (areas of grassy land), land used for 
 crops, and productive land that was not being used. 
 These categories accounted (match up each pair of items in order) for 58, 7 and 
 2% of the used land. The left out/kept out categories were 
 forest and (natural area with trees) (29%) and unusable land (4%). 
 Labour (X2): First, we built a (number or thing that changes) for 
 family labour by treating males and females as equals, 
 and by only counting half of the family labour under 
 14 years of age. Second, we built a (number or thing that changes) for 
 hired labour along the lines of Guanziroli et al. (2001). 
 These authors figured out an approach to correct for the 
 fact that (a) (lasting for a short time) workers should not be counted 
 as full-time equal workers, and (b) many farms, 
 especially the large ones, hire contracting firms in an 
 effort to avoid paying social security and other labour 
 taxes. Finally, we added family and hired labour 
 together in order to construct the labour (number or thing that changes) in 
 full-time equal units. 
 Tractors (X3): Tractors are measured in the 
 equal of a 75 horsepower tractor, which was 
 the midpoint of the modal horsepower class (50- 
 100 hp). 
 Animals (X4): Many studies of TFP have not used 
 animals as an input, even when they were carefully thought about/believed 
 part of output. We grouped animals based on their 
 relative prices in the CW of Brazil. We then used the 
 stock of animals in (cows, bulls, etc.)  equals as a substitute for the 
 stock of capital in animal production. 
 (bought something for money) inputs (X5): We created an input 
 (number or thing that changes) based on the expenses for (a) fertiliser, 
 (b) chemicals (such as bug-killers and herbicides), (c) 
 seeds, (d) fuel, and (e) feed and medicine for animals. 
 Finally, we created 'representative farms' for each 
 farm size, of each type of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment), in each county. 
 This was necessary because we did not have access to 
 farm level data. We used data from all 426 counties in 
 the CW (leaving out/keeping out the Federal District) that was 
 grouped into 15 size classes and 4 types of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment). 
 After removing unusable (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements), the final 
 dataset covered 237,595 establishments grouped 
 
 244 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 into 9304 representative farms, suggesting an average of 
 25 establishments per representative farm. 
 
 4. Scientific results 
 We first calculated the middle-point value of output per 
 hectare (Y/X1) and the middle-point value of output per unit 
 of labour (Y/X2) for each farm size class. The data 
 were agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with a broad body of international 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the relationship between farm size and 
 working well. On the one hand, there was a strong 
 inverse relationship between value of output per 
 hectare and farm size, reflecting the intensive use by 
 small farms of their rare/not enough  factor of production-land. 
 Labour working well, in contrast, was much higher on 
 large farms where the opportunity cost of labour is 
 greater. The relationship between total factor working well (or technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) under CRS) and farm 
 size is influenced by the partial productivities of land, 
 labour, and all other inputs. 
 We calculated the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) scores 
 according to the way(s) of doing things in Section 2 and the 
 idea (you think is true) of constant returns to scale. We then 
 moved backward the (wasting very little while working or producing something) scores on different combinations of explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) as reported in Table 1. 
 We guessed all of the (moving backwards) with county level 
 fixed effects to take account of (related to space or existing in space) mixed-up nature, 
 such as differences in soil quality, that was not 
 captured in the move backwardors. We used a GLS procedure 
 that allowed for heteroscedasticity across the 426 
 counties. Further, because each (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) in our data 
 set contains mean values of each of the (numbers that change/things that change) over 
 all farms in a given (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) type-size-county cell, we 
 used the number of establishments represented by 
 each (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) to construct weights to correct for the 
 heteroscedasticity (not only across counties, but also 
 across (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) types and sizes) that otherwise rises 
 from moving backward on cell means or ''grouped data'' 
 (Kmenta, 1971). In practice, the guess ways of doing things 
 mattered little and the guessed coefficients from all 
 of the (moving backwards) proved quite strong to alternative 
 (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) and to the including in something/exclusion of 
 different sets of (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Moving backward (1) guesses the absolute/without any limits relationship between the log of technical inefficiency and 
 the log of farm size. We added a quadratic term to 
 capture non-linearities that we watched/followed in a prior 
 
 graphical analysis of the mean inefficiency by farm 
 size. Both coefficients were (meaningful numbers) at 
 least at the 1% level. In Fig. 1 we have plotted the 
 curve 'size' based on the coefficients from moving backward 
 (1). The curve shows a non-linear relationship 
 between inefficiency and farm size, with inefficiency 
 first rising and then falling as farm size grows. The 
 modal farm size class of 20-50 ha might be thought about/believed 
 as a target size for land reform in this area, and for 
 this reason we have set its level of inefficiency equal to 
 one in the figure. Relative to this group, which 
 accounts for 21% of the farms in the area, farms in 
 the 200-500 range are guessed to be about 20% less 
 (producing a lot with very little waste). While farms smaller than 20 ha are even 
 (producing more with less waste), the analysis here will focus on farms 
 above 20 ha which represent 78% of the farms in the 
 area and more then 95% of all (numbers that change/things that change) other than 
 labour.1 
 In addition to farm size, the next four (moving backwards) 
 control for differences in inefficiency due to land 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) status. We included dummies for renters, 
 (farm workers paid with a share of crop profits) and people (who are living in a building, etc.) to tell/show the difference between them 
 from landowners. Including (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) dummies in 
 model (2) did not change the coefficients on size. The 
 results point to/show that renters were somewhat more 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) than owners (negative coefficients point to/show 
 lower inefficiency), people (who are living in a building, etc.) were less (producing a lot with very little waste), and 
 (farm workers paid with a share of crop profits) had mixed results. It is likely that 
 renters were (producing more with less waste) in this area because they 
 were a more (a mixture of things that are all pretty much the same) group of market oriented 
 farmers relative to owners who were the majority. In 
 our final model - moving backward (5) - the partial effect of 
 differences in land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) on inefficiency is (compared to other things) 
 small compared with that of most other (things that decide other things) 
 of working well. We guess that renters were 14% 
 (producing more with less waste) than owners, while (farm workers paid with a share of crop profits) and 
 people (who are living in a building, etc.) were 5 and 7% less (producing a lot with very little waste). 
 In addition to land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment), moving backward (3) controls 
 for differences in the (written work) of output. Relative 
 to the left out/kept out category - (cows, bulls, etc.) - producers that 
 (focused on doing one thing very well) in higher value activities ((lasting for a short time) 
 crops, (the study of plants), permanent crops, and hogs and 
 chickens) had lower levels of inefficiency. A 
 coefficient equal to À1 would suggest that a one 
 1 
 
 Some authors, such as Rezende (2003), argue that small family 
 farms are not doable/possible in the CW due to the long drought period and 
 the relative lack of off-farm employment. 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 245 
 
 Table 1 
 Moving backward results for the (things that decide other things) of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something): (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) = ln(inefficiency) 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 (1) 
 
 Farm size 
 Size 
 0.45 
 À0.04 
 Size2 
 Land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) (relative to owners) 
 Renter 
 (farm worker paid with a share of crop profits) 
 Person (who is living in a building, etc.) 
 Composition of output (relative to cattle) 
 (lasting for a short time) crops 
 (the study of plants) 
 Permanent crops 
 Hogs and chickens 
 Other 
 Access to institutions/public products (that are bought and sold) 
 Credit 
 Electricity 
 Technical help 
 Cooperatives 
 Market access 
 Technology and inputs 
 Machines 
 Crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 Fertiliser 
 Pest and disease control 
 Soil conservation 
 Mechanical milking 
 (not made by nature/fake) insemination 
 Log chance 
 À4396 
 
 (2) 
 
 (3) 
 
 (4) 
 
 (5) 
 
 0.45 
 À0.04 
 
 0.32 
 À0.03 
 
 0.37 
 À0.03 
 
 0.39 
 À0.03 
 
 À0.39 
 À0.23 
 0.11 
 
 À0.11 
 0.10 
 0.18 
 
 À0.19 
 À0.00a 
 0.06 
 
 À0.14 
 0.05a 
 0.07 
 
 À1.22 
 À1.98 
 À1.36 
 À1.39 
 0.95 
 
 À1.20 
 À1.60 
 À1.31 
 À1.31 
 0.58 
 
 À1.05 
 À1.25 
 À1.26 
 À1.26 
 0.58 
 
 À0.16 
 À0.55 
 À0.27 
 À0.30 
 À0.56 
 
 À0.05a 
 À0.48 
 À0.15 
 À0.22 
 À0.53 
 
 À2432 
 
 À0.11 
 À0.28 
 À0.33 
 À0.08b 
 À0.21 
 À0.86b 
 À0.09a 
 À2308 
 
 À4240 
 
 À2962 
 
 Notes: All (moving backwards) have county fixed effects (not reported) and allow for heteroscedasticity across counties using as GLS procedure. All 
 coefficients are (meaningful numbers) at least at the 1% level unless selected/named with the following symbols: 
 a 
 Not (meaningful numbers) at the 5% level. 
 b 
 (meaningful numbers) at the 5% level. 
 
 percentage point increase in the share of production 
 coming from (lasting for a short time) crops, for example, translates into a 1% increase in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Based 
 on the coefficients from this moving backward, the (may or may not happen, depending on something) relationship between size and inefficiency is 
 graphed in Fig. 1 as 'composition of output'. Because 
 (cows, bulls, etc.)  production accounted for nearly half of the 
 value of output for farms over 50 ha, but less than 
 25% for farms under 10 ha, controlling for these 
 differences reduces the (wasting very little while working or producing something) disadvantage of 
 large producers. So, the 'composition' curve is 
 higher than the 'size' curve below the 20-50 ha class 
 and lower than it above this size. The advantage of 
 farms in the 20-50 ha class over larger farms drops to 
 no more than 8.4%. 
 
 Moving backward (4) incorporates (numbers that change/things that change) meant to 
 capture access to institutions and public products (that are bought and sold). So, 
 the (numbers that change/things that change) credit, electricity, technical help 
 and cooperatives all measure the share of establishments in each representative farm that uses these 
 items. These (numbers that change/things that change) range between zero and one. 
 Market access, in contrast, is meant to take by force/take control of the 
 degree to which market oriented farms are likely to 
 be (producing more with less waste) than farms producing for their own 
 consumption. This (number or thing that changes) is measured as the value 
 of sales divided by the value of production. All five 
 (numbers that change/things that change) are related to lower inefficiency. 
 Market (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) and use of electricity had the 
 largest hit/effect, followed by participation in cooperatives and use of technical help, with credit 
 
 246 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 Fig. 1. (may or may not happen, depending on something) effect of farm size on inefficiency ((usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized as a fraction of the 20-50 ha group). 
 
 having the smallest hit/effect.2 Based on the coefficients from this moving backward, the curve 'institutions' in 
 Fig. 1 moves/changes up (in a big way) relative to the previous 
 picture/situation, reflecting the fact that large farms tended to 
 have special (and good) access to these institutions, and 
 controlling for this advantage would increase the 
 relative inefficiency of these farms. So, farms in 
 the 1000-2000 range were now guessed to be the 
 least (producing a lot with very little waste). They were 36% less (producing a lot with very little waste) than 
 farms in the 20-50 ha class, or nearly twice the 
 highest (wasting very little while working or producing something) difference that was watched/followed in 
 the base case. This is powerful (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the 
 importance of providing small farms with access to 
 these institutions. 
 Moving backward (5) controls, also, for a variety of 
 factors related to the level of technology and the use of 
 inputs. All (numbers that change/things that change) are measured as the share of 
 2 
 We are surprised by the small size of the coefficient on credit. 
 This was the most important difference from earlier, unweighted 
 results. However, separate (moving backwards) using credit/size interaction 
 terms, showed that the effect of credit on inefficiency differs/changes 
 (in a big way) across size groups. We hope to shed added/more light 
 on these results in future research. 
 
 establishments that report using the selected/named item. 
 So, an increase in the share of farms using 
 machines, crop-watering/rinsing with water, fertilisers, pest and disease 
 control or soil (protecting something from harm), all add/give to reducing 
 inefficiency. Mechanical milking has the largest effect 
 of all of these (numbers that change/things that change). Based on the coefficients from 
 this moving backward, the curve 'technology/inputs' in Fig. 1 
 shows that when we also control for differences in the 
 use of technology and inputs, the relative inefficiency 
 of large farms is even greater than in the previous 
 pictures/situations. The relative disadvantage of farms in the 
 1000-2000 ha class rises to 46% in this case. 
 However, due to the indivisibilities that exist with 
 certain technologies, such as tractors, providing small 
 and medium farmers with greater access to these 
 inputs might require institutional inventions of new things such as 
 the development of rental markets for the services 
 given by these inputs. 
 Finally, we guessed some different things than/different versions of our 
 models to check the strength of the results and to 
 examine the (related to space or existing in space) nature of our data. Due to space 
 limits, we restrict ourselves to summarising the 
 most important ends/end results. 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 First, to test the quadratic (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the 
 size-inefficiency relationship, we guessed our five 
 models using a series of farm size dummies in place of 
 the log of size and square of log of size, and graphed the 
 results. The resulting graphs did, in fact, (pretty close) 
 an inverted, U-shaped curve fairly closely, pointing to/showing 
 that the quadratic (detailed description of exactly what is required) is appropriate. 
 Second, to test the sensitivity of the DEA results to 
 measurement error for the (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) that define the 
 edge of something/unexplored area, we removed the 0.5% (or 47) (producing the most with the least waste) 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements), re-ran DEA, and re-guessed the model. 
 With only a few exceptions, the signs of the guessed 
 coefficients remained the same, as did their high levels relative to the others in the same 'group' (e.g. 
 composition of output). Most importantly, the shape of 
 the size-inefficiency relationship represented in Fig. 1 
 remained almost the same, although inefficiency now reached a 
 maximum in the 2000-5000 farm size category rather 
 than in the 1000-2000 class. So, it is unlikely that 
 measurement error on the edge of something/unexplored area (in a big way) 
 affected our results. 
 Third, we thought about/believed whether the (when something is kept out or not included) of 
 forest and (natural area with trees) areas as inputs (described something as less than it was) the 
 relative inefficiency of large farms, because these 
 farms may hold large amounts of undeveloped land for 
 guess/guessing, as a hedge against inflation or for 
 fame/respect, and therefore do not use it (in a way that produces a lot with very little waste) for 
 production. To test this, we recomputed our DEA 
 results, leaving out/keeping out only 'unusable land' (4% of land in 
 the CW) from our land input (number or thing that changes), and without 
 leaving out/keeping out (related to pumping or digging things from the ground) products, forestry products or 
 (away from cities) industry from our output (number or thing that changes). The new 
 coefficients were, again, almost the same  in sign and importance 
 in nearly every case, and the quadratic relationship 
 between size and inefficiency was mostly 
 unchanged. The (wasting very little while working or producing something) advantage of farms in 
 the 20-50 ha group (in model 5) was still 46% over the 
 1000-2000 class. So, the (when something is kept out or not included) of forest and 
 (natural area with trees) does not appear to bias downward the 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) disadvantage of large farms. We want to be 
 cautious about generalising this result, given the 
 (like nothing else) features of this area: the unusual energy 
 of farming-based growth in the area, driven mostly 
 by large farms. 
 Fourth, we managed and did/done two tests to explore the 
 hit/effect on (wasting very little while working or producing something) of transportation costs, location 
 and (related to space or existing in space) relationship of the errors in our moving backward 
 models. First, we figured out/calculated the relationship-related coefficient 
 
 247 
 
 between the 426 fixed effects in model (5) and an 
 guess of transportation costs between each county 
 and Sa˜ o Paulo, the money-based center of Brazil.3 The 
 relationship-related coefficient of only 0.11 points to/shows that the 
 fixed effects mainly take by force/take control of other county level fixed 
 factors, such as soil quality and rainfall, which appear 
 to be much more important in explaining (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 than county level money-based distance from Sa˜ o Paulo. 
 Second, the version of this paper presented in South 
 Africa in August, 2003, reported results for a model 
 that allowed for (related to space or existing in space) relationship in the errors across 
 counties using a SUR (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). The results were 
 almost identical to model (5) reported here. We 
 decide that the (related to space or existing in space) nature of our data does not 
 appear to be (unfairly influencing an opinion) our results. 
 Finally, to decide/figure out whether the dummies for land 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) types were (good) enough to control for differences 
 between owners, renters, (farm workers paid with a share of crop profits) and people (who are living in a building, etc.), we guessed our models separately for each of 
 the (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) types. Fig. 2 shows the relationship between 
 size and inefficiency suggested by the coefficients of 
 model (5) for each of the four (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) types. Although 
 we did find some differences in the coefficients across 
 models, the U-shaped relationship between size and 
 inefficiency remained in every case. 
 Interestingly, Fig. 2 shows that the relative 
 inefficiency of large renters was less than that of 
 large owners. In fact, renters of farms greater than 
 5000 ha were actually (producing more with less waste) than those in the 
 20-50 ha group. Unlike in many other parts of the 
 world where renters might be more like (farm workers paid with a share of crop profits), 
 renters in the Brazilian Center-West were a (compared to other things) 
 (group of things that are all pretty much the same) group of market oriented farmers. 
 Surprisingly, renters made greater use than owners 
 of those modern inputs, technologies and institutions 
 recorded by the Farming-based (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  that were 
 connected with lower levels of inefficiency.4 It is 
 3 
 
 We would like to thank Newton de Castro, a professor at the 
 UFRJ in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and a Co-PI on the research project 
 NEMESIS for kindly providing us with this transportation cost 
 (number or thing that changes). Because of perfect multicollinearity between this countylevel (number or thing that changes) and our fixed effects, we could not include it in our 
 models. 
 4 
 Not only did renters sell a larger share of their value of output 
 to the market than owners in each size category, they also (focused on doing one thing very well) much more heavily in (lasting for a short time) crops (rather than cattle) and 
 were more likely to use credit, technical help, machines, 
 fertilisers and soil (protecting something from harm) measures. 
 
 248 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 Fig. 2. (may or may not happen, depending on something) effect of farm size on inefficiency by (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) type ((usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy)ized as a fraction of the 20-50 ha group). 
 
 likely that large renters also made greater use of 
 unseen factors, which could explain the relative 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) advantage of this group. 
 In general, the inverse relationship between size 
 and (wasting very little while working or producing something) weakened as we moved from (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 types connected with lower technologies (people (who are living in a building, etc.)) 
 to those connected with greater market (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) and 
 greater use of modern technologies, inputs and 
 institutions (renters). So, while our combined moving backward results correctly represented the situation of 
 owners, which accounted for 88% of the establishments in this area, there were important differences 
 across (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) types in the size-inefficiency relationship. These differences deserve more study. 
 
 5. Ends/end results 
 In this paper we used Data Envelopment Analysis 
 (DEA) to guess the technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farms in 
 the Center-West of Brazil, and then studied the 
 (things that decide other things) of (wasting very little while working or producing something) with moving backward ways of doing things. 
 Future research should explore the strength of the 
 
 results presented here by comparing them with 
 guesses from a (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function. 
 There are important policy effects/results/suggestions that can be 
 came/coming from the analysis in this paper. The results 
 point to/show that access to institutions and products (that are bought and sold)  that are 
 often given by the (government), such as market 
 access via (set of machines) creation and (away from cities) electrification, were among the most important (things that decide other things) of 
 differences in (wasting very little while working or producing something). Other important (things that decide other things) included the use of inputs such as crop-watering/rinsing with water and 
 fertilisers, and differences in the composition of 
 output. These results identify the types of policies and 
 production practices that could add/give to increased 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in this area. 
 We also showed the relationship between farm size 
 and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) to be more complex than what 
 is (usually/ in a common and regular way) believed. Rather than an inverse relationship, where working well falls as farm size rises, we 
 found a U-shaped relationship. For farms up to about 
 1000-2000 ha, (wasting very little while working or producing something) did fall as farm size rose, but 
 beyond this size it started to rise again. The most 
 important reasons why the inverse relationship broke 
 down relate to special (and good) access by large farms to 
 
 S.M. Helfand, E.S. Levine / Farming-based Money flow 31 (2004) 241-249 
 
 institutions and services that help lower inefficiency 
 (such as (away from cities) electricity, technical help and access 
 to markets) as well more intensive use of the 
 technologies and inputs that raise working well. The 
 access of large farmers to such (wasting very little while working or producing something)-improving 
 inputs and institutions may partially explain the 
 dramatic TFP growth in this area relative to the rest 
 of Brazil. However, if one could create an (surrounding conditions) 
 in which small to medium size farms had equal access to 
 working well improving institutions, and improved 
 access to modern technologies and inputs, then these 
 farm could still produce (producing more with less waste)ly than farms in 
 the 2000-20,000 ha range. So, even in the CenterWest of Brazil, a area seen as very 
 large farms and (compared to other things) high levels of technology, 
 land reform continues to provide the possibility of 
 (at the same time) improving equity and (wasting very little while working or producing something). Its 
 success, however, is strongly conditioned by the 
 (completing/matching) institutions, investments and services 
 that allow small and medium size farms to compete on 
 a level playing field. 
 Finally, we found important differences in the size- 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) relationship across land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) types. While 
 all types showed a U-shaped relationship, the U-shape 
 was most obvious for renters, which was the most 
 market oriented type and which made the greatest use of 
 the institutions and modern inputs connected with 
 higher levels of (wasting very little while working or producing something). The U-shape weakened, 
 more closely approximating a monotonic inverse 
 relationship, as we moved to the land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) type 
 (people (who are living in a building, etc.)) connected with lower market orientation 
 and lower technology. These results lend further 
 support to the view that differential access to 
 institutions, and use of technologies and inputs, can 
 significantly change  the usual findings of an inverse 
 relationship between farm size and working well. 
 
 Responses 
 This paper was written as part of a larger project on 
 (related to space or existing in space) money flow/money-based studies called NEMESIS (www.nemesis. 
 org.br). The project is based at IPEA in Rio de Janeiro 
 
 249 
 
 and has been supported by a grant from the Brazilian 
 government under a program called PRONEX. We 
 would like to thank Gerva´ sio Castro de Rezende, 
 Eusta´ quio Reis, Keith Griffin, and Tim Coelli for 
 valuable comments on an earlier draft. 
 
 References 
 Barrett, C.B., 1996. On price risk and the inverse farm 
 size-working well relationship. J. Dev. Econ. 51 (2), 193- 
 216. 
 Berry, R.A., Cline, W., 1979. Land-related Structure and Working well in 
 Developing Countries. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 248. 
 Coelli, T., Rao, D.S.P., Battese, G.E., 1998. An Introduction to 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) and Working well Analysis. Kluwer School-related Publishers, Norwell, 275. 
 Fa¨ re, R., Grosskopf, S., Lovell, C.A.K., 1994. Production Edges of something/unexplored areas. 
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 296. 
 Gasques, J.G., Conceic¸a˜ o, J.C.P., 2001. Changeac¸o˜ es Estruturais da Agricultura e Produtividade Total Dos Fatores. In: 
 Gasques, J.G., Conceic¸a˜ o, J.C.P. (Eds.), Changeac¸o˜ es 
 da Agricultura e Polı´ticas Pu´ blicas. IPEA, Brasilia, pp. 
 17-92. 
 Guanziroli, C., Romeiro, A., Buainain, A.M., Di Sabbato, A., 
 Bittencourt, G., 2001. Agricultura Familiar e Reforma Agra´ ria 
 no Se´ culo XXI. Editora Garamond Ltda, Rio de Janeiro, 
 284. 
 Instituto Brasileiro de Geografı´a e Estatistica IBGE, 1998. Censo 
 Agropecua´ rio 1995-1996. IBGE, Rio de Janeiro. 
 Kmenta, J., 1971. Elements of Econometrics. Macmillan Publishing 
 Co., New York, 655. 
 Kumbhakar, S.C., Lovell, C.A.K., 2000. (random/including random data points) Edge of something/unexplored area Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 333. 
 Rezende, G.C., 2003. Ocupac¸a˜ o Agrı´cola, Estrutura Agra´ ria e 
 Mercado de Trabalho (away from cities) no Cerrado: O Papel do Prec¸o da 
 Terra, dos Recursos Naturais e das Polı´ticas Pu´ blicas. In: 
 Helfand, S.M., Rezende, G.C. (Eds.), Regia˜ o e Espac¸o no 
 Desenvolvimento Agrı´cola Brasileiro. IPEA, Brasilia, pp. 
 173-212. 
 Vicente, J.R., Anefalos, L.C., Caser, D.V., 2001. Produtividade 
 Agrı´cola no Brasil, 1970-1995. Agricultura em Sa˜ o Paulo SP 
 39 (2), 1-23. 
 Vicente, J.R., Anefalos, L.C., Caser, D.V., 2003. Influeˆ ncia de 
 Capital Humano, Insumos Modernos e Recursos Naturais na 
 Produtividade Agrı´cola. In: Helfand, S.M., Rezende, G.C. 
 (Eds.), Regia˜ o e Espac¸o no Desenvolvimento Agrı´cola Brasileiro. IPEA, Brasilia, pp. 265-296. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
