AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 197-200 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Introduction to the special issue on (related to space or existing in space) 
 analysis for farming-based money-flow experts 
 Gerald C. Nelson* 
 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 305 Mumford Hall, 1301 W Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL 61801, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 
 The goal of this special issue is to introduce farming-based money-flow experts to new (related to careful studying or deep thinking) approaches involving (related to space or existing in space) data. 
 This paper provides a brief history of the special issue and an introduction to von Thiinen' s model of the (things that decide other things) of land 
 use and rent that underlies all (related to space or existing in space) analysis. 
 © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: (related to space or existing in space) analysis 
 
 The goal of this special issue is to introduce farming-based money-flow experts to new (related to careful studying or deep thinking) approaches involving (related to space or existing in space) data (data that include the co-ordinates on 
 the surface of the earth, sometimes referred to as georeferenced). The beginning/creation of this issue was two learning 
 workshops-at the International Association of Farming-based Money flow Meetings, Berlin, August 2000 
 and the American Farming-based Money flow Association Meetings, Chicago, August 2001. The format of 
 the workshops was a morning session with summary 
 papers and a series of afternoon hands-on sessions, 
 where people (who were part of a study, etc.) were able to experiment with software and data, working through a problem involving 
 (related to space or existing in space) data and ways of doing things. The four papers following this introduction (Nelson and Geoghegan, 2002; 
 Bell and Irwin, 2002; Little bull et al., 2002; Anselin, 
 2002) are based on the summary sessions. The remaining papers were selected from the submissions 
 in response to a call for papers to complement the 
 summaries. 
 
 * Tel.: +1-217-333-6465; fax: +1-217-333-5538. 
 E-mail address: g-nelson@staff.uiuc.edu (G.C. Nelson). 
 
 The rest of this article introduces the key 
 ideas in (related to space or existing in space) analysis-that location matters 
 and that near things matter more than far things. 
 For scientists (who study mountains, rivers, hills, etc., and their location), the importance of the related ideas of the (very important nature) of location and the influence 
 of neighbours similar things the (very important nature) of held back 
 (by useful thing/valuable supply or budget) utility (biggest increase/best possible extent) ideas 
 for money-flow experts. Interestingly, the scientists (who study mountains, rivers, hills, etc., and their location)' equal of Adam Smith, Johann Heinrich von Thtinen, 1 
 used farming-based markets to show the importance 
 of location and the resulting transport costs to a 
 central market in deciding/figuring out production (land use 
 choices) at different locations and the resulting land 
 1 Johann Heinrich von Thiinen was a "North German landowner 
 from the Mecklenberg area. Although educated at Gi:ittingen, he 
 spent most of his life managing his (away from cities) estate, Tellow. In the 
 first amount/quantity of his written work, The Separated State (1826), he laid 
 down the first serious treatment of (related to space or existing in space) money flow/money-based studies, connecting 
 with the explanation of rent. His second volume (1850) developed 
 the (basic, built-in, important qualities/scent) of the not important working well explanation of distribution in 
 a mathematically exact way .... Nearing his death, he asked 
 that his famous equation for the not important product of labour, or 
 natural wage (w = -J7iji), be carved into his gravestone." From 
 http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/profiles/thunen.htm, accessed on 14 
 August 2002. 
 
 0169-5150/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: SO 169-5150(02)00081-6 
 
 G. C. Nelson! Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 197-200 
 
 198 
 
 Farm price of vegetables 
 
 Farm price of wheat 
 / 
 
 ,/ 
 
 Jl.// 
 
 Land use: 
 vegetables 
 Land use: 
 wheat 
 
 Fig. 1. The von Thiinen model of farm price, land use and land 
 rent. 
 
 rent. 2 The von Thiinen ideas that underlie all 
 (related to space or existing in space) analysis are introduced next. 
 The basic von Thiinen model is (now under different control) in Fig. 1. In 
 a blank plain, surrounding a central market, two 
 crops can be grown-wheat and vegetables. All locations have identical production (features/ qualities/ traits), including profit-making the most of operators, but transport costs 
 to the central market, with (coming from the outside of something)ly serious and stubborn 
 prices, differ by crop. The price of vegetables in the 
 central market (a) is higher than the price of wheat 
 (b) but vegetables are more expensive to transport. 
 Hence, the farm vegetable price falls more quickly 
 than the farm wheat price as distance from the market 
 increases. 3 Beyond point 'c', the farm price of wheat 
 is higher than vegetables. The result is a series of ring-like rings of land use around the central market, pointed to/showed in the bottom part of the graph. In the shaded 
 2 As is so often the case, Paul Samuelson has penetrating ideas about the money-based explanation hidden (under) von Thiinen's work 
 (Samuelson, 1983). 
 3 Note that while output prices fall with distance from the central 
 market, input prices increase. In this simple version of the von 
 Thiinen model, no (bought) inputs are used. 
 
 area, vegetables are grown; in the next ring wheat. Beyond 'd', neither crop is money-making and land is left in 
 its natural state. Even though the productive (features/ qualities/ traits) of the farms are identical, the effect of transport cost is (lowering in number/getting worse) land rents with distance from the 
 central market. 
 Once differences in land working well, prices, transport costs and many markets are introduced, the 
 analysis becomes more complex but the basic ideas 
 of the importance of location and transport cost in deciding/figuring out land use remain. Identifying and explaining those land uses (numbers-based) provides idea-based, 
 data, and modelling challenges. 
 The four summary papers start from the basic ideas of von Thiinen. The first three papers provide 
 reviews of the ideas, book-related, data and examples 
 of analysis in three topic areas-land use in developing countries, the (away from cities)-city-based  (connecting point/way of interacting with something), and quality 
 farming. The final summary paper introduces the 
 econometric issues that come up when location information is available. The first summary paper (Nelson and 
 Geoghegan, 2002) reviews the explanation and practice of 
 modelling land use in developing countries where official data sources almost never include georeferenced values. 
 The use of remotely sensed data provides an especially 
 important other choice. The (giving a reason to do something) issue for the research in this area can be summarised in the phrase "do 
 roads cause (chopping down trees)?" More generally, how does 
 (set of machines) development and policy changes that change  transport costs or prices at the central market change 
 the relative a money-making state of different land use choices? 
 Does it become money-making to convert forested land to 
 some other land use? Papers in this issue by Mertens 
 et al. (2002), Muller and Zeller (2002), Munroe et al. 
 (2002), Swinton (2002), and Vance and Geoghegan 
 (2002) explore land use issues in a few developing 
 countries and with a variety of new and interesting ways of doing things. 
 The second summary paper, by Bell and Irwin 
 (2002), looks at the issues facing planners, real 
 estate developers and nature-lovers at the changing (away from cities)-city-based  (connecting point/way of interacting with something). As suburbs expand and 
 single family home lot sizes grow, pressure follows 
 to convert farming-based land to (where there are lots of homes) real estate 
 or open space such as parks and forest preserves. 
 These issues have received the most attention in developed countries where data sources are (compared to other things) 
 more plentiful and this paper focuses (related to careful studying or deep thinking) 
 ways of doing things in data-rich (surrounding conditions). It should be 
 
 G. C. Nelson/ Farming-based Money flow 27 (2002) 197-200 
 
 noted, however, that the most fast growth of city-based 
 areas is happening in poor countries and 
 the (related to careful studying or deep thinking) ways of doing things presented are related to 
 those (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) also. 
 In all (related to space or existing in space) analysis research, a key issue is the (connected/related) unit of analysis. Should it be US counties, I km 
 square grids from weather satellites, or 30m cells 
 from medium-level (ability to display or measure very small things) satellites or (from high in the air) photos? 
 In a perfect world the scale should be closely connected with the 
 area over which an individual decision-maker has control and information. Little bull et al. (2002) examine 
 quality farming technologies and their (compared to other things) 
 slow acceptance by farmers. This set of technologies 
 (including yield monitors and quality input (online or paper form that asks for a job, money, admission, etc.)) makes it possible to collect data on some 
 important production attributes within a field. They 
 demonstrate that (completing/matching) information can be 
 very important to securing/making sure of the money-making ability of a new technology. The paper by Florax et al. (2002) demonstrates 
 that these ideas are (connected/related) even for Sahelian 
 farmers. 
 The final paper in the summary section (Anselin, 
 2002) introduces the reader to the added/more difficulties in econometric analysis that come up when (related to space or existing in space) 
 relationships exist. In a 'traditional' analysis involving (related to space or existing in space) data (for example, guessing a production 
 function based on input and output data) the location 
 of the (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) is assumed to be not related. However, if there is some kind of (related to space or existing in space) relationship, either among the (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)) (a forest at one 
 location causes neighbouring locations to have forests 
 as well) or in the error structure (caused maybe by 
 almost the same  soil types in neighbouring locations), limit/guideline guesses can be inefficient and/or (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking). Anselin 
 reviews the idea-based issues that come up with (related to space or existing in space) 
 data and analysis, providing ideas from the usual (related to space or existing in space) econometrics books as well as from 
 geostatistics, biostatistics and medical image analysis. Of particular importance to land use analysis is 
 his discussion of hidden/covered up changeable guess with (related to space or existing in space) data. Since land use is the result of an unobservable decision process (choosing a land use that has the 
 highest expected (money made/good thing received)), (not numbers-based) choice guess 
 ways of doing things are used. Anselin reviews the added/more 
 difficulties this causes and suggests ways of doing things to 
 correct for it. 
 The papers in this issue (show or prove) the application 
 of many different kinds of (related to careful studying or deep thinking) ways of doing things (logit, 
 
 199 
 
 probit, danger-related analysis, Bayesian analysis, combining 
 remotely sensed and household survey data, (testing out)), to (related to space or existing in space) money-based problems in many areas of 
 the world (The Amazon, Australia, Bangladesh, Honduras, Kenya, Mexico, Peru, The Sahel, Vietnam). The 
 reader will find interesting new approaches to many 
 important issues talked about in farming-based and (related to a large area) 
 money flow/money-based studies. 
 
 Responses 
 
 I would like to admit/recognize/respond to a great (money owed)  to all 
 the reviewers for the papers thought about/believed for this special issue. I would also like to thank the organisers 
 of the Berlin 2000 Meetings of the IAAE and the 
 Chicago 2001 Meetings of the AAEA, and the editor 
 of Farming-based Money flow for making possible the 
 development of these papers and the opportunity to 
 make them available in a single (book, magazine, etc.). This material is based upon research supported in part by the 
 Cooperative State Research, Education and Extension Service, U.S. Department of Farming, under 
 Project No. ILLU 05-0361. Any opinions, findings, 
 ends/end results, or recommendations expressed in this (book, magazine, etc.) are those of the author, who is only responsible for the analysis and ends/end results presented 
 here. 
 
 References 
 Anselin, L., 2002. Under the hood: issues in the (detailed description of exactly what is required) and 
 (understanding/ explanation) of (related to space or existing in space) moving backward models. Agric. Econ. 27. 
 Bell, K., Irwin, E.G., 2002. (related to space or existing in space)ly clear micro-level modeling 
 of land-use change at the (away from cities)-city-based  (connecting point/way of interacting with something). Agric. Econ. 
 27. 
 Little bull, D.S., Lowenberg-DeBoer, J., Swinton, S., 2002. Adding 
 value to (related to space or existing in space)ly managed inputs by understanding site-specific 
 yield response. Agric. Econ. 27. 
 Florax, R., Voortman, R., Brouwer, J., 2002. (related to space or existing in space) dimensions of 
 quality farming: a (related to space or existing in space) econometric analysis of millet 
 yield on Sabelian coversands. Agric. Econ. 27. 
 Mertens, B., Poccard-Chapuis, R., Piketty, M.G., Lacques, A.E., 
 Venturieri, A., 2002. Crossing (related to space or existing in space) analyses and animals 
 money flow/money-based studies to understand (chopping down trees) processes in the Brazilian 
 Amazon: the case of Sao Felix do Xingu in South Pant Agric. 
 Econ. 27. 
 Miiller, D., Zeller, M., 2002. Land use patterns in the central 
 highlands of Vietnam: a (related to space or existing in space) model combining village survey 
 data with pictures from planes (understanding/ explanation). Agric. Econ. 27. 
 
 200 
 
 G.C. Nelson/Agricultural Money flow 27 (2002) 197-200 
 
 Munroe, D.K., Southworth, J., Tucker, C.M., 2002. The patterns 
 of land-cover change in western Honduras: exploring (related to space or existing in space) 
 and time-related complex difficulty. Agric. Econ. 27. 
 Nelson, G.C., Geoghegan, J., 2002. Modeling (chopping down trees) and 
 land use change: thinly distributed data (surrounding conditions). Agric. Econ. 27. 
 Samuelson, P.A., 1983. Thunen at two hundred. J. Econ. Lit. 21, 
 1468-1488. 
 
 Swinton, S., 2002. (Recording on a camera or computer) household-level (related to space or existing in space) influence 
 in farming-based management using random effects moving backward. 
 Agric. Econ. 27. 
 Vance, C., Geoghegan, J., 2002. Time-related and (related to space or existing in space) modeling of 
 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees): a survival analysis linking satellite and 
 household survey data. Agric. Econ. 27. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
