Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 P olicy R esearch W orking P aper 
 
 Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 4858 
 
 Poorness Decline, Farming-based Wages, 
 and Non-Farm Employment in (away from cities) India 
 1983-2004 
 
 Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 WPS4858 
 
 Peter Lanjouw 
 Rinku Murgai 
 
 The World Bank 
 Development Research Group 
 Poorness Team 
 March 2008 
 
 Policy Research Working Paper 4858 
 
 Abstract 
 The authors carefully study five rounds of National Sample 
 Survey data covering 1983, 1987/8, 1993/4, 1999/0, 
 and 2004/5 to explore the relationship between (away from cities) 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) and poorness. Poorness in (away from cities) India 
 declined at a modest rate during this period. The authors 
 provide area-level guesses that illustrate (large/relatively large) 
 (land-area-based/location) mixed-up nature in this progress. Poorness 
 guesses relate well with area-level data on changes 
 in farming-based wage rates. Farming-based labor remains 
 the preserve of the uneducated and also mostly 
 of the scheduled social classes and scheduled tribes. Although 
 farming-based labor grew as a share of total money-based 
 activity over the first four rounds, it had fallen back to 
 the levels watched/followed at the beginning of the survey period 
 by 2004. This all-India path masks widely changing/different 
 (popular things/general ways things are going) across states. During this period, the (away from cities) nonfarm part/area grew (slightly/not proudly), mainly between the last two 
 survey rounds. Regular non-farm employment remains 
 mostly connected with education levels and social status 
 
 that are rare among the poor. However, casual labor and 
 self-employment in the non-farm part/area show/tell about greater 
 involvement by (not having money or education) groups in 2004 than in 
 the previous/coming before rounds. The hint/result/effect for poorness is 
 not clear--the poor may be pushed into 
 low-return casual non-farm activities due to lack of 
 opportunities in the farming-based part/area rather than being 
 pulled by high returns offered by the non-farm part/area. 
 Econometric guesses show/tell about that (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the nonfarm part/area is related to falling poorness via two 
 routes: a direct hit/effect on poorness that is likely due to a 
 pro-poor not important (number of times something happens) of non-farm employment 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.); and an indirect impact (named after/discovered by/caused by) 
 the positive effect of non-farm employment growth 
 on farming-based wages. The analysis also confirms the 
 important (thing that's given/work that's done) to (away from cities) poorness reduction 
 from farming-based working well, availability of land, and 
 consumption levels in close/nearest city-based  areas. 
 
 This paper--a product of the Poorness Team, Development Research Group--is part of a larger effort in the department to 
 carefully study processes and causes of poorness reduction in poor countries. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted 
 on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at rmurgai@worldbank.org and planjouw@ 
 worldbank.org. 
 
 The Policy Research Working Paper Series spreads around the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
 issues. An goal of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
 names of the authors and should be referred to/be given a ticket in the same way/in that way. The findings, (understandings/ explanations), and ends/end results expressed in this paper are completely those 
 of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
 its connected organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. 
 
 Produced by the Research Support Team 
 
 Poverty Decline, Farming-based Wages, 
 and Non-Farm Employment in (away from cities) India: 
 1983-2004 
 Peter Lanjouw (World Bank) and Rinku Murgai (World Bank)
 
 * 
 
 We are thankful to people (who were part of a study, etc.) of the workshop "Household-Level Linkages Between Farm and Non-farm 
 (away from cities) Income Generation Activities" held at the Food and Farming-based Organization, October 11-12, 2007, 
 and to people (who were part of a study, etc.) at the Ninth Once-a-year Conference on Indian Money-based Policy Reform at Stanford 
 University in June, 2008. Added/more thanks are due to two unnamed referees and to Mukesh Eswaran, 
 Subashish Gangopadhyay, Himanshu, Hanan Jacoby, Anjini Kochar, Ashok Kotwal, Aprahajit Mahajan, 
 Martin Ravallion, Abhijit Sen, Forhad Shilpi, TN Srinivasan, Tara Vishwanath, Wilima Wadhwa and 
 Nobuo Yoshida. We thank Pinaki Joddar for research help. The views in this paper are those of the 
 authors and should not be taken to reflect those of the World Bank or connected institutions. All errors are 
 our own. 
 
 I. Introduction 
 Twenty years ago the common image of India was one of a huge, crowded 
 country blessed with a full of life (system or country where leaders are chosen by votes) but sickened by a highly stiff social structure, 
 low levels of human development, (existing all over a large area) and deep consumption poorness, and 
 doomed to never-ending money-based underperformance. 
 
 The last 20 years have seen some 
 
 big changes to that image. Following money-based changes first introduced during 
 the 1980s and continued in later years, India has raced towards the top of the world 
 league tables in terms of group money-based performance. There is little doubt that the 
 newly freed/released Indian (process of people making, selling, and buying things) has settled into a new, more fast, growth path. 
 While future problems may unfold and growth may fail, a return to the hardened/thickened old days 
 seems unlikely. In fact, on the money-based front the country now faces problems that are 
 linked to success: moving to the next generation of changes to sustain growth and 
 expanding the benefits of fast growth--across parts/areas, areas, and people. 
 Money-based growth is only a means, not an end. It is critical that rising incomes 
 and new opportunities brought in by a gave new life to (process of people making, selling, and buying things) translate into welfare 
 improvements. (in the past), India's performance in poorness reduction has been rather 
 disappointing. As a share of people/of the group, poorness during the pre-reform 20 years 
 declined at a pace that was steady, but slow. In the face of (happening now) overall population 
 growth it proved very hard to reduce (a lot) the total number of people 
 suffering from walking very unsteadily (or huge) levels of material (not having something wanted or needed). 
 
 A question of central 
 
 importance has this way been whether the newly stimulated/protected Indian (process of people making, selling, and buying things) announces/predicts also a 
 clear break with the past in the domain of poorness reduction. This question has 
 engaged a large community of (people who work to find information) and analysts during the last 20 years. 
 This paper focuses on areas away from cities and presents (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from household surveys 
 to ask whether, and how, (away from cities) living standards have improved very much over time. 
 Guesses of (away from cities) poorness from four large-scale surveys carried out in 1983, 1987/8, 
 1993/4 and 2004/5 point to/show that there has been modest progress but with no suggestion of 
 an increasing speed in the pace of poorness reduction in (away from cities) India next to the increasing speed 
 of money-based growth during this period. There is large amounts of difference/different version both across and 
 within states which we fully use to explore (machines/methods/ways) hidden (under) the watched/followed patterns 
 of poorness reduction. 
 2 
 
 The paper confirms the (in the past) close association between poorness and 
 farming-based wage employment, and finds that there has been no decline - until the most 
 recent period of 1999/00 to 2004/05 - in the share of the adult population with first (or most important) 
 occupation in farming-based wage labor. As a result, changes in poorness are found to 
 relate well with changes in farming-based wages at the area (within state) level. There 
 is little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of broad, (including everything and everyone), increasing speed in farming-based wage growth 
 during the 1990s. In a majority of areas, real farming-based wage growth between 1993/4 
 and 2004/5 is lower than what was watched/followed during the 1980s. The period after- 1999 
 saw a sharp slowing down in the growth rate of farming-based wages, and in some 
 areas real wages actually (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse). 
 A part/area that is often looked to for driving force in (away from cities) poorness reduction is the (away from cities) 
 non-farm part/area. This part/area accounts for nearly half of (away from cities) household income in a 
 significant number of states in India. The part/area is highly blended and can be 
 in a rude way/in a very simple way divided into three sub-parts/areas making up: regular salaried non-farm 
 employment; casual wage labor in the non-farm part/area; and non-farming-based selfemployment activities. The former sub-part/area is most clearly connected with (compared to other things) 
 high and stable incomes, while the last thing just mentioned two are more blended and can contain 
 both productive as well as leftover/extra activities. NSS data point to/show that during the reference 
 period there are signs of modest growth, on group, in the size of the non-farm part/area. 
 While overall employment levels in the non-farm part/area remained very steady and solid 
 between 1983 and 1999/0, there is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that this has picked up between 1999/0 and 
 2004/5. 
 However, throughout this period the poor are hardly represented at all in the 
 regular non-farm part/area and are only (a) little more involved in non-farm selfemployment. Only in the case of casual wage-labor in the non-farm part/area do the poor 
 appear to have a somewhat greater involvement in the non-farm part/area than do the nonpoor. 
 (even though there is the existence of) (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of only modest poorness reduction or (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) out of 
 farming at the national level, National Sample Survey (NSS) data show/tell about a great deal 
 of mixed-up nature in these results at the sub-state area-level. This (related to a large area) difference/different version 
 can be mistreated to study econometrically the relationship between poorness, farming-based 
 
 3 
 
 wage labor employment and non-farm employment in (away from cities) India. The analysis shows/tells about 
 that poorness is connected in a complex way with the non-farm part/area. First the data 
 point to/show that, controlling for farming-based wages, farming-based working well, land 
 availability and consumption levels in nearby city-based  centers, (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of non-farm 
 employment is directly connected with poorness decline. 
 
 We suggest that this is 
 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the idea that while at early levels the non-poor may have been more 
 successful at "capturing" non-farm income earning opportunities, there is some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 that "not important (number of times something happens)" of further (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the sub-part/area is pro-poor. We show 
 that the pro-poor hit/effect of the non-farm part/area is lessened in settings where education 
 levels are especially low. Second, the analysis further shows that (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the nonfarm part/area appears to put pressure on wage rates in farming (again, less strongly so in 
 settings where education levels are especially low). Rising farming-based wage rates are, 
 in turn, strongly related to (away from cities) poorness reduction. So, there is some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with an important indirect hit/effect of the non-farm part/area on (away from cities) poorness. 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) got together in this study from the NSS surveys this way offers some 
 scientific support to the view that the period between 1983 and 2004/5 was one of 
 gradual money-based (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) out of farming and limited poorness reduction in (away from cities) 
 areas. But it is important, also, to admit/recognize/respond to the limits to the analysis here. 
 The analysis stops in 2004/5 and we are unable to say what has happened since that 
 survey year. The analysis is also somewhat partial in its examination of sources of (away from cities) 
 jobs. 
 
 Famously, we are not able to carry out a very described/explained analysis of the 
 
 relationship between poorness and farming-based production, or on the (change over time) of 
 farming-based output over time. This (something left out) is due to lack of described/explained data in the NSS 
 surveys on farm production and household incomes. 
 In the remaining sections of this paper we turn in greater detail to the scientific 
 supports/supporting details of the basic story organized and listed above. In Section II we think about/believe the (change over time) 
 of poorness in India. 
 
 Section III looks at farming-based labor and farming-based wages. 
 
 Section IV documents the size and (change over time) of the non-farm part/area between 1983 and 
 2004/5, and Section V bold acts a area-level panel dataset across three of our four 
 surveys to bring together the arguments of the previous/coming before sections and Section VI offers 
 some ending/deciding comments. 
 
 4 
 
 II. Poorness 1983 - 2004/5 
 Similar guesses of poorness for the 38th, 43rd, 50th and 61st NSS rounds 
 suggest that at the all-India level, (away from cities) poorness (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) (slightly/not proudly) from 37.2 percent to 
 28.4 percent between 1993/4 and 2004/5, a rate of less than 1 percentage point per year 
 (Table 1). This is nearly the same as the decline from 46.9 to 37.2 percent that happened 
 during the previous/coming before 10 years (between 1983 and 1993/4). There is little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of a 
 striking increasing speed of poorness reduction in (away from cities) India next to the well-recorded/supported 
 increasing speed of money-based growth in India during this period. 1 
 Table 1 also shows/tells about that changes in poorness at the national, and even state, level 
 mask (large/relatively large) mixed-up nature in the (change over time) of poorness across areas. In fact, 
 while poorness (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) in most areas, it is guessed to have risen between 1993 and 
 2004/5 in roughly one in six of the areas thought about/believed in our analysis. 
 There has been a great deal of arguments surrounding the pace, and even 
 direction, of poorness reduction during the 1990s due to problems of comparability of the 
 1999/00 NSS 55th round with earlier surveys. 2 In a predictor to this paper, Kijima and 
 Lanjouw (2003 and 2005) proposed some changes/recalculations at restoring comparability 
 across the 50th and 55th rounds, and suggested that poorness reduction in areas away from cities was 
 very modest between 1993/94 and 1999/00, a finding that was also suggested by Sen and 
 Himanshu (2004a and 2004b). Results in these papers suggest that most of poorness 
 reduction between 1993/4 and 2004/5 is likely to have happened in the last thing just mentioned half of the 
 ten years, between 1999/00 and 2004/5. This presents a puzzle, because as shown in 
 the next section, poorness reduction in (away from cities) India has (in the past) been closely connected 
 with farming-based wages and the last thing just mentioned half of the ten years was witness to a sharp 
 slowing down in farming-based wage growth. It has led some (people who work to find information) (Himanshu 2007; 
 Dev and Ravi, 2007) to suggest that the non-farm part/area may have be a key factor behind 
 the poorness decline during the 1990s. 
 1 
 
 In a recent (thing that's given/work that's done), Deaton (2007) hints that official statistics may be understating the rate of 
 (away from cities) inflation during this time period with the hint/result/effect that the 2004/5 poorness guesses might be 
 understating the true (number of times something happens) of poorness in that years. His analysis hints that the rate of poorness 
 decline between 1993/4 and 2004/5 discussed above may this way be overstated by 3 percentage points. 
 2 
 See the collection of papers (Deaton, 2003a, Datt, Kozel and Ravallion, 2003, Sundaram and Tendulkar, 
 2003) in the Money-based and Political Weekly (January 25, 2003), and the update in Deaton and Kozel 
 (2006). 
 
 5 
 
 We think about/believe in the next section (popular things/general ways things are going) in employment in farming-based labor, and in 
 farming-based wages, to see to what extent these provide (information or physical objects that prove a story is true) to the 
 poorness guesses above. 
 
 III. Farming-based Employment and Farming-based Wages 
 (in the past), employment in casual farming-based wage labor has been shown to be 
 strongly related to poorness in (away from cities) India (Lal, 1976, Singh, 1990, Lanjouw and 
 Stern, 1998, Sharma 2001, Sundaram, 2001, Himanshu, 2004). More recent data suggest 
 that this is still the case. The "odds" of being employed in farming-based wage labor fall 
 monotonically as one rises in the consumption distribution. And there is only small/short 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of this association weakening over time (Table 2). Other dimensions of wellbeing such as education levels and social class  status have also been shown to be strongly and 
 inversely related to farming-based wage employment (Kijima and Lanjouw, 2005). 
 Farming-based wage employment continues to employ over 20% of adult males, and 
 has expanded steadily since 1983, until a recent decline between 1999/00 and 2004/05 
 (Table 3). For women, although far fewer are judged to be (money-based)/cheaply active, the 
 importance of farming-based labor employment is even more obvious. 
 
 There is 
 
 (large/relatively large) mixed-up nature among states, with a few states with higher farming-based 
 employment shares in 2004/5 than, say, in 1987/8 (Add on Table 1). 
 This (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) hints that farming-based wage employment and farming-based wages 
 especially, can serve as a valuable window on living standards in areas away from cities. As 
 suggested by Deaton and Dreze (2002), farming-based wages can be viewed not only as 
 useful proxies of poorness but can also be seen as indicators of poorness in their own right 
 insofar that they (record by a camera or computer) the reservation wages of the (away from cities) labor force. 
 Trends in state-level daily farming-based wages guessed from NSS data suggest 
 much mixed-up nature in levels and (moves in a particular way/becomes popular) across states. During the 1980s, in 8 states, real 
 wages (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) (Table 4). 3 This pattern gives/agrees with the widely-held idea that 1987/8 
 3 
 
 Farming-based wage data are available in India from a variety of sources. Himanshu (2004) provides a 
 described/explained test of the different sources available, and argues that calculation of farming-based wages 
 directly from the NSS surveys is not only (able to be done), but quite possibly yields more reliable figures than are 
 available from other choice sources. He cautions against the calculation of farming-based wage rates from the 
 1987/8 NSS round, arguing that the unit record data do not produce wage rates that are easily similar 
 to wage guesses for that year published by the NSS itself. We have chosen to calculate and report the 
 
 6 
 
 was a poor farming-based year. Beyond 1987/8 and until 1990/0, real wages rose in all 
 states. However, between 1999/0 and 2004, there was a significant slowing down in real 
 wage growth, from 2.6 percent per year between 1993/4 and 1999/0 to 1.6 percent per 
 year in the period that followed. In some states real wages actually (lower in number/get worse). Only in 
 Assam, Orissa and UP is there (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of real wages rising more quickly between 
 1999/0 and 2004/5 than during the previous/coming before two survey rounds. 
 This slowing down in wage growth, put next to possibly more fast 
 decline in poorness during the 1999/0 to 2004/5 has led to renewed attention to the nonfarm part/area as a source of poorness reduction. We turn to (popular things/general ways things are going) in non-farm employment 
 in the next section. 
 
 IV. Non-Farm Employment 
 As described in Section I, the (away from cities) non-farm part/area is widely looked to as a 
 source of speed and power for (away from cities) growth and poorness reduction. 
 
 Employment patterns in 
 
 the non-farm part/area have been widely examined for (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of money-based energy in 
 areas away from cities. Visaria and Basant (1993) carefully examine National Sample Survey and 
 (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  data and document a clear increase in the share of non-farming-based employment 
 in the (away from cities) group of workers during the 1980s, with the (popular thing/general way things are going) more clearly obvious among males 
 than among female workers. Also, the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) appears to point to a more fast 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of third/(related to three) part/area employment rather than of secondary part/area employment,4 
 and that most of employment growth is of a casual nature, rather than permanent. 
 Surprisingly, this (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) appears to have slowed during the last few years. Unni and 
 Raveendran (2007) suggest that long-term employment growth in areas away from cities slowed 
 down (in a big way) between 1993/4-2004/5 relative to 1983-1993. 
 Fisher, Mahajan and Singha (1997) decide that 18-25% of (away from cities) employment 
 happened in the non-farm part/area at the beginning of the 1990s. An important (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) 
 made in this study was that about one-fifth of total (away from cities) non-farm employment 
 1987/8 guesses but admit that they may be less reliable than guesses for other survey years. In 
 the econometric analysis in Section V, we do not include the 1987/8 data due to these comparability 
 problems. 
 4 
 Secondary part/area refers to manufacturing, utilities, construction and mining. The third/(related to three) part/area includes 
 activities such as retail trade, hotels and restaurants, (money-related) services, transport and communication, public 
 management, education, health, and community services. 
 
 7 
 
 was guessed to be created by (government) services, mostly public management 
 and education (see also Sen, 1996). Other important parts/areas in terms of employment 
 shares were found to include retail trade, personal services, construction, wood products 
 and furniture, over-land transport, and fabrics. While manufacturing activities are often 
 the first that come to mind when discussing the non-farm part/area, the study showed that 
 services are easily as important. 
 A study by Acharya and Mitra (2000) draws on many rounds of National 
 Sample Survey data (spanning the period 1984-1997), and also two rounds of the 
 Money-based (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.) (corresponding to 1990 and 1998) to ask whether the positive non-farm 
 employment (popular things/general ways things are going) of the 1980s have continued through the 1990s. They find little 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of further (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.). At the all-(away from cities) India level they find that employment in 
 the secondary and third/(related to three) parts/areas grew from about 22% of the group of workers in 1983 to 
 about 25% by 1987-8. They found no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of further growth during the 1990s; the 
 last NSS survey they examined ("thin" round for 1997) pointed to/showed an employment rate of 
 about 24%. 
 
 The authors note large amounts of difference/different version across states in the degree of 
 
 (related to working on the job) (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) (with states such as Kerala, Punjab, Haryana, Gujarat and 
 Tamil Nadu clearly more (branched out/done different things) than others), but watch/notice no clear (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of 
 growth in non-farm employment rates during the 1990s happening in any state other than 
 Kerala (Acharya and Mitra, 2000). 5 Unni and Raveendran (2007) suggest that non-farm 
 self-employment and non-farm casual wage employment part/area grew (a) little more 
 quickly between 1993/4-2004/5 than during the previous/coming before ten years. However, they point 
 to (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of a less fast growth rate in regular non-farm employment during this 
 period. 
 An important recent paper by Foster and Rosenzweig (2003) provides a possible 
 explaining/big show of how the non-farm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) interacts with the farm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) - building on 
 the great mixed-up nature of non-farm activities in areas away from cities, and highlighting the 
 importance of general-balance relationships. The authors argue that a key honor/difference 
 has to be made between traded and non-traded products (that are bought and sold)  and services, and they focus on 
 the importance of wage and (money paid for working) employment in non-farm activities instead of the 
 
 5 
 
 In his thorough examination of NSS data between 1977/8 to 1999/0 Vaidyanathan (2001) watches/states 
 many of the same (popular things/general ways things are going) reported here. 
 
 8 
 
 self-employment activities that have usually/(in the past) been the focus of attention. Foster and 
 Rosenzweig (2003 and 2004) carefully study NCAER data from roughly 250 villages covering 
 the period 1971, 1982 and 1999 to study the (change over time) of the non-farm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in (away from cities) 
 India. These data permit the authors to calculate non-farm incomes, and they show that 
 non-farm income shares have increased significantly during this time period. 6 Foster and 
 Rosenzweig suggest that a growing (away from cities) based export-oriented manufacturing part/area can 
 be expected to have an important pro-poor hit/effect in (away from cities) India, possibly more 
 significant than that which can be expected from agriculture-led growth. This follows 
 from their (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) that (away from cities) (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) tends to be more fast and long/big in 
 places where farming-based wages are lower and where farming-based working well growth has 
 been less marked. Although the Foster and Rosenzweig study employs different data 
 definitions and conventions than NSS-based studies (including the present study) their 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is similar to a very significant rise in non-farm employment shares during 
 their study period. They suggest that by 1999 about 44% of males (old/allowed to get old/got older) 25-44 had 
 first (or most important) employment in the non-farming-based part/area by 1999. These figures appear higher 
 than what NSS data suggest (although the figures cannot be directly compared as they 
 refer to different age groups and different employment definitions). 
 
 An important 
 
 question is whether (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the non-farm part/area watched/followed by Foster and Rosenzweig 
 happened steadily during their reference period, or whether it happened in (periods of time when something works, then stops, then works again, etc.). 
 As others have already suggested, and we will  see further below, NSS data point to/show that 
 between 1987/8 and 1999/0 there was little (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of non-farm employment in (away from cities) 
 areas. 
 A recent study by Eswaran, Kotwal, Ramaswami and Wadhwa (2007) chases after the 
 question of whether (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the non-farm part/area is likely to influence farming-based 
 wage rates. This could be an important route through which (away from cities) non-farm employment 
 influences (away from cities) poorness, especially if, as suggested by Foster and Rosenzweig (2003 
 and 2004) non-farm businesses/projects have been beginning and building on themselves in areas where 
 farming-based wages are low (and therefore (away from cities) poorness is high). The analysis by Eswaran 
 6 
 
 Foster and Rosenzweigh (2003b) suggest that non-farm income shares grew from just under a third in 
 1982 to nearly 50% in 1999. A study by Lanjouw and Shariff (2002) based on a different NCAER dataset 
 for 1993 calculated a (away from cities) non-farm income share of 37%. This is similar to steady growth of the nonfarm part/area throughout the 1980s and 1990s - a (popular thing/general way things are going) which NSS employment data do not appear to 
 back up (with proof) (see below). 
 
 9 
 
 et al (2007) draws on NSS data in combination with total factor working well data from 
 other sources. They find that farming-based wage growth during the period 1983-1999 has 
 been driven for the greatest part by changes in farming-based working well and that the 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) of the non-farm part/area to real wage increase is likely to have been no greater 
 than a quarter. 
 In Section V below we will  revisit the arguments offered by Foster and 
 Rosenzweig (2003 and 2004) and those by Eswaran et al (2007), (related to/looking at/thinking about) the role of 
 farming-based wage labor markets, and the farm against/compared to/or the non-farm part/area, in 
 understanding (away from cities) poorness reduction. We turn first to descriptive analysis of NSS data 
 in order to gain a sense of overall dimensions of the non-farm part/area. 
 
 Non-Farm Employment Shares 
 Non-farm employment is divided into three categories: regular employment 
 (generally salaried), casual employment (daily wage) and self-employment/own 
 business/project activities. This honor/difference is meant to reflect a little bit the very 
 different (features/ qualities/ traits) of non-farm activities in areas away from cities - (features/ qualities/ traits) that are 
 important in terms of defining the (quality of something that makes people like it or want it) of such jobs. A general typology that 
 appears to stir up interest in findings from many village studies is that regular non-farm 
 employment is usually highly searched-for in areas away from cities as it is connected not only with 
 high incomes, but importantly also with a degree of (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength). Non-farm self-employment 
 activities can be both leftover/extra, last resort options as well as high return, productive, 
 activities, but whether they are of the former or latter version generally depends on the 
 amount of capital useful things/valuable supplies that can be brought to the activity. Casual non-farm wage 
 employment is generally thought to be less insulting to a worker than farming-based wage 
 labor, but returns may be only (only a little bit) higher and the nature of the work may be both 
 physically demanding as well as dangerous (construction, rickshaw pulling, industrial 
 workshops, etc.). 7 
 
 7 
 
 Note, there is possible overlap in our categories of casual, self-employment and regular non-farm 
 employment - a person may be doing more than one type of activity in the course of the year. In our 
 econometric analyses below we classify people on the basis of Principal Usual Status, the activity they 
 are involved in for the major part of the year coming before the survey, including both their principal and main 
 less important thing/small company activity. 
 
 10 
 
 Employment shares in non-farm activities have grown since 1983, reaching their 
 peak in 2004/5 (Table 3), with state level employment shares ranging 22-32% (Add on 
 Table 1). In each (pertaining to each person or thing) survey year, wage and (money paid for working) employment has tended to 
 make up about 11-16% of overall employment, with the balance made up by selfemployment/own-business/project activities. There are large differences across states in terms 
 of the importance of the non-farm part/area. In Kerala, non-farm employment shares were 
 as high as 77% in 2004/5, and the importance of regular employment in this state grew 
 significantly over time (from under 25% to nearly 40%). In states such as Madhya 
 Pradesh, Bihar, Chattisgarh and Maharashtra, the part/area has still to make its presence felt. 
 At the all-India level, there has been a modest (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of this part/area over time. 
 However, importantly, it has become the main source of employment growth in (away from cities) 
 areas. In the 1980s, of the nearly 40 million added/more jobs created, the majority (6 out 
 of every 10) were in the farm part/area. Between 1993/4 and 2004/5, non-farm employment 
 growth had outstripped farming, as 6 of every 10 new jobs in (away from cities) India were 
 created in the non-farm part/area. 
 
 The largest increase in (in small steps up) employment 
 
 attributed to the non-farm part/area happened between 1999/0 and 2004/5. 
 
 Non-Farm Employment and Consumption Quintiles 
 The difference between regular, casual and self-employment in the non-farm 
 part/area is well reflected in Tables 5a-5c, recording/writing down the relationship between non-farm 
 employment and consumption quintiles in each of the (pertaining to each person or thing) survey years. 8 In all 
 five survey years, regular non-farm employment happened surprisingly more in the top 
 quintile of the per-person use distribution (Table 5a). While overall employment 
 shares in regular non-farm employment stayed around 6% throughout this period, the 
 relative frequency of such employment in the top quintile was two or more times higher, 
 while in the bottom quintile it was below 3%. 
 Overall employment shares in casual non-farm activities are only (a) little higher 
 than for regular non-farm employment shares (Table 5b). But the distribution across 
 consumption quintiles is quite different. Casual wage employment in the non-farm part/area 
 
 8 
 
 Lanjouw and Shariff (2003) watch/notice very almost the same  patterns across income quintiles in NCAER data for 
 1993/4. 
 
 11 
 
 generally happens most often in the lowest quintiles of the consumption distribution. 
 The odds of employment in casual non-farm wage labor are less than one in the top 
 quintiles and greater than one in the bottom three quintiles. There is little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of 
 planned change in these patterns over time. 
 Non-farm self-employment activities tend to be more evenly distributed over the 
 consumption distribution, pointing to/showing that both poor families as well as rich families 
 are involved in such activities (Table 5c). On balance, however, the odds of selfemployment in the non-farm part/area are (a) little higher in the top three quintiles of the 
 consumption distribution suggesting that such activities are more frequent among the 
 (compared to other things) better off. There is some suggestion that in the 2004/5 survey year the (incline/smooth change of something between two points) 
 between self-employment in the non-farm part/area and consumption quintiles has 
 weakened somewhat. While in this year the percentage of self-employed in the non-farm 
 part/area is still lowest in the bottom quintile, the odds of participation are higher than in the 
 other survey years and (in the same way), the odds are somewhat lower in the top quintile. 
 The patterns of employment watched/followed across the consumption distribution also 
 tend to be repeated in terms of other dimensions of well-being such as education and 
 social class  status (Kijima and Lanjouw, 2005). Education levels and social status are usually 
 highest among those with regular non-farm employment while casual non-farm 
 employment is more common among the (can't read or write) and scheduled social class  and scheduled 
 tribe families. Over time there is some suggestion that casual non-farm employment 
 has become (a) little more strongly related to college levels. This is 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with slowly rising education levels in (away from cities) India over time, and a habit/desire 
 for those with some education to crowd out the uneducated in casual non-farm 
 employment (see further below). 
 
 Non-Farm Employment Chances 
 Of course, education and social status are not just of interest as built-in indicators 
 of welfare, but are also likely to play an instrumental role in deciding/figuring out income or 
 consumption levels - influencing for example, people' access to non-farm 
 opportunities. 
 
 The relationship between (related to working on the job) choice and household 
 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) is explored more in a planned way in Add on Tables 3-7 on the basis of 
 
 12 
 
 multinomial logit models of (related to working on the job) choice for each survey year (Add on Table 2 
 provides descriptive statistics of the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) employed in these models). 
 We employ the multinomial logit model to explore the individual and household 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) that are related to the chance of non-farm employment in (away from cities) 
 India (see Greene, 1993 for a useful explaining/big show of this model). We think about/believe seven broad 
 occupations in areas away from cities: farming-based casual wage employment; regular farm 
 employment; (producing crops/helping something grow); non-farm regular employment; non-farm casual wage (daily 
 wage) employment; non-farm own-business/project activities; and other (plus non-working). 9 
 Our "explanatory" (numbers that change/things that change) contain a selection of individual and household 
 (features/ qualities/ traits). At the individual level we think about/believe the age, educational status, and 
 caste/religious status of each person. 
 At the household level, we have information on the size of the household to which 
 each person belongs and the household's per person landholding. The last thing just mentioned might proxy 
 wealth and contacts, and in that way provide some indication of the extent to which 
 people are better placed to take advantage of opportunities in the non-farm part/area. 10 
 The multinomial model needs/demands that a particular (related to working on the job) category be 
 selected/named as the numeraire against which all results should be compared. We have 
 chosen farming-based wage labour as the comparison group. This hints that limit/guideline 
 guesses for the categories which are included should be understood/explained not as related things of 
 employment in a given (related to working on the job) category, but as indicators of the strength of 
 association of a particular explanatory (number or thing that changes) with the (pertaining to each person or thing) (related to working on the job) category 
 relative to the same explanatory (number or thing that changes) with farming-based labour. To ease (understanding/ explanation) 
 we think about/believe direct limit/guideline guesses and then produce some received/made from tables that 
 summarize the hit/effect of specific explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). 
 The multinomial logit models confirm that relative to farming-based wage labor, the 
 chance of employment in any of the three non-farm sub-parts/areas is regularly lower 
 for those who belong to the scheduled social classes and for those with no education. This 
 9 
 
 We (increase in number and strength) in this analysis on reported principal occupation of males, and are unable to think about, as a 
 result, the set of issues connected with combining farm with nonfarm activities during the course of, say, an 
 farming-based year (with its connected peak and slack seasons). 
 10 
 It is often noted that the market for the (instance of buying something for money) and sale of land is rather thin in (away from cities) India, as argued/against 
 to the market for landuse - (living somewhere) (see Jayaraman and Lanjouw, 1999). (areas of owned land) may therefore be 
 (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) (coming from the outside of something) in the kind of models guessed here. 
 
 13 
 
 pattern remains quite stable the five survey years. These findings are summarized in 
 Tables 6 and 7 presenting the (described the future) chances of employment in the different 
 occupations at mean values of the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). For example, the first cell in 
 Table 6 points to/shows that in 1983 the (described the future) chance of employment in farming-based 
 labor would be about 34.6% if all people were scheduled social classes or scheduled tribes 
 (with education levels and other (features/ qualities/ traits) going along with/matching up to the overall average in 
 the population). This chance would fall to 23.4% if their social class  status were switched 
 to non-SC/ST. It is important to recognize that these are pretty/interesting chances - in reality 
 SC/ST's would have education levels and (areas of owned land) well below the national average 
 also. Table 6 points to/shows that the effect of social class  status on regular non-farm employment 
 chances appears to operate indirectly through the differential education and 
 (areas of owned land) of SC/ST's instead of directly. Holding these other (features/ qualities/ traits) constant 
 (at their national average), (described the future) employment in regular non-farm employment is not 
 very (much) lower for SC/STs. With casual and self-employment in the non-farm part/area, 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of social class  differences are more easily discernable. In general, there is little 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of big changes in the role of social status in deciding/figuring out (related to working on the job) status 
 over time. 
 Table 7 confirms the clear association of education with employment in non-farm 
 activities. (described the future) chances of regular non-farm employment in all five survey 
 years increase very (much) with education levels (at mean values of other (features/ qualities/ traits)), 
 while they fall sharply in the case of farming-based labor, and more moderately in the case 
 of casual non-farm employment. There is little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of a strong role for education in 
 self-employment activities. 
 
 Once again, this is possibly the result of the 
 
 mixed-up nature in the kind of self-employment activities that happen. 
 Finally, the multinomial models in Add on Tables 3-7 also suggest that the 
 chance of employment in regular non-farm activities and non-farm self-employment 
 is much higher (relative to farming-based labor) for those with higher per person 
 (areas of owned land). Lanjouw and Stern (1998) argue, on the basis of a described/explained village study in 
 Uttar Pradesh, that information networks and ability to pay (payments of money to get favors) are important 
 (things that decide other things) of access to the better-paying and more attractive non-farm jobs. It is 
 possible that per person (areas of owned land) are proxying such valuable things here. 
 
 14 
 
 V. Non-Farm Employment, Poorness, and Farming-based Wages: A (related to a large area) Analysis 
 We end/decide the analysis in this paper by drawing on the large amounts of difference/different version 
 across NSS areas and over time to bring together the three thin pieces/strings of the analysis: 
 poorness, farming-based labor and non-farm employment. We construct an NSS area-level 
 panel dataset based the 1983, 1993/4, and 2004/5 rounds of the NSS surveys. These three 
 rounds have generally been met with broad support as to hidden (under) data quality, 
 reliability and comparability. They span a period of broadly 20 years and, given that there 
 are on average some 60 areas that make up the major states in India, also reflect 
 (large/relatively large) (related to space or existing in space) mixed-up nature. Our panel data set is based mostly on data received/made from 
 from the NSS survey and grouped to the NSS area level, but we have also extra 
 information on area-level farming-based working well to the dataset, built up from districtlevel indicators of once-a-year production, land, and prices of over 40 major crops 
 available from official (books, magazines, etc.). 
 
 11 
 
 The information file brings together non-farm 
 
 employment, poorness and farming-based wage results at the area-level with data on 
 non-farm wages, city-based  consumption levels, per person (areas of owned land) and average 
 education results. 
 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 Our approach in this section is mostly descriptive. We start with a (related to a large area) 
 analysis of the related things of non-farm employment, asking to what extent the farm and 
 non-farm parts/areas are to be seen as (completes/goes along with) or as substitutes. 
 
 We distinguish 
 
 between types of non-farm employment (regular, casual and self-employment) as well as 
 broad part/areaal categories. 
 
 We are interested in particular to see whether there are 
 
 complementarities between non-farm employment growth and education results. 
 We then turn to an analysis of the related things of (away from cities) poorness and of (away from cities) 
 farming-based wage rates. Our approach here builds on a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) developed in Datt and 
 Ravallion (1998) in which a reduced-form (detailed description of exactly what is required) for poorness is expressed as a 
 11 
 
 We are thankful to Himanshu for sharing his guesses of NSS area-level yields with us. These 
 guesses are based on once-a-year district-level data on crop production and land reported by the Ministry of 
 Farming. Produces /gives up are measured as the value of total production per hectare of land gave/reserved to over 40 
 main crops in the districts making up an NSS area. Triennium averages of production and land 
 around the survey year are used to smooth out once-a-year ups and downs. 
 
 15 
 
 function of farming-based working well and other (numbers that change/things that change) such as stocks of skilled labor or 
 inflationary shocks. Because of short-run stickiness or other mistakes in labor 
 markets, a reduced form for poorness includes farming-based wages and prices as an 
 added/more move backwardor. By controlling for wages and prices, Datt and Ravallion separate a 
 "direct" effect of farming-based working well on poorness reduction from general balance 
 indirect effects that are felt through changes in wages and prices. Datt and Ravallion 
 (1998) apply this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) using 24 rounds of NSS data covering a 35-year period 
 between 1958 and 1994. In the present study our data span only three time periods, but 
 we bring added/more (related to space or existing in space) difference/different version to the analysis. 
 We build on the Datt and Ravallion (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) by looking also at the role of the nonfarm part/area in reducing (away from cities) poorness in India. A natural starting point would be to 
 include a measure of non-farm working well in the reduced form (detailed description of exactly what is required) for poorness. 
 Data limits, however, mean that such a relation cannot be guessed. 
 
 Some 
 
 guesses of non-farm working well are available, but these are only at the state-level and 
 restricted to the organized manufacturing part/area which leaves out almost all 
 (away from cities) non-farm jobs. Given the (not being there; not being present) of non-farm working well data, we proxy nonfarm growth by employment in the non-farm part/area. Given the suggestion that access to 
 non-farm part/area may be restricted on the basis of (features/ qualities/ traits) that do not favor the poor 
 - noted in the previous section where we examined individual-level chances of nonfarm employment - we think about/believe including in something of non-farm employment as a separate 
 (thing that decides something) of poorness reduction. Since overall non-farm employment may well contain 
 important endogenous elements, we also think about/believe separately the hits/effects of regular, 
 salaried employment which is probably less likely to suffer from endogeneity since a 
 large share of regular jobs are in the (government) which is less affected by the local 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Also, we can enquire whether (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of the part/area is pro-poor on the 
 margin. 
 
 To that end, we present (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the not important (number of times something happens) of non-farm 
 
 employment (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) based on an approach described in Lanjouw and Ravallion 
 (1998). 
 Because our poorness (moving backwards) show/tell about a strong association between poorness 
 reduction and farming-based wage rates we turn next to a question asked by Eswaran et al 
 (2008), namely whether there is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of non-farm employment growth on 
 
 16 
 
 agricultural wages. To the extent that growth in non-farm employment leads to a general 
 tightening of farming-based wage markets, one might expect to see a rise in farming-based 
 wages in locations where the non-farm part/area is expanding. This would then point to an 
 indirect effect of non-farm employment on poorness reduction via its hit/effect on wages. 
 
 Results: Related things of Non-Farm Employment Growth 
 In Tables 8a and 8b we guess the relationship between non-farm employment 
 growth and changes in farming-based working well. The first panel in each table reports the 
 absolute/without any limits relationship, net of period effects (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by time dummies for 1993/4 
 and 2004/5. Non-farm employment growth is measured as the log of average number of 
 non-farm workers per working age adult in each NSS area, and farming-based 
 working well growth is the log of produce as measured by the value of production of 43 main 
 crops per hectare. The second panel of each table adds four added/more explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change): the log of area-level average casual non-farm wages; the log of average per 
 capita city-based  consumption per area; area-level log per person (areas of owned land); and the 
 log of the area-level working population that has not completed first (or most important) school 
 education. Reason for including these (numbers that change/things that change) is as follows: Foster and 
 Rosenzweig (2003 and 2004) repeat that non-farm businesses/projects may be attracted to 
 locations where reservation wages are low; we introduce casual non-farm wages as a 
 substitute for such reservation wages. Average per person city-based  consumption per area is 
 included as a possible substitute for market size for (away from cities) non-farm products and services. 
 Per person (areas of owned land) are meant to (take control of) land (oversupply/large quantity) in the area - by that/in that way 
 proxying scope for collection externalities. 
 
 Finally our education (number or thing that changes) is 
 
 meant to (take control of) the extent to which low education levels in (away from cities) area may act as a 
 reducer of (away from cities) non-farm employment growth. 
 Tables 8a and 8b are (told apart from/separate than) each other only with respect to the way 
 in which they control for unseen location (features/ qualities/ traits). In Table 8a, we guess 
 our models with state-level fixed effects. This hints that we allow both time-related 
 difference/different version as well as within-state area level difference/different version to decide/figure out our limit/guideline 
 guesses. Given that we have far more (related to space or existing in space) difference/different version in our data than time-related 
 difference/different version, limit/guideline guesses from the state-level fixed effects (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) are driven 
 
 17 
 
 largely by cross sectional difference/different version. Table 8b replaces the state-level fixed effects with 
 area-level fixed effects. In this (detailed description of exactly what is required) we can control for unseen 
 area-level (features/ qualities/ traits) and difference/different version rises mostly from area-level changes over 
 time. 
 In the first panel of Table 8a we can see that farming-based working well is strongly 
 connected with non-farm employment. Controlling for state-level (features/ qualities/ traits), as well 
 as year effects, we see that areas with higher farming-based working well are connected 
 with greater non-farm employment. This pattern holds true for all non-farm employment 
 taken together, but also for sub "parts/areas" of the non-farm part/area: regular and casual 
 employment, although not self-employment. (thinking about/when one thinks about) parts/areas of activity, it appears 
 that farming-based working well is especially strongly connected with growth in the nonfarm manufacturing and (related to buying and selling goods) parts/areas, but not construction. 
 
 When added/more 
 
 controls are added, the positive relationship between farming-based working well and nonfarm growth is significant only in the case of regular non-farm employment. More than that, 
 farming-based working well growth is related to a decline in construction employment. 
 This last (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) is somewhat confusing, but it may be that construction "booms" 
 happen at the expense of farming, in the sense that they involve the (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) of land 
 out of farming into (where there are lots of homes), retailing or industrial/manufacturing uses. In most 
 models, city-based  consumption levels are strongly and positively connected with non-farm 
 employment. 
 
 Greater get (oversupply/large quantity) tends to reduce non-farm employment. 
 
 An 
 
 important finding is that regular non-farm employment tends to be lower in those areas 
 where the share of poorly educated workers is greater. Regular non-farm employment 
 this way seems to be especially dependent on an educated group of workers. 
 In broad terms this way, when we control for unseen state but not area-level 
 (features/ qualities/ traits), we find that areas with higher farming-based working well are also those 
 where non-farm employment is greater. This finding is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the idea that 
 there exist positive linkages from the farming-based part/area to the non-farm part/area (see for 
 example Mellor and Lele, 1973). 
 This end/end result is reduced however, when we control for area-level fixed 
 effects rather than just state-level fixed effects. We find now that overall non-farm 
 employment, and also non-farm self-employment is negatively related to farming-based 
 
 18 
 
 productivity. 
 
 This hints that the non-farm part/area, especially non-farm self- 
 
 employment, may function more as a safety net - acting to soak up labor in those areas 
 where farming-based working well has been declining - rather than being (helped increase/showed in a good way) by 
 growth in the farm-related part/area. The disagreement between the findings in Table 8a and 8b 
 (top panel) can be understood in terms of the fact that in the former Table, thin sliceal 
 difference/different version across areas within states is allowed to decide/figure out the limit/guideline guess on 
 yield. Such thin sliceal difference/different version confirms that the non-farm part/area tends to be more 
 present in areas which are also productive (related to farming). The findings in Table 8b, 
 however, suggest that growth in the non-farm part/area appears to be more a response to 
 declining farming-based working well than a result of farming-based growth. 
 When we examine the fuller (related to a large area) fixed effects (detailed description of exactly what is required) (lower panel of 
 Table 8b) the negative relationship between non-farm employment and yields is no 
 longer significant. Apart from a strongly significant and positive limit/guideline guess on 
 the dummy for 2004, pointing to/showing a very (much) higher presence of non-farm employment in 
 2004 - in all "parts/areas" (with the important/famous exception of regular non-farm employment) - 
 the only other (meaningful numbers) limit/guideline guess is on our workers substitute in 
 the regular non-farm employment model - pointing to/showing that regular non-farm employment 
 growth has been slower in those areas where education levels have not improved. Note 
 that although the area-level fixed effects (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) do not result in a large number 
 of highly significant findings, the explanatory power of these models is very (much) higher 
 than of the state-level fixed effects models in Table 8a. This points to/shows that there are 
 important area-level unseen (features/ qualities/ traits), and that models that do not control for 
 these well enough may finally decide something about the drivers of non-farm employment 
 growth that are non-strong. 
 
 Results: Related things of Poorness Decline 
 We tu<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
