AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Worldwide  models applied to farming-based and trade policies: 
 a review and test 
 Honest  van Tongeren a, Hans van Meijl a, Yves Surry b, * 
 b 
 
 a Farming-based Money flow Research Institue (LEI), P.O. Box 29703, 2502 LS The Hague, The Netherlands 
 Institut National de Ia Interesting Agronomique (INRA}, Unite d'Economie et de Sociologie (away from cities)es de Rennes, 
 Regret  Adolphe Bobierre, CS61 103, 35011 Rennes Give upx, France 
 
 Received 2 February 2000; received in changed form 12 July 2000; accepted 21 August 2000 
 
 Abstract 
 The continuing process of worldwide  (combination of different things together that work as one unit) bears effects/results/suggestions for farmers and related supplying and processing businesses 
 in all parts of the world, but also for the rest of the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things). An test of farming-based and trade policy hits/effects is 
 bound to be complex and is often supported by (numbers-based) modeling analysis. This article provides an test of the present 
 state of applied modelling in the area of trade and farming-based policies. We provide in this paper a (serving to compare two or more things) test of 
 other choice modelling approaches, (thinking about/when one thinks about) a total of 16 partial balance and general balance models. The test 
 includes possible modelling foundations, datasets employed and institutional aspects, such as model maintenance and 
 spreading around of results. A typology of models is given by structuring the test along a clear set of test 
 judging requirements.© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Worldwide  modelling; Farming; Trade 
 
 1. Introduction 
 The 1990s have seen a growing (dependent on each other) of national (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). This worldwide  (popular thing/general way things are going) even 
 speeded up since the signing of the Uruguay Round 
 Trade agreement in Marrakech in 1994. Signs of this 
 increasing globalisation of the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) take 
 a few forms. World trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) have grown at a faster speed in the nineties 
 than in the previous ten years (WTO, 1998). (money-related) 
 markets are more and more connected on a world 
 wide scale and any shocks happening in one finan*Corresponding author. Tel.: +33-2-2348-5390; 
 fax: +33-2-2348-5380. 
 E-mail addresses: f.w.vantongeren@lei.wag-ur.nl 
 (F. van Tongeren), surry@roazhon.inra.fr (Y. Surry). 
 
 cial place have results in other places in the world. 
 Another sign of this world globalisation is the (happening now) 
 creation of (related to a large area) trade agreements and a combining of existing ones. On the policy side, globalisation 
 of the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things) led policy makers, governments 
 and international institutions to tackle worldwide  policy 
 issues such as worldwide  warming and transboundary (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) problems and come up with some real 
 policy proposals. This knowledge among policy makers also show/also obviouss itself in the trade policy area with a 
 worldwide  agreement to launch a new round of trade policy 
 (back-and-forth conversations to agree on something) (even though there is the existence of) a bad start at Seattle in November 
 1999. 
 This overall (popular thing/general way things are going) of globalisation of money-based 
 activity and (at the same time) a worldwide  (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) of 
 policy discussions is continuing to represent an huge challenge for money-flow experts. Tests of such 
 
 0169-5150/011$- see front matter© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: S0169-5150(00)00109-2 
 
 150 
 
 F. van Tongeren et aLl Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 things has needed/demanded the development of worldwide 
 money-based models. Such effort in worldwide  modelling is 
 now (done or used by many people) and has become an integrated 
 part of the money-related field. What's more, the development of such models has been helped by the 
 fast improvement in information and communication 
 technologies (ICT). Along with the globalisation 
 of money-based activity and policy making, money flow/money-based studies 
 research is globalising also. Large scale worldwide 
 models are more and more supported by international 
 teams and international groups of important people. 
 The purpose of this article is to review the present 
 state of applied modelling used to examine the worldwide 
 hits/effects of farming-based and trade policies. Although 
 the extent of/the range of this review is limited by a carefully planned bias 
 towards farming-based trade issues, we should also not 
 lose sight that, now/recently, many worldwide  things 
 go beyond farming-based and trade policy issues, some 
 of which are (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) related. This led us to 
 put into use an open-minded plan in managing and doing this review of worldwide  models. More specifically, we reviewed 
 not only worldwide  models with an exclusive farming-based 
 and trade policy focus but also looked at models which 
 may also be used to test other worldwide  problems such 
 as worldwide  macroeconomic and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) issues. 
 The continuing process of worldwide  (combination of different things together that work as one unit) bears 
 effects/results/suggestions, not only, for farmers and related supplying and processing businesses in all parts of the 
 world, but also for the rest of the world (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 An test of likely policy hits/effects is bound to 
 be complex and should be supported by (numbers-based) 
 modeling analysis that clear the relations of countries between each other, and that clear (connected/related) 
 interactions between the farming-based parts/areas and the 
 rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 There is no model which can serve all purposes. 
 The choice of possible (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), the extent of 
 (related to a large area) and part/areaal opening (a place) to all people and the choice 
 of datasets and guess methods decide/figure out the 
 domain of (ability to be used for something) of the model. Potential users 
 of applied models should be aware of strengths and 
 weaknesses of other choice approaches. This review 
 mostly presents true information about (connected/related) 
 models, and presents this information in a structured 
 format to highlight common features, differences 
 and areas of (ability to be used for something) of modelling approaches. In 
 this way we hope to help the model user in making 
 his own test. 
 
 Table 1 lists the sixteen models discussed in this 
 review, their starting bodies (institutions and/or 
 people) and their current status. A first honor/difference 
 in Table 1 is that between partial balance models focusing on farming on the one hand, and 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models on the other hand. These latter 
 worldwide  models are designed in such a way that they 
 could address farming-based and trade policy issues but 
 also other worldwide  problems such as worldwide  macroeconomic and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) ones. A large part of these 
 models are still operational and are now used 
 for policy- and outlook analysis. For these reasons, 
 they are in a continuous state of flux of changing 
 through (one after the other) updates and changes. This situation led us to conduct the model review at a point 
 of time (early 1999) and provide a snapshot of all 
 these models as they functioned at the beginning of 
 1999. Changes that could have happened to the operational models since this date are not thought about/believed 
 in this article. Information on the individual models 
 has been gathered using published papers and journal 
 articles, unpublished working documents, electronic 
 www/documents and personal contacts. An building to 
 this article, which is available on request, provides a 
 described/explained description of each of the models reviewed. 
 The needed thing that the model should be (compared to other things) 
 recent and likely to be used in the 1990s has led us to 
 leave out/keep out important (things that happened before other things) such as the IIASA Basic 
 Linked System (Parikh et al., 1988), The GOL model 
 developed by USDA-ERS (Roningen and Liu, 1983), 
 OECD's MTM model (Huff and Moreddu, 1990) 
 and the Tyers-Anderson model (Tyers and Anderson, 
 1992). We have also left out/kept out single-valuable thing trade 
 models and linear (or non-linear) programming models that attempt to describe input-output relationships 
 for a certain production process in great detail. 
 Although this review of worldwide  models has an farming-based and trade policy focus, it does not pretend to 
 be thorough. The authors are well aware that some 
 worldwide  models have been left out/kept out from this review. 
 This is especially true in the area of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 modelling and more especially in the area of worldwide 
 warming where a large and continuous research effort 
 has happened over the last 10 years. 1 Also, existing 
 1 For a full review and (the best design available now) in models of (related to the Earth's weather) 
 change, see the different chapters of the OECD Workshop on Money-based Modelling of Climate Change (OECD, 1998). 
 
 Table 1 
 List of models reviewed in this article 
 Model 
 Partial models 
 AGLINK 
 
 ESIM ((related to Europe) (testing out) Model) 
 
 FAO World Model 
 FAPRI 
 GAPsi (Gemeinsame AgrarPolitik 
 (testing out)) 
 MISS (Modele International Simplifie 
 de (testing out)) 
 SWOPSIM (Static World Policy 
 Simultaion Model) 
 WATSIM (World Farming-based Trade 
 (testing out) Model) 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models 
 G-Cubed (Worldwide  Computable Genereal 
 Balance Growth Model) 
 GTAP (Worldwide  Trade Analysis project) 
 
 GREEN 
 INFORUM (Inter-industry Forecasting 
 at the University of Maryland) 
 MEGABARE/GTEM 
 Michigan BDS (Brown-Deardorff-Stern) 
 RUNS ((away from cities)-Urban-North-South) 
 WTO Housemodel 
 
 Starting bodies (institutions and/or people) 
 
 Key reference 
 
 Current Status 
 
 Organisation for Money-based Co-operation and 
 Development (OECD) 
 US Department of Agriculture/Economic Research 
 Service, USDA/ERS, and University Giittingen, 
 Germany 
 Food and Farming Organisation of the United 
 Nations (FAO) 
 Food and Farming-based Policy Research Institnte, 
 Iowa State University 
 Bundes Forschungsanstalt fur Landwirtschaft 
 (PAL), Germany 
 Institut National de Ia Recherce Agronomique 
 (INRA), France 
 US Department of Agriculture/Economic Research 
 Service (USDA/ERS) 
 University of Bonn, (related to Europe) Commission, 
 Federal Ministry of Farming, Germany 
 
 See http://www.oecd.org/agr/ 
 Documents/aglink98.pdf 
 Tangermann and Josling (1994) 
 
 Used 
 
 FAO (1993) and see 
 http/:www.fao.org/es/esc 
 Young et a!. (1999) 
 
 Used 
 
 Frenz and Manegold (1988) 
 
 Used 
 
 Mahe and Tavera (1989) 
 
 Not used 
 
 Roningen (1986) 
 
 Not used 
 
 Henrichsmeyer et a!. (1998) 
 
 Used 
 
 Used 
 :"11 
 
 Used 
 
 "' 
 
 1:&amp;gt; 
 ;:, 
 
 C' 
 
 ;:, 
 
 """'&#126; 
 ;:, 
 
 &#126; 
 
 ,.... 
 
 1:&amp;gt; 
 
 ;;: 
 
 ""&#126;- 
 
 E.. 
 i:' 
 
 &#126; 
 &#126; 
 
 " 
 ;; 
 "&#126;;:, 
 
 McKibbin and Wilcoxen, US (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 Protection (service business/government unit/power/functioning) (EPA) 
 Purdue University, GTAP Center and GTAP 
 Group of companies 
 Organisation for Money-based Co-operation and 
 Development (OECD) 
 University of Maryland 
 
 Australian Bureau of Farming and Useful thing/valuable supply 
 Money flow 
 University of Michigan 
 Organisation for Money-based Co-operation and 
 Development (OECD) 
 The World Trade Organisation (WTO) 
 
 McKibbin and Wilcoxen (1999), and see 
 http://www.msgpl.com.au/msgpl/msghome.htm 
 Hertel (1997), and see 
 http://www.agecon.purdue.edu/gtap/ 
 Lee et a!. (1994) 
 
 Used 
 
 N 
 0\ 
 
 Used 
 
 -;::, 
 
 Used 
 
 .::: 
 ,_ 
 
 Almon (1991), and see http://www. 
 inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Topic/Economics/ 
 EconData/lntpartn.html 
 ABARE (1996), and see http://www.abare.gov.au/ 
 
 Used 
 
 'f' 
 ,_ 
 
 Brown et a!. (1992), and see 
 http://www.spp.umich.edu/rsie/model 
 Burniaux and van der Mensbrugghe (1990) 
 
 Used 
 
 Francois et al. (1995), and see http://www. 
 intereconomics.com/handbook/disk.htm 
 
 &amp;lt;::&amp;gt; 
 &amp;lt;::&amp;gt; 
 
 ""'- 
 
 ;::] 
 
 Used 
 
 Not used 
 Used 
 
 v: 
 
 !52 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al./Agricultural Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 worldwide  trade models are more and more taking (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) issues into account. In the same way/the same topic, we do 
 not intend to review the large body of work dealing 
 with the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) models which 
 is out of the extent of/the range of this review. 2 
 
 2. Test judging requirements 
 This section introduces our set of test judging requirements, 
 which are (after that) used to describe and compare 
 other choice modelling approaches. The set of judging requirements is 
 based on the recognition that applied modelling forms 
 a combination of explanation and scientific data, both of 
 which deserve due attention in policy (connected/related) modelling. 
 The general 'filter' for including in something of models in the 
 current review has been that the model should 
 - be multi-area and worldwide  in nature; 
 - have relevance for farm-related, trade and valuable thing from nature based activities; 
 - be multi-valuable thing; 
 - have a medium term time frame (around 5 years); 
 - be an balance model (i.e. not models that project 
 demand-supply gaps using mostly technical relations); 
 - be of young age, and likely to be used in some 
 form in the 1990s; 
 - be an applied model, (in other words) uses a combination of explanation and scientific data; 
 - have a strong policy (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting). 
 2.1. Idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built): definition and scope 
 2.1.1. Market balance models against/compared to/or 
 time series projection models 
 Although time series projection models have been 
 left out/kept out from the list, it is useful to tell apart this approach from balance models. Time series projection models attempt to forecast the future on the basis 
 of prediction of historical data. These models usually put more focus on the (related to studying numbers) behaviour 
 of time series data than on the money-based possible 
 supports/supporting details of behavioural equations. A projection 
 model may, for example, project valuable thing supply 
 2 For a recent review of these (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) models, see Conrad 
 ( 1999), and Faucheux and Levarlet ( 1999). 
 
 based on (related to scientific farming) data on land and yields without taking into account farmers' responses to changing 
 market prices. For a discussion of this method and a 
 large scale application, see Alexandratos (1995). Another well known worldwide  model that relies heavily on 
 the projections method is found in Rosegrant et al. 
 (1995). 
 On the other hand, market balance models contain the response (behaviour) of money-based agents to 
 changes in prices (costs), and prices (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) to 
 clear markets. The goal of these models is the desire/decision of balance prices and amounts on (connected) sets of markets. 3 In a fully feathered worldwide 
 balance model, there will usually be endogenous 
 prices attached to world markets as well as domestic markets. This class of models is firmly established 
 within mainstream money flow/money-based studies where the behavioural 
 response of suppliers and buyers is usually received/made from 
 from optimising ideas (you think are true): given a description of 
 the production technology, the supplier chooses a combination of inputs such that costs are (made small) for 
 a given level of output. Given a description of person preferences, the buyer decides/figures out his preferred 
 consumption bundle such that his/her utility is (made as big as possible) for a given level of his/her budget. Standard 
 ideas (you think are true) include constant returns technology, homothetic preferences, and markets seen as 
 perfect competition. While these basic possible ideas (you think are true) underlie balance modelling, the optimisation process is usually not modelled clearly. 
 Rather, a reduced form approach is common, where 
 demand and supply are specified as functions of income, prices and elasticities. 
 Depending on ideas (you think are true) made about the flexibility of production factors, balance models can 
 be classified as short term, medium term or long term. 
 Short term (in the Marshallian sense) means that some 
 production factors are fixed, and are not allowed to 
 (give out things in a different way) between other choice uses. The fixed factors 
 will usually be capital, farming-based land, and maybe farming-based labour. Medium term models allow 
 3 This does not deny the existence and relevance of unbalance situations. (lasting for a short time) shortages and excess supply situations 
 (which may, for example, arise as a result of price or amount rules) can very well be (taken/took control of) in balance models, 
 for example, by allowing for stockpiling and (everything is gone). The key 
 point is that these models catch market interactions in a clear 
 and possibly sound way. 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al. I Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 for (giving out things in a different way) of all production factors as response 
 to some (coming from the outside of something) events. Finally, long term models would also model endogenous (transfer of money from individuals to businesses). 
 Within the group of market balance models, we 
 can identify partial and (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models. 
 2.1.2. Representation of national (processes of people making, selling, and buying things): 
 partial against/compared to/or (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models 
 Partial models treat (stores around the world) for a 
 selected set of traded products (that are bought and sold), e.g. farming-based products (that are bought and sold). 
 They think about/believe the farming-based system as a closed 
 system without linkages with the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Effects of the rest of the domestic and world 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) on the farming-based system may be included 
 in a top-down fashion by changing limits/guidelines and 
 (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change). Partial models are in way of thinking/basic truth/rule 
 able to provide much product detail. See also Meilke 
 et al. (1996) who give a summary of worldwide  partial 
 balance models changed to fit farming-based trade. 
 Partial models may be single- or multi-product. 
 Multi-product models can take by force/take control of supply and 
 demand relationships among farming-based products. Most partial models include linear or log-linear 
 behavioural equations, which allows the representation of supply and demand relationships (responses) 
 winning/most common in the markets under study. 4 They also includes into their supply and demand relationships 
 (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) such as technical change, world 
 population and household income. 
 Partial models of international trade in farming 
 generally focus on trade in first (or most important) valuable things. That 
 is, they take by force/take control of farming-based supply, demand and trade 
 for unprocessed or first-stage processed farming-based 
 products without taking into account trade in processed food products, even though the last thing just mentioned 
 valuable things represent an increasing share of world 
 trade. 
 The main area of application of partial balance 
 models is described/explained trade policy analysis to specific 
 products, which represent only a small part of/amount of the 
 activities of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) in question. This (small part/area) condition hints that policy-caused changes on 
 4 Some (single country) partial balance modellers attempt to 
 overcome the faults/problems that are suggested by linear and log-linear 
 behavioural equations by guessing flexible functional forms. See, 
 e.g. Frohberg et a!. (1997). To our knowledge this has not yet 
 been applied in worldwide  trade models, however. 
 
 153 
 
 the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) (outside the farm part/area) are 
 so small that they can safely be ignored. 
 On the other hand, (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models provide 
 a complete representation of national (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), 
 next to a (detailed description of exactly what is required) of trade relations between 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). A first step in moving from partial balance to (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide modelling is to introduce 
 supply and demand equations for an group leftover/extra valuable thing. By forcing (happening over and over again in a predictable way) restrictions 
 on the supply and demand elasticities of the changed 
 model, one gets a model that includes demand and 
 supply interactions between farming-based valuable things and other valuable things in a consistent way. A 
 fuller (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide (detailed description of exactly what is required) is received/got when 
 the model is closed with respect to the generation of 
 factor income and expenses, which needs/demands the 
 clear (detailed description of exactly what is required) of factor markets for land, labour 
 and capital. In other words, the very important general 
 balance features are (now under different control) by including factor movements between parts/areas, next to allowing for 
 demand interactions. (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models capture 
 effects/results/suggestions of international trade for the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 as a whole, covering the circular flow of income and 
 expense and taking care of inter-industry relations. 
 There are three broad classes of (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide 
 models: macro-econometric models, input-output 
 models and applied general balance (AGE) models. Macro-econometric models do not concern us 
 here, since they will not zoom in on farming, but 
 rather are concerned with macro-money-based things such as inflation and exchange rates. Input-output 
 models provide a complete description of 
 inter-industry linkages and a full accounting of first (or most important) incomes earned in production activities. 
 AGE models do also usually contain full inputoutput detail, but on top of that they contain equations 
 that describe the behavioural response of producers, 
 people, importers and exporters and possibly other 
 agents in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 5 AGE models are specifically concerned with useful thing/valuable supply portion issues, that 
 is, where the portion of production factors over 
 other choice uses is affected by certain policies or (coming from the outside of something) developments. International trade is usually 
 an area where such caused effects are important 
 5 Limits of open Leontief input-output models include fixed 
 prices, (coming from the outside of something) final demand, perfectly elastic factor supplies, 
 and an inability to (show or prove) welfare effects. 
 
 154 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al./Agricultural Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 results of policy choices. Needless to say, such 
 caused effects are not visible in partial models. In the 
 face of changing international prices, useful things/valuable supplies will 
 move between other choice uses within the domestic 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things), or even between (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) if production 
 factors are (in other countries) mobile. Only if a complete 
 description of the multi-part/areaal nature of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is given, can such developmental issues be 
 analysed. 
 
 2.1.3. (related to a large area) scope 
 Multi-area models differ with respect to their 
 (related to a large area) coverage. 6 Worldwide  trade models attempt 
 a closed accounting of the selected valuable thing 
 trade flows for the whole world. If the model is 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide, the worldwide  model also includes a 
 around the world closed income accounting system. At the 
 other end of the scale, a model might focus on 
 trade between a selected set of trading partners, 
 without attempting a around the world closed accounting. 
 Or it might even single out one group of countries, 
 such as the EU-15, and describe its trade on world 
 markets. 
 A around the world closed information file does not suggest that all 
 areas or countries distinguished are treated with the 
 same amount of detail. An (middle-position) position is 
 often adopted, (in which/during which/in what way/in what) the model's information file is 
 closed with respect to the world, but only selected 
 areas are treated with a great amount of detail, and 
 confining the description of other areas to a smaller 
 range of (numbers that change/things that change) that are of important importance. 
 2.1.4. Linked individual country models or 
 parametric differences between areas 
 There are two broad approaches with respect to the 
 modelling of individual (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) within the worldwide 
 money-based system. One approach starts by giving a described/explained representation of individual (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), taking 
 into account much of the institutional and money-based 
 details of the individual countries, and (after that) 
 linking individual country models through trade flows, 
 6 Obeying the international trade books, 'regional' 
 has a supra-national meaning in this report, and not an intranational (areas, etc.) one. A 'country' goes along with the 
 idea of a nation state. Whenever this article refers to areas, we 
 mean an group of individual countries. (related to a large area) groupings 
 of countries, therefore, do not necessarily represent a clear 
 (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) space, for example, a 'Rest of the World' area. 
 
 capital flows and possibly factor ability to move around between 
 countries. 7 
 The other route to worldwide  modelling starts by 
 assuming the same modelling structure for all individual (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), and representing differences 
 between (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) in terms of data and limits/guidelines 
 only. This approach produces /gives up a (compared to other things) clear/open and honest 
 model structure, since there is only one money-based 
 model. This in turn greatly helps both the data 
 handling aspects as well as the (understanding/ explanation) of results. In the linked country models approach, the 
 individual country models may be based on different 
 possible ideas (you think are true), which may make it hard 
 to untangle model results into the effects of (coming from the outside of something) events on the one hand and differences in 
 explanations on the other hand. A disadvantage of the 
 'one model fits all' approach is clearly its limited 
 ability to handle (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) differences between 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). 8 
 2.2. (detailed description of exactly what is required) and modelling issues 
 
 2.2.1. Pattern of behavior against/compared to/or (serving to compare two or more things) 
 static (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) 
 Pattern of behavior models allow the analysis of fell behind transmissions and (change to make better/related to changing something) processes over time. Or, the (serving to compare two or more things) static approach studies the 
 differences between equilibria resulting from different 
 ideas (you think are true) on (coming from the outside of something) data or policy (numbers that change/things that change). 
 The time path between equilibria is ignored in (serving to compare two or more things) static models. 
 Pattern of behavior models can be used to trace the collection of stock (numbers that change/things that change), whereas static models 
 are unable to do this. In (serving to compare two or more things) static models, 
 policy changes have no effect on the collection of 
 stocks - e.g. capital stock - and the connected 
 changes in production possibilities. For short-run 
 farming-based analysis the effects/results/suggestions of collected 
 valuable thing stocks may be (connected/related) also. 
 Pattern of behavior features can be included in balance models in a few ways. The most often 
 used approach is to specify a recursive sequence of 
 7 The United Nations Project LINK (Klein and Su, 1979) is a 
 well known example of this approach to worldwide  modelling. 
 8 An (middle-position) approach has been followed by the GLOBUS 
 model (Bremer, 1987), which included three perfect model 
 structures for, (match up each pair of items in order), developed (systems where supply and demand controls prices and production), centrally 
 planned (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) and developing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al. I Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 (lasting for a short time) equilibria. That is, in each time period the 
 model is solved for an balance, given the (coming from the outside of something) conditions winning/most common for that particular period. 
 In between periods, stock (numbers that change/things that change) are updated, either (coming from the outside of something)ly (e.g. population) or as a result of the 
 balance results of the previous/coming before period (e.g. investment demand leading to a changed capital stock in 
 the next period). Recursive patterns do not (promise that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) 
 time-consistent behaviour. In contrast, in intertemporal balance models agents display best 
 behaviour over time as well as within periods. 
 Intertemporal models are usually equal to 
 using clear expectations ideas (you think are true). 9 Such 
 forward-looking behaviour leads to balance time 
 paths that move towards a long-run steady state (if 
 it exists). A main reason to includes such intertemporal features into general balance models is the want to model savings rates endogenously, and because of this to allow the model to create 
 other choice (endogenous) growth rates. In such models, a policy change can have a lasting effect on 
 the (process of people making, selling, and buying things)'s growth rate through changes in the 
 collection of capital stocks. A feature which 
 is impossible with a fixed savings rate idea (you think is true). 10 
 (serving to compare two or more things) static models are sometimes used to 
 create projections of policy hits/effects at some future 
 point in time. Such projections are not to be confused 
 with econometric forecasts, but are (accomplished or gained) by building an (not made by nature/fake) future dataset that is consistent 
 with the model's ideas (you think are true)- a (what people commonly call a/not really a) (a measure of what occurs naturally/sports boundary line) 
 - and (after that) conducting a policy experiment 
 on the basis of this projected dataset. The (not made by nature/fake) future dataset is built by making ideas (you think are true) on 
 the growth of (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change) and limits/guidelines and 
 (after that) letting the model solve for an balance that is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with these ideas (you think are true). Typical projections with AGE models depend on (coming from the outside of something) 
 forecasts of GDP, factor gifts and factor working well. 
 9 What's more, by modelling the intertemporal equilibtium behaviour of money-based agents, as well as equilibria within periods, 
 such models can undo the Lucas (1976) opinion on 
 money-based models. 
 10 If knowledge is included as a production factor that can be 
 saved, growth rates become endogenous, even with a fixed 
 savings rate (see endogenous growth books, for example, Grossman and Helpman (1991)). 
 
 155 
 
 2.2.2. Modelling of international trade 
 
 2.2.2.1. Ideas (you think are true) about the nature of traded 
 goods: (group of things that are all pretty much the same) against/compared to/or blended products (that are bought and sold). 
 In classical trade models, products (that are bought and sold)  are assumed to be 
 almost the same  in the eyes of buyers. In such a market, the 
 products (that are bought and sold)  of one producer perfectly substitute for those 
 of another and are called (group of things that are all pretty much the same). If the number of suppliers is (good or well enough) large, the market will 
 approach the perfect competitive result and prices 
 across suppliers will be equalised. Evenness and 
 (wanting to beat others in contests) also suggest that each actor in the 
 market is either a buyer or a seller of the good, but 
 never both, since each actor is either able to produce 
 the good with non-negative (money made/good things received) at the winning/most common 
 market price or not. This hints that a country can 
 only be an exporter or an importer of a certain good, 
 and models that include this idea (you think is true) describe only 
 inter-industry trade. 
 Evenness therefore simplifies the job  of trade 
 modelling much. Since prices are equalised and 
 there is no other unique quality of the 
 products (that are bought and sold), it makes no difference from which supplier 
 a particular (instance of buying something for money) is made. The evenness idea (you think is true) is therefore connected with a 'pooled' market approach to trade modelling, where we see only 
 what each actor brings to the market (supply) and what 
 that actor takes from the market (demand). For obvious reasons, the combined market approach is also known 
 as 'non-(related to space or existing in space)' modelling. 
 However, these simplifications in modelling have 
 extreme limits for applied trade research, as these 
 models explain only inter-industry trade and not 
 intra-industry trade. The last thing just mentioned turns out to be an 
 important thing/event in trade, since even at high 
 levels of disaggregation, countries report both exports 
 and imports in any part/area. If intra-industry trade is 
 netted out, one ignores an important thing/event of 
 the real world and underplays the importance of trade 
 to each area. What's more, these trade models can 
 be (over-reacting to very small things/able to detect tiny signals) to changes in transportation costs 
 and trade policy wedges, and risk extreme 
 (focusing on doing one thing very well) when part/area-clearly stated/particular factors of production are not present in the model, see also Francois 
 and Reinert (1997). 
 One way to introduce intra-industry trade in a 
 model is to assume that products (that are bought and sold)  are told apart by 
 other factors than price alone, and because of this are viewed 
 
 156 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al. I Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 as (not totally pure/not totally correct) substitutes from the point of view of the 
 buyer. When product (using different things) is possible, products (that are bought and sold) 
 are called blended and the job  of trade modelling is much more complex. First, there is no 
 need for prices to equalise across suppliers. If products (that are bought and sold) 
 are blended, then different buyers are willing to 
 pay different prices to get the same amount of the 
 good. Because of this, independent price movements among 
 suppliers are possible. Second, each actor in the market may be both a buyer and a seller at the same time 
 if products (that are bought and sold)  are (made different). This hints that the trade 
 model has to trace twice as many transactions than 
 under the evenness idea (you think is true). Clearly, the two-sided (detailed description of exactly what is required) provides a richer and more described/explained 
 picture of the market, but needs/demands much more data, 
 limits/guidelines, bookkeeping and math-based effort. 
 Whether the added/more effort is (done for good reason) by added/more 
 (connected/related) information depends on the kind of problems 
 a model has to tackle. Many policy arguments and policy legal documents are two-sided in nature, and can only be 
 treated within a two-sided (detailed description of exactly what is required) of trade flows. 
 There are two ways to includes product (using different things) into applied trade models. On the one hand, 
 product (using different things) can be introduced (coming from the outside of something)ly 
 by assuming that products are (made different) by country of origin. This method introduced by Armington (1969) simply assumes that imports and domestic 
 products (that are bought and sold)  are (not totally pure/not totally correct) substitutes in demand. The often 
 used Armington creation in applied trade models 
 calls for/uses the idea (you think is true) that products are (made different) by country of origin. In combination with a preference function that is separatable in domestic products 
 and combined foreign products, this yields scientifically small import functions. Most often a CES 
 functional form for preferences is assumed. 11 This 
 idea (you think is true) has received much criticism because the 
 source of product (using different things) is (coming from the outside of something)ly introduced on the demand side. Another disadvantage of 
 this idea (you think is true) is that terms of trade effects turn out to 
 be quite large scientifically. The Armington idea (you think is true) 
 hints that each importer, however small the area 
 may be, has some degree of market power, and is there- 
 
 In general, the idea (you think is true) of (weak) separability of the utility function hints that 'bundles' of products (that are bought and sold)  have to be identified, 
 where substitution is (compared to other things) easy within 'bundles' but substitution is less easy across 'bundles'. This is (based on facts and other evidence) also an scientific issue. 
 11 
 
 fore able to influences world prices. See Brown (1987) 
 for an (related to careful studying or deep thinking) and number-based test of terms 
 of trade effects under the Armington idea (you think is true). 
 An different approach is to introduce product (using different things) endogenously at the firm level on the supply side. 12 This approach assumes that people 
 prefer (made different) products (that are bought and sold)  either to get a better 
 match between their preferred variety and those existing 
 in the market place (Lancaster, 1980) or to get increased variety in consumption (Spence, 1976; Dixit 
 and Stiglitz, 1977). Krugman (1979, 1980) and Ethier 
 (1979, 1982) introduced the idea  of (related to one company having too much power) 
 competition into international trade explanation. In this approach fixed costs such as R&amp;D or marketing costs 
 are necessary to produce (made different) products (that are bought and sold). Including fixed costs has some effects/results/suggestions for trade 
 policies. Next to the usual gains from trade we 
 get 'noncomparative advantage' gains from trade in 
 the presence of scale (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) and (not totally pure/not totally correct) competition. First, shocks that increase output at firm level 
 result in positive scale effects. Second, there are gains 
 from trade in the form of increased variety (by that/in that way 
 getting/causing fixed costs and reducing the sales of existing 
 firms). Thirdly, scale (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) suggest that the market can only support a limited number of firms, which 
 are as a result (in a way that is not totally pure or totally correct) competitive. Trade creates a larger market that can support a larger number 
 of firms and because of this a greater level of competition. The 
 reduction in market power is called the procompetitive effect. The advantage of this approach is that it 
 locates product (using different things) on the supply side and 
 it (makes small) terms of trade effects. A disadvantage is 
 that the (not being there; not being present) of firm level data makes econometric 
 guess of elasticities filled with problems (Winters, 1990). 
 2.2.3. Representation of policies 
 A careful representation of policies is an very important part of worldwide  models applied to practical 
 farming-based and trade issues. The policies thought about/believed 
 cover not only trade policies but also domestic farming-based policies which add further distortions between 
 international and domestic prices. Modelling policy 
 12 Berkum van and van Meijl (2000) give an elaborate survey of 
 (things that decide other things) of international trade, such as factor gifts, 
 product (using different things), (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) and invention of new things, and 
 their effects/results/suggestions for trade patterns and trade policies. What's more, 
 they survey evidence on the relevance of different explanations 
 for explaining trade in farming-based and food products. 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al./ Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 157 
 
 price distortions caused by the quota. There are a few 
 methods to number quotas and other non-tax/import tax measures (Lord, 1997), which basically amount to two different ways to put into use them in applied models: 
 the first is a tax/import tax equal representation, while the 
 second method specifies amount restrictions directly. 
 
 instruments in worldwide  models can take two forms. The 
 first one consists of developing a direct (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) representation of the policy legal documents through including its (machines/methods/ways). The second approach is 
 more indirect and measures the policy-caused distortions through a price-transmission (policy-response) 
 relationship linking international and domestic 
 prices. 13 Depending on the values taken by this relationship, it is flexible enough to take by force/take control of a wide organized row 
 of trade and domestic farming-based policy governments 
 ranging from a perfect transmission of world prices 
 to perfect insulation. Measures of distortions (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by price wedges and/or tax/import tax equals are 
 included into this policy response function. 
 In the worldwide  models under review, these two forms 
 of representing policies are being used a lot. 
 About the price transmission (detailed description of exactly what is required), the 
 most common form of modelling policy instruments 
 is the perfect transmission case with price wedges and 
 or tax/import tax equals. This form is (compared to other things) easy to put into use. In what follows, we illustrate the modelling 
 of policy legal documents through two trade policy instruments: taxes/import taxes and (numbers-based) restrictions. 
 Taxes/import taxes and (numbers-based) restrictions such as quotas and (something you choose to do, but is not required) export handcuffs, etc. (VERs) are two 
 types of trade policy legal documents that are examined 
 in applied trade models. Taxes/import taxes can be introduced in 
 a plain/honest/easy manner and are most of the time 
 expressed as the percentage by which the domestic 
 price goes beyond the world price; (in other words) an ad braveryem tax/import tax rate. Quotas are harder to put into use. First, 
 one has to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) whether a quota is binding or 
 not. Second, it is hard to test what would be the 
 level of imports without the quota. Third, one has to 
 model who takes the rents that build up from the 
 quota: domestic importers or foreign exporters. With 
 regard to the second element (people who work to find information) focus on the 
 
 2.2.3.1. Tax/import tax equals or price wedges. The tax/import tax equal or price wedge of a non-tax/import tax measure is 
 the difference between the free world price of a good 
 and the price on the domestic market. These measures 
 can be (compared to other things) easily be watched/followed when products (that are bought and sold)  are 
 (a mixture of things that are all pretty much the same) and free world prices can be gotten 
 from transaction values. For manufactured products (that are bought and sold), the 
 former is a problem and for many (farming-based) valuable things the last thing just mentioned is a problem. A popular method 
 to arrive at guesses of tax/import tax equals is use of 
 producer support guesses (PSE). 14 A disadvantage 
 of these helping payment equals is that they change/differ  much from year to year, not only through changes 
 in policies but especially through changes in world 
 prices, exchange rates and the value of domestic production. 
 The representation of amount restrictions as price 
 wedges is not always an (good) enough approach. If a quota 
 is not binding in the test result, its tax/import tax equal 
 will be equal to zero. However, the quota may become 
 binding as the result of a policy (testing out). This effect 
 will not be (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) when the quota is came close to 
 by a tax/import tax equal because the tax/import tax equal remains zero. Added/more difficulties arise in the case 
 of multi-level  (serving or acting to prevent harm) big plans/layouts/dishonest plans like tax/import tax-rate quotas 
 (TRQs). These big plans/layouts/dishonest plans specify different tax/import tax rates 
 for different import quota levels, and it has to be decided/figured out whether each quota is really binding and/or 
 the tax/import tax is way too high. Also, the (putting into) use of 
 a quota hints the generation of quota rents, which 
 
 13 For more details on the (detailed description of exactly what is required) and (putting into) use of 
 price transmission equations, see Tyers and Anderson (1992, 
 Chapter 2). Price transmission equations can also be viewed as 
 reduced-form relationships received/got from a (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) "political 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)" model explaining the behaviour of policy decision makers who optimise a policy preference (social utility) functions 
 subject to money-based and political restrictions. The scientific (putting into) use of price transmission equations is often practical 
 and not necessarily received/made from in a consistent fashion from the hidden (under) political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) model. This could explain why such a 
 (detailed description of exactly what is required) of policies is not used in worldwide  computable general 
 balance models. 
 
 14 PSEs were earlier known as 'producer helping payment equals'. 
 These include the move from/change from price distortions (i.e. price wedges), 
 and the moves (from one place to another) from government to producers. The move from/change from 
 price distortions or market price support is again the move from/change from 
 people to producers in the form of price gaps between domestic and world prices. The move from/change from government expenses includes both direct government payments and indirect moves (from one place to another) (e.g. input payments, tax givebacks). The personal helping payment 
 equal (CSE) measures the understood tax or helping payment charged on 
 people. See Cahill and Legg (1990) for a complete description. Both PSEs and CSEs are regularly published by OECD. 
 
 158 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al./ Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 builds up as income to the holder of the right to import 
 or export under the quota. The endogenous desire/decision of quota rents and their distribution over holders 
 of quota rights can only properly be (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by an 
 clear representation of these policy measures. See, 
 for example, DeMelo and Tarr (1992) for a discussion 
 of trade quota (tools or objects used to do work or measure something). 
 
 2.2.3.2. Other policy legal documents. Next to border 
 protection (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) stricto sensu, other (connected/related) 
 policies often need to be represented in models. 
 For example, in relation to the GATT/WTO promises, ceilings on the amount/quantity of give money tod exports 
 as well as bounds on the value of export payments 
 may be (connected/related). In relation to the common farming-based policy (CAP) of the (related to Europe) Union, land 
 set-aside and headage premiums are clearly examples 
 of farming-based (watches and checks by law officers) that do not directly affect border protection, but anyway do affect 
 trade flows. 
 2.2.4. Possible consistency 
 Judging the possible (state of always working or appearing the same way) of models has 
 many parts/faces, and the discussion here is far from 
 thorough. 15 At its most basic level, a model's number-based results should be (not numbers-based) in accordance 
 with the possible foundations on which the model 
 has been built. At the level of number-based (putting into) use of the model, possible (state of always working or appearing the same way) places 
 needed things on the limits/guidelines used in functional 
 forms, especially limits/guidelines used in demand systems 
 and supply equations. 16 
 15 It is not a plain/honest/easy job  to develop a sound set of judging requirements 
 to judge the possible (state of always working or appearing the same way) of models. This theme is also 
 closely related to the issue of model validation, which we have 
 not taken up in this article. In addition the test of possible truth/trueness would require much more information on the individual models than is available. Since number-based model results 
 are depending on the particular set of ideas (you think are true) employed, in 
 particular policy ideas (you think are true) and ideas (you think are true) on (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change), a judgement of the number-based truth/trueness would require a study 
 where model results are compared against the background of the 
 same set of ideas (you think are true). 
 16 The four very important properties of demand functions are: (I) 
 adding up: at the given level of prices and income, demand equals 
 total expense, (2) evenness: paid/made up for (Dummiesian) demand is (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree zero in prices and un-paid-for (Marshallian) demand is (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree zero in 
 income and prices together, (3) matching: cross-price effects are 
 
 (impressive/forcing (on people)/causing an inconvenient situation) all (happening over and over again in a predictable way) conditions on the limits/guidelines used in demand system and the supply equations 
 of worldwide  partial balance models is almost an unbeatable job. To overcome this problem, worldwide 
 partial balance modellers have put into use the following two plans: (i) secure/make sure of that all limits/guidelines (elasticities) make happy the very important (happening over and over again in a predictable way) conditions (i.e. 
 that own price effects have the right signs and rule the cross-price effects) and/or (ii) (force (on people)/cause an inconvenient situation) the full 
 set of (happening over and over again in a predictable way) conditions to small parts/pieces of the 
 worldwide  model. 
 The money-based structure of general balance 
 models forces the model builder to exercise a strict 
 discipline relating to/connected to the restrictions on limits/guidelines. Especially, a necessary condition for the 
 existence and (quality of being unlike anything else in the world) of an balance solution 
 is that all excess demand functions are (group of things that are all pretty much the same) 
 of degree zero in prices. This condition is met when 
 the (happening over and over again in a predictable way) conditions on demand and supply equations are happy. In a properly designed general 
 balance model, (state where all things are equal) between incomes and expenses will always be made happy for the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as 
 a whole. This feature does not always hold for partial 
 balance models because they don't have the restrictions 
 forced by an (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide national accounting 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). 
 
 2.2.5. Model closures 
 'Closing' the model is the process of classifying the 
 (numbers that change/things that change) as either endogenous, (in other words) values are serious and stubborn (solved for) by the model, or (coming from the outside of something), (in other words) 
 pre-planned outside the model. Model experiments 
 are conducted by introducing other choice ideas (you think are true) 
 on (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Different model closures can also be employed to 
 construct different models from the same basic modelling (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). Multi-area models with a worldwide 
 coverage can sometimes be changed into single 
 area models by singling out one clearly stated/particular area 
 and declaring 'the rest of world' as (coming from the outside of something). (in almost the same way), (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models can be changed into 
 matching, (4) negativity: the matrix of own- and cross-price 
 derivatives of paid/made up for demand functions is negative 
 semi-definite. In particular this hints that (a) paid/made up for demand function slope downward, and (b) own price effects rule cross-price effects. See, for example, LaFrance (1986) and 
 LaFrance and Hanemann (1989). Almost the same  (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) hold for 
 equation systems used to model the supply side. 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al./Agricultural Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 partial models of selected parts/areas, by specifying a 
 closure which holds 'the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things)' as (coming from the outside of something). The last thing just mentioned possibility is especially useful if 
 one wants to compare partial balance results 
 against general balance results, by that/in that way checking for the presence of significant (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide 
 caused effects following a certain policy change 
 targeted at the farming-based part/area. 
 There are certain general closure rules that have 
 to be satisfied by both partial and general balance models. Both in a partial and a general balance setting, a valid closure has to promise that 
 the number of endogenous (numbers that change/things that change) is equal to the 
 number of equations. In addition to this necessary 
 technical condition, the closure must specify a valid 
 money-based (surrounding conditions). For example, if the balance model demands that all buyers exhaust their 
 budget, the closure must be such that all buyers 
 are on their budget restriction, and that there are 
 no 'leakages' with respect to incomes and expenses. 
 Since partial models describe only a subsystem of 
 the (process of people making, selling, and buying things), they do not have to be worried about 
 the (what people commonly call a/not really a) 'macroeconomic closure', (in other words) the treatment of the link between investment and savings. In 
 models without intertemporal decision making with 
 respect to investments, the identity between macroeconomic investment and savings is (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) by 
 fixing either one at some pre-specified level, and 
 needing/ordering the other (number or thing that changes) to change something (to help someone)/take care of someone. For example, a (what people commonly call a/not really a) 'Keynesian closure' specifies an 
 (coming from the outside of something) investment level and lets savings (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) 
 endogenously. On the other hand, in 'neo-classical 
 closures', investment is (changing to make better/changing to fit new conditions) to savings levels. 
 Since the source of savings may be both domestic 
 and foreign, the closure rule also has effects/results/suggestions for 
 the treatment of the current account balance. If the 
 trade balance is fixed (coming from the outside of something)ly, one mostly 
 also fixes the difference between domestic savings 
 and domestic investments. Also, in multi-area 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models, the approach of fixing trade 
 balances at the (related to a large area) level is a simplifying way to 
 avoid modelling the portion of worldwide  savings to 
 individual areas. A disadvantage of this approach 
 is the inability to model endogenous changes in the 
 volume of (related to a large area) trade balances. It is obvious that 
 the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of the macroeconomic closure can 
 have deep/extreme hits/effects on model results. 
 
 159 
 
 2.3. Data and limits/guidelines 
 2.3.1. Data 
 Data needed things are very demanding for 
 multi-(related to a large area) models of international trade. The 
 amount of data is figured out by/decided by the level of opening (a place) to all people (countries/regions, activities/commodities) and 
 the possible structure ((group of things that are all pretty much the same)/heterogeneous 
 products (that are bought and sold), two-sided/pooled markets). 
 Not only is the amount of data usually quite large, 
 but the data needed to be (to both people or groups equally) consistent. Especially if trade is related to domestic inter-industry 
 structures, big changes/recalculations to the published 
 data are necessary, because the procedures for collecting and classifying trade statistics differ from those 
 employed for domestic input--output tables. While 
 trade data with broad coverage are now widely available on a similar basis, this is certainly not true 
 for input-output data and for trade protection information. 17 A social accounting matrix (SAM) usually 
 underlies (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide models. Although the SAM 
 is sometimes only completely/in a hinting way present in the information file 
 of AGE models, it forms the basis for a clear 
 and consistent description of national (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). See 
 Lord (1997) for a description of widely used data 
 sources for international trade analysis. 18 
 It is obvious that regular updating of datasets will 
 improve the timeliness and relevance of results. The 
 choice of base year for a modelling dataset has added/more results, both for (serving to compare two or more things) static and 
 energetic models. The money-based conditions that win at the point of reference decide/figure out the ends/end results 
 that can be drawn from different tests. 
 2.3.2. Limits/guidelines 
 The limits/guidelines used in behavioural equations decide/figure out the response to policy changes, and are therefore 
 a very important element in each modelling exercise. Key 
 limits/guidelines usually are: price- and income elasticities 
 17 A recent combined effort by USDAIERS, Farming and Agrifood, Canada, the (related to Europe) Commission, UNCTAD, FAO and 
 OECD develops a new Farming-based Market Access Information file 
 (AMAD). At the time of writing this contains tax/import tax-line level 
 data on market access commitment and (putting into) use of about 
 50 WTO members. AMAD is publicly available since September 
 2000. See Waino et al. (2000) and www.amad.org. 
 18 The building to van Tongeren and van Meijl (1999) lists the 
 datasources of individual models in some detail. 
 
 160 
 
 F. van Tongeren et al./ Farming-based Money flow 26 (2001) 149-172 
 
 and budget shares in demand systems; substitution 
 elasticities and input cost shares in supply systems; 
 Armington (substitution) elasticities in import<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
