 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
 SCIENCE @DIRECTO 
 
 AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Access to credit, plot size and cost inefficiency among 
 smallholder tobacco growers in Malawi 
 Gautam Hazarika a,*, Jeffrey AI wang b, 1 
 a 
 
 Department of Business Management, The University of Texas at Brownsville, 80 Fort Brown, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA 
 b Department of Farming-based and Applied Money flow, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA 
 
 Received 8 May 2001; received in changed form 14 August 2002; accepted 15 August 2002 
 
 Abstract 
 Using data from the Malawi (money-related) Markets and Household Food Security Survey, this paper examines the effect of access 
 to credit from formal sources, and tobacco plot size, on cost inefficiency among Malawian smallholder tobacco growers. 
 Farm-specific cost inefficiency is guessed within the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area analysis. Access to credit is measured 
 as the sum of household members' (stated by the person doing a survey, etc.) credit limits at credit organisations, probably a truer measure of an (coming from the outside of something) 
 credit restriction than credit program participation or actual loan uptake. It is found that tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) is significantly 
 less cost inefficient per area of land  on larger plots. While access to credit by itself has no (related to numbers) visible effect on cost 
 inefficiency, it reduces the gain in cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) from a larger plot size. 
 © 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: 0130; Q120 
 Keywords: Tobacco; Malawi; Plot size; Farming-based finance; Cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Improvement in the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farming-based production, including working well growth, is an very important part of any (away from cities) growth plan. In 
 sub-Saharan Africa, where price-based (change to make better/related to changing something) 
 policies have not led to broad-based money-based growth, 
 gain in the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farming-based production is 
 viewed as necessary for money-based growth and the 
 help of (away from cities) poorness. (away from cities) finance may add/give by helping the (instance of buying something for money) of expensive inputs and 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-956-544-8953; 
 fax: + 1-956-548-8736. 
 E-mail addresses: ghazarika@utb.edu (G. Hazarika), 
 alwangj@vt.edu (J. Alwang). 
 1 Tel.: +1-540-231-6517; fax: +1-540-231-7417. 
 
 the adoption of other choice crops. Besides, (money-related) 
 services may be packaged to deliver technical intelligence. Improved access to (away from cities) finance may, this way, be 
 connected with increased working well and decreases 
 in cost inefficiencies. 
 Conditions in Malawi highlight the possible benefits of improved (wasting very little while working or producing something) in farming-based production. Malawi is among the 10 poorest countries in 
 the world, with a GNP per person guessed at US$_$ 
 190 (World Bank, 2000) and social indicators that are 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with (existing all over a large area) poorness. The country is 
 mostly (away from cities): &amp;lt;25% of people/of the group lives 
 in city-based  centres-and farming rules the (away from cities) 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Malawian farming is seen as extreme (existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things): smallholders under traditional (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 on the one hand, and either lease- or free-held estate farms on the other, make up/be equal to the major (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 
 0169-5150/03/$ - see front matter© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 doi: 10.1016/50169-5150(03)00020-3 
 
 100 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 types. Estate farms were viewed through the 1970's 
 and 1980's as the engines of (away from cities) growth, and the 
 former Banda country (ruled by one) used policies that favoured 
 the huge houses. These policies included exclusive marketing rights for high-value crops, other marketing policies that squeezed smallholders, and access to give money tod inputs and credit. While Malawian farming-based growth was fairly strong during the 1970's and 
 early 1980's, this growth was misleading since it did not 
 spread to the smallholder part/area. Smallholders now make up/be equal to around 70% of the Malawian population and about 90% of the country's poor. The middle-point area under (producing crops/helping something grow) by smallholders is a little 
 0.6 ha (World Bank, 1995). The high concentration 
 of poor in areas away from cities with small (areas of owned land) helps 
 permit the government's current focus on farming-based 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) among smallholders as an engine of 
 poorness-reducing growth. 
 Recent policy changes designed to benefit smallholders have focused on two crops: combination maize varieties and burley tobacco. Malawian smallholders give/reserve some 70% of their land to maize, mostly local 
 varieties. Combination maize has not been widely adopted 
 for a few reasons, including the fact that the preferred hard combinations only became available in the early 
 1990's, the high relative cost of fertiliser, and lack of 
 credit. The new policy changes are expected to (help increase/show in a good way) uptake of combination maize and, this way, release land 
 for production of more money-making and mostly export 
 crops. Burley tobacco is the most likely candidate to 
 replace maize land. Burley tobacco is now 
 grown on some 150,000 ha of land and accounts for 
 at least 70% of Malawi's foreign exchange earnings 
 (about US$_$ (mUS$) 375 million, every year). The importance of this crop to the Malawian (process of people making, selling, and buying things) has 
 earned it the nickname 'green gold'. 
 Until (not very long ago), the Government of Malawi (helped increase/showed in a good way) 
 production of high-value cash crops like tobacco in the 
 estate part/area. Before 1990, under the Special Crops 
 Act of 1972, smallholders were prohibited from marketing tobacco. Smallholders' share of tobacco quotas 
 has, however, increased since 1990. Smallholder marketing quotas were first offered in the after-reform 
 time  to members of tobacco growers' clubs. An (middle-position) buyer program was introduced in 1993 that 
 allowed even non-members of tobacco clubs to sell 
 tobacco to registered traders. The number of smallholders producing tobacco has increased (a lot) 
 
 as a result of these policy changes (Zeller et al., 
 1997). 
 The smallholder burley tobacco program reflects a 
 big change in the Malawian farming-based development plan away from estate-led growth toward 
 a broad-based smallholder focus. Burley tobacco is 
 now seen as an engine that will provide useful things/valuable supplies to 
 cash-starved smallholders, will (combine different things together so they work as one unit) them into the 
 cash (process of people making, selling, and buying things), and allow flexibility and (trying new things out/testing ideas scientifically) in the (away from cities) part/area. The success of the program 
 depends upon the spread of burley tobacco production 
 to useful thing/valuable supply-poor farmers, the ability of smallholders 
 to (in a way that produces a lot with very little waste) produce high-quality tobacco products, 
 and complementaries between tobacco production and 
 other on-farm businesses/projects. 
 By examining the relationship between plot size 
 and cost inefficiency per area of land  in tobacco production, 
 this paper aims to discover whether the government's 
 promotion of smallholder tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) has involved an equity-(wasting very little while working or producing something) trade-off. A negative relation between cost inefficiency and tobacco plot size 
 would suggest that the policy of de-focusing tobacco production in the estate part/area while encouraging it in smallholdings has helped equity at the 
 expense of (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 This paper also examines the effect of smallholders' 
 access to credit upon their (wasting very little while working or producing something) in tobacco production. It is well known that the capital needed things 
 of tobacco farming are big. For example, Zeller 
 et al. (1997) find that input expenses per hectare 
 in Malawi are much greater for tobacco than for 
 maize or most other crops and that the cropping share 
 of tobacco in smallholdings is positively and significantly related to farmer access to credit. Because of this, 
 improving access to credit may be a necessary step 
 toward (accomplishing or gaining) more (existing all over a large area) burley tobacco production. However, besides encouraging the spread of 
 tobacco production, improved credit access may raise 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in tobacco farming by enabling farmers to 
 better (instance of buying something for money) inputs in cost (making small) proportions 
 and to use/advantage of improvements in production technology. The relationship between credit availability and 
 money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the Malawian smallholder 
 tobacco part/area has not (before that/before now) been completely 
 (examined something closely). 
 The paper's scientific plan, using data from 
 the Malawi (money-related) Markets and Household Food 
 Security Survey, consists of two steps, though in 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 keeping with recent econometric advances, the paper 
 later tries to combine the two steps into a single 
 step. First, farm-specific cost inefficiency per area of land  is 
 guessed within the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area 
 analysis (e.g. Parikh et al., 1995). Next, the guessed 
 cost inefficiency is related to farm and household 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) including tobacco plot size and access 
 to credit from formal sources. It is found that cost 
 inefficiency is negatively and significantly related 
 with tobacco land. Because of this, the government's focus 
 on smallholder led growth may in fact have involved 
 an equity-(wasting very little while working or producing something) trade-off. It is also found that 
 while access to credit by itself has no (meaningful numbers) effect on cost inefficiency, credit availability 
 has the counter-productive effect of reducing the gain 
 in cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) from an increase in tobacco land. 
 The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents a discussion of the relation 
 between credit access and cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) in farming. The section also discusses scientific issues in the 
 measurement of access to credit. Section 3 presents 
 the econometric model and discusses guess. The 
 data are described in Section 4, as are the scientific 
 results. Section 5 presents a summary of the findings 
 and the paper's end/end result. 
 
 2. Credit programs and cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) in 
 farm-related 
 Cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) results from both technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something). Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 refers to a producer's ability to get the highest possible output from a amount of inputs. Think about/believe a unit 
 isoquant with capital and labour as the inputs. This 
 isoquant is the center  of the minimum capital-labour 
 combinations necessary to produce a unit of output. 
 Hence, production is technically (producing a lot with very little waste) along it. The 
 producer of a unit of output using a capital-labour 
 combination that lies above this isoquant is, therefore, 
 technically inefficient. 
 Allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) refers to a producer's ability to 
 (make as big as possible) (money made/good thing received) given technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). A producer 
 may be technically (producing a lot with very little waste) but allocatively inefficient. 
 For example, the producer in the previous/coming before paragraph 
 may put forward  a unit of output using a combination of 
 capital and labour that lies on the unit isoquant but that 
 is more expensive than a different combination of in- 
 
 101 
 
 puts on the isoquant. The cheapest input combination 
 would, of course, be the point of tangency between 
 an isocost line and the unit isoquant. Allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) also applies to the producer's ability to choose 
 the best level of output, or even the best output 
 mix. 
 Access to credit may raise allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) in 
 farming. For example, a farmer unable to get 
 market inputs in (good) enough amounts may substitute 
 non-market inputs such as the labour of family members. However, given the opportunity cost of family 
 labour, the farmer's input combination may be more 
 expensive than an different combination consisting of 
 more (bought) inputs and less family labour. Credit 
 may allow the farmer to use market and non-market 
 inputs in a cost (making small) combination. Credit may 
 also raise allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) by increasing a farmer's 
 ability to bear risk. For example, a farmer with access to credit may become willing to adopt riskier but 
 possibly more money-making technologies, or to plant a 
 more drought prone but higher value crop. 
 Credit access may also raise the farmer's level of 
 technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). For example, credit may enable a 
 farmer to put into use more capital-intensive methods of production, (in other words) to buy more machines, a market input. If the farmer (bought something for money) new machines clearly showing/including 
 improved technology, his level of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 would rise. Further, to the extent that credit access is 
 related to the provision of technical help 
 (farming-based extension services) by credit organisations, farmers' technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) will increase. Note 
 that it is not necessary for a farmer to actually borrow 
 to benefit from credit access. For example, the mere 
 option of borrowing may lead a farmer to avoid such 
 risk reducing but (losing money) plans as (related to doing things to prevent trouble or injury) saving and the production of tougher but lower 
 value crops. Hence, a farmer with the option to borrow 
 may become willing to put the famous roll of bills 
 in his mattress to a more productive use on the farm. 
 Access to credit has generally been measured in two 
 ways in the books, namely, (divided into two) membership in credit programs, and actual loan uptake. Both 
 these measures may be no good for guessing the 
 true (proof that one thing definitely causes another) effect of credit access on money-based results (e.g. David and Meyer, 1980; Feder et al., 1990; 
 Zeller et al., 1996). First, since credit program participation and loan uptake are (something you choose to do, but is not required), the measures 
 are possibly endogenous with results such as 
 
 102 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. Alwang!Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 working well and income. A farmer who gets/helps of loans 
 from a credit (service business/government unit/power/functioning) may be found to be more productive, but it may not be decided that loans lead 
 to higher working well since it is reasonable that farmers 
 with more desire and ability are likelier to search for 
 loans. Such qualities, being unseen, are unlikely to 
 be controlled for in a moving backward relating farming-based 
 working well to farmer loan uptake, with the result that 
 the moving backward's error term, consisting partially of unseen farmer qualities, will be related to loan uptake. Bias in the OLS guess of the effect of farmer 
 loan uptake on farming-based working well is, therefore, 
 likely. 
 Even if the possible endogeneity of actual loan uptake were dealt with, (problems, delays, etc.) with this measure of 
 credit access would continue. For example, built into 
 it is the wrong idea (you think is true) that people with 
 no loan uptake are without access to credit. However, 
 this would only be true if they were denied loans. 
 More generally, actual loan uptake would be an correct measure of credit access only if credit limits 
 were (existing everywhere) binding, (in other words) if everyone's loan uptake 
 were equal to her credit limit. In reality, people often do not fully exercise their option to borrow. 
 In fact, as discussed earlier, an individual who does 
 not at all exercise the option to borrow may yet benefit from that option, for example, by feeling secure 
 enough to adopt possibly more money-making but riskier 
 plans. 
 Next, membership in a credit program often gives/discusses benefits unrelated to credit access such as reading and writing ability classes and business training. For example, members of the Malawi (away from cities) Finance Company's (MRFC) 
 credit program are given farming-based extension services. These secondary benefits of credit program participation probably confuse the true (proof that one thing definitely causes another) 
 effect of access to credit. Finally, mere membership 
 in a credit program may not (promise that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) ready access 
 to credit. In fact, many group-based credit programs 
 say that only half of a group's members may receive credit at any time. Even credit programs denying this rule rarely provide their members with 
 certain access to credit. 
 Hence, Diagne ( 1998) and Diagne and Zeller (200 I) 
 argue that the credit limit, the maximum amount that 
 may be borrowed as (stated by the person doing a survey, etc.) by survey people (who were part of a study, etc.), is a better measure of credit access. The authors reason that unlike credit program participation 
 
 or actual loan uptake, which are related to demand for 
 credit, the credit limit, reflecting mainly supply-side 
 factors such as the availability of credit programs and 
 the money supplies of lenders, is a truer measure of 
 an (coming from the outside of something) credit restriction. So, this paper measures a tobacco producing household's access to credit 
 by the sum of the credit limits of its members at credit 
 organisations. 
 To be sure, this (compared to other things) novel measure of credit 
 access is not clearly (coming from the outside of something) (uncorrelated 
 with unseen borrower (features/ qualities/ traits)). For example, Diagne (1998) agrees that the maximum amount 
 that lenders are willing to lend will mirror their test of the chance of default and other borrower 
 (features/ qualities/ traits). Hence, an (producing a lot with very little waste) tobacco farmer may 
 have a higher self-tested credit limit than an inefficient one. The OLS guessed effect of credit access 
 on cost inefficiency might, this way, be (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) downward. 
 On the other hand, since an goal of non-profit 
 agro-(money-related) institutions in LDCs may be the reduction of money-based inefficiency, more inefficient farmers may be made/gave/given greater help. The OLS guessed effect of credit access on cost inefficiency 
 might, as a result, even be (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) upward. Anyway, it is reasonable that the credit limit measure of 
 access to credit is (compared to other things) more (coming from the outside of something) than actual loan uptake or (divided into two) membership in credit 
 programs, which are carefully planned acts on the part of borrowers and, therefore, probably related to 
 their unseen attributes. 
 
 3. The econometric model 
 Think about/believe the (random/including random data points) cost function based on the 
 composed error model (e.g. Aigner et al., 1977); 
 n 
 
 InC 
 
 = a+ ,8 In Qi + L) i 
 
 In 
 
 Pu + (British pounds); 
 
 (1) 
 
 J=l 
 
 where C; represents household i' s cost per area of land  of tobacco production, Qi represents the value in money-based 
 units of the household's tobacco output per area of land, 2 Pu 
 shows/indicates the household-clearly stated/particular price of changeable input 
 2 The existence of multiple tobacco types requires/results in measurement of tobacco output per area of land  in money-based rather than physical 
 units. 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 i, and c; is a disturbance term consisting of two independent elements as follows: 
 c; 
 
 = 
 
 V; 
 
 + U; 
 
 (2) 
 
 V;, assumed to be independently and identically distributed as N(O, cr&#126; ), represents random difference/different version in 
 cost per area of land  due to extra factors such as the 
 weather and crop sicknesses. The term U; is taken to 
 represent cost inefficiency relative to the (random/including random data points) 
 cost edge of something/unexplored area, a+ ,BIn Q; + LJ=l oj In Pij + V;. It is, 
 therefore, one-sided instead of being (in a matching way) distributed about the origin. In other words, U; = 
 0 if costs are, ceteris paribus, as low as can be, and 
 U; &amp;gt; 0 if cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) is (not totally pure/not totally correct). U; is assumed 
 to be identically and independently distributed as cutting offs (at 0) of the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) distribution N(f.-L, cr&#126;). 
 The (random/including random data points) cost function ( 1), may be guessed by 
 maximum-chance. Given the above distributional 
 ideas (you think are true), 
 E(U;/c;) 
 
 = 
 
 (1 
 
 erA 
 + 
 "A 2) 
 
 [_( 
 
 *] 
 
 ¢(f.-L7) 
 l _ &amp;lt;P(&#126;-L7) - 1-L; 
 
 (3) 
 
 where ¢ and &amp;lt;P represent, (match up each pair of items in order), the standard (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) p.d.f. and the standard (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) c.d.f., A = cru / crv, 
 
 J 
 
 cr = CT&#126; + cr&#126;, and f-L7 = (c;A/cr) + (f.-L/CTA). Replacing c; in the above expression by the moving backward 
 leftover/extra and the other limits/guidelines by their ML guesses produces an estimate, [h of farm-specific cost inefficiency (Jondrow et al., 1982). 
 Next, the equation, 
 
 (4) 
 is guessed by OLS, where A; represents household i's 
 tobacco land, L; represents the household's access 
 to credit from formal sources measured as the sum of 
 its members' self reported credit limits, (numbers that change/things that change) X; 
 consist of other farm and household (features/ qualities/ traits), 
 and e; represents the moving backward error. In order to examine whether the effect of tobacco plot size on cost inefficiency is influenced by credit access, the equation, 
 
 U; = 
 
 A;n1 
 
 + A; L;n2 + L;n3 + X;n4 + e; 
 
 (5) 
 
 is also guessed. (meaningful numbers) of the interaction between tobacco land and credit access, A;L;, 
 will produce the end/end result that access to credit influences the not important effect of tobacco land on cost 
 inefficiency. 
 
 103 
 
 The above two-stage method, consisting of ML guess of a (random/including random data points) cost edge of something/unexplored area followed by OLS 
 guess of an equation relating (described the future) cost inefficiency to the possible (things that decide other things) of cost inefficiency, has lately been criticised. For one, a moving backward 
 model of (described the future) inefficiency effects in Stage 2 argues with the idea (you think is true) in Stage 1 of identically distributed inefficiency effects (Battese and Coelli, 1995). 
 Hence, the twin steps are (using other choices) combined into a 
 single step according the model by Battese and Coelli 
 (1995). It is continued to be assumed that V;, random 
 difference/different version in cost per area of land  due to extra factors 
 such as the weather, is independently and identically 
 distributed as N(O, cr&#126;). However, U;, the cost inefficiency part, is now assumed to be independently, but not identically, distributed as cutting offs 
 (at 0) of the (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) distribution N(Z;B, cru). In other 
 words, the mean of the cost inefficiency effect is assumed to be a function of (numbers that change/things that change) Z;, taken in the 
 scientific guess, to be identical to the move backwardors 
 in (5). This (detailed description of exactly what is required) permits the coefficients e to 
 be guessed together with the coefficients of the cost 
 edge of something/unexplored area (1). 
 
 4. The data and scientific results 
 Data for the study are drawn from the Malawi (money-related) Markets and Household Food Security Survey 
 conducted both/together in 1995 by the International Food 
 Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and the Department 
 of (away from cities) Development (DRP) of the Bunda College 
 of Farming of the University of Malawi. A total 
 of 404 (away from cities) families in 45 villages in five districts 
 of Malawi were surveyed. The yearlong survey (from 
 February to December) consisted of three rounds. The 
 scientific analyses are managed and did/done upon data from the 
 second round of the survey, since only it contained 
 the necessary described/explained tobacco production data. While 
 rarely in household surveys is labour input disaggregated by crop, these data permit the (putting a value on something) of labour 
 used/paid in tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) alone towards calculation of the cost per area of land  of tobacco production. 
 There are four main credit and savings programs now operating in Malawi: the Malawi 
 (away from cities) Finance Company (MRFC), Promotion of 
 Micro-Businesses/projects for (away from cities) Women (PMERW), the 
 Malawi Mudzi Fund (MMF), and the Malawi Union 
 
 104 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 of Savings and Credit Co-operatives (MUSCCO). 
 The first three programs are based on the ways of thinking/basic truths/rules 
 of group lending, while MUSCCO is an individual membership based union organisation. MRFC 
 and MUSCCO provide seasonal farming-based credit, 
 mostly for tobacco and maize, though the former does 
 not serve families with less than half a hectare of 
 land. PMERW and MMF, operating in only a few 
 districts, (focus on doing one thing very well) in credit for off-farm businesses/projects. 
 There are, also, many small credit programs run by NGOs and international government 
 organisations. 
 The above 404 (away from cities) families do not make up/be equal to a 
 random sample. Since it was necessary to include (good) enough numbers of credit program people (who were part of a study, etc.) in the 
 survey, the low participation rate in credit programs 
 in Malawi made random sampling silly/not doable. Because of this, 
 the surveyors chose to/chosen to layered random sampling. 
 The 4700 (away from cities) families listed in the 45 villages covered by the Malawi village (official count of everyone who lives in a country, city, etc.)  were divided into three layers: a layer consisting of current 
 people (who were part of a study, etc.) in the above four credit programs, a layer consisting of past people (who were part of a study, etc.) (mostly in a failed 
 government credit program), and a layer consisting 
 of families that had never participated in a credit 
 program. A random sample was chosen from each 
 layer such that about half of the final sample of 404 
 families consisted of current credit program people (who were part of a study, etc.), with past people (who were part of a study, etc.) and non-people (who were part of a study, etc.) 
 making up about equal parts of/amounts of the rest. So, the survey over samples current credit 
 program people (who were part of a study, etc.). The scientific guess incorporates sampling weights in an attempt to account for 
 this over sampling. 
 In each round of the Malawi (money-related) Markets and 
 Household Food Security Survey, people who responded over 17 
 years old were asked about the maximum amount 
 they might possibly have borrowed during the period of recall. A household's access to credit from formal sources may, this way, be calculated as the sum of the 
 credit limits of its members at credit organisations. 
 The cost per area of land  of tobacco production is measured 
 as the sum of the costs of seed, fertiliser, bug-killer, and 
 labour input, and the costs of moving inputs to the 
 farm and moving the crop to market. The inputs 
 whose log prices are included in the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of 
 the (random/including random data points) cost function (1), are: labour, seed, fertiliser, and bug-killer. Farm and household characteris- 
 
 muscle twitches/weird behaviors with reasonable holding upon cost inefficiency, the 
 (numbers that change/things that change) Xi in (4) and (5), include the value of farm 
 valuable things, farm size, household size, the average age of 
 12-year-old or older family members, the proportion 
 of family members (old/allowed to get old/got older) 12 and above able to read and 
 write Chichewa, the proportion able to read and write 
 English, and the proportions with the educational (written proof of something): First (or most important) School Leaving Certificate (Grade 
 8), Junior Certificate (Grade 10), and M.S.C.E. certificate (Grade 12). (connected/related) data were available for 
 70 tobacco helping grow families. However, it was 
 discovered that tobacco land (in a mistaken way) went beyond 
 farm size in three of these families, no doubt, due 
 to coding error. The three families were dropped, 
 producing/giving up a final sample of 67 families. Table 1 
 presents the (unweighted) sample means and standard 
 mistakes of the (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Table 2 presents weighted maximum-chance 3 guesses of the (random/including random data points) cost edge of something/unexplored area. The cost per 
 area of land  of producing tobacco increases (a lot) in 
 the value of output per area of land, in the hourly wage, in the 
 price per kilogram of tobacco seed, and in the price 
 per kilogram of fertiliser. Cost, however, appears to 
 decrease in the cost per kilogram of bug-killer. 
 Table 3 presents weighted OLS guesses of (4) and 
 (5). It is assumed that tobacco land is an (coming from the outside of something) move backwardor, or that farmers first set apart land between tobacco and other crops and only (after that) 
 make their tobacco inputs use decisions. This 
 is a reasonable idea (you think is true) in the Malawian big picture. 
 The average cropping share of tobacco in Malawian 
 smallholdings is only about 2% (Diagne and Zeller, 
 2001). Diagne and Zeller (2001) argue that this 
 small cropping share is due to smallholders' desire 
 for independence in maize, the Malawian dietary 
 staple. It is significant in this big picture  that 90% of 
 Malawian smallholders in a study by Smale and Phiri 
 (1998) declared that the ability to produce maize for 
 self-consumption was their most important judging requirement 
 of well being. Diagne and Zeller (200 1) argue that 
 such independence may be necessary in the face of 
 the (not working properly) of (away from cities) maize markets, caused by 
 a lack of marketable extra of maize in smallholdings 
 and an not enough transportation (set of machines). So, 
 3 The weighted log-chance function is simply the sum over 
 all i of w; log(p;), where w; is the sampling weight connected with 
 the ith tobacco farming household and p; is the ith log chance. 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. Alwang I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 105 
 
 Table 1 
 Sample means and standard mistakes (unweighted) 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Mean 
 
 Standard moving away 
 
 In( cost of producing tobacco per acre) 
 ln(value of tobacco production per acre) 
 ln(hourly wage) 
 ln(price of seed/kg) 
 ln(price of fertiliser/kg) 
 ln(price of bug-killer/kg) 
 Household credit limit at formal credit institutions 
 Tobacco land 
 Household credit limit at formal credit institutions x tobacco land 
 Farm land 
 Value of farm valuable things 
 Household size 
 Average age of+ 12-year-old household members 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members able to read and write in Chichewa 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members able to read and write in English 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with First (or most important) School Leaving Certificate 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Junior Certificate 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with M.S.C.E. certificate 
 
 6.815 
 7.529 
 -0.770 
 7.158 
 0.678 
 4.769 
 278.508 
 1.612 
 738.209 
 4.809 
 740.731 
 6.328 
 30.453 
 0.282 
 0.161 
 0.147 
 0.030 
 0.014 
 
 0.927 
 1.278 
 0.946 
 0.499 
 0.184 
 1.407 
 540.351 
 1.314 
 2770.504 
 2.617 
 1232.080 
 2.338 
 8.762 
 0.319 
 0.225 
 0.209 
 0.100 
 0.059 
 
 67 
 
 N 
 
 Note: All money-based values are in current Malawi Kwacha (MK). 
 
 it is believable that smallholders' food security concerns 
 lead them to first set apart most of their land to 
 maize, leaving but little for tobacco, and only then to 
 make their tobacco inputs application decisions. 
 It is found that cost inefficiency per area of land  significantly decreases in tobacco land. This hints that 
 the government's policy of (helping increase/showing in a good way) tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) in smallholdings instead of tobacco huge houses 
 has made production of this premier cash crop more 
 cost inefficient, even if it has (helped increase/showed in a good way) equity in the 
 (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things). An inverse relation between cost inefficiency and tobacco plot size is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with Diagne 
 
 Table 2 
 Weighted ML guesses of the (random/including random data points) cost edge of something/unexplored area 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 Constant 
 In( value of tobacco production per acre) 
 ln(hourly wage) 
 ln(price of seed/kg) 
 ln(price of fertiliser/kg) 
 1n(price of bug-killer/kg) 
 log-chance 
 Note: Numbers in parentheses represent t-ratios. 
 
 Coefficient 
 0.434 
 0.409 
 0.483 
 0.353 
 1.297 
 -0.113 
 -43.514 
 
 (0.435) 
 (10.470) 
 (7.726) 
 (2.337) 
 (5.873) 
 ( -1.859) 
 
 and Zeller's (2001) finding that Malawian smallholders, especially those farming plots of a total size of 
 &amp;lt;0.25 ha (0.62 areas of land), are likely to experience/likely to get applying too much/too many 
 amounts of inputs, especially fertiliser. The authors 
 argue that farmers may be trying to pay 
 for the lack of land by the over-use of inputs, and 
 that this may be especially true in tobacco farming 
 since the crop is set apart and given out only about 2% of the average 0.7 ha (1.73 areas of land) of land helped grow by a smallholder. So, increase in tobacco land may reduce 
 this (making up for something/paying for something) over-use of inputs, causing a decline in cost inefficiency per area of land. This has the important hint/result/effect that if the mean cropping share of 
 tobacco in smallholdings were, by a combination of 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something), raised from its current low value of 2%, 
 average cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) in smallholder tobacco production would rise. Since a likely reason for this low cropping share is smallholders' desire for independence 
 in maize, with roots in the poor functioning of (away from cities) 
 maize markets, tobacco's cropping share in smallholdings might increase if the government improved the 
 functioning of (away from cities) maize markets, e.g. by upgrading 
 the (away from cities) transportation (set of machines). 
 The guesses in Table 3 also point to/show that a tobacco 
 farming household's credit limit at credit organisations 
 
 106 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 Table 3 
 (things that decide other things) of cost inefficiency: weighted OLS guesses 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Coefficients Eq. (4) 
 
 Coefficients Eq. (5) 
 
 Constant 
 Household credit limit at formal credit institutions 
 Tobacco land 
 Household credit limit at formal credit institutions x tobacco land 
 Value of farm valuable things 
 Farm land 
 Household size 
 Average age of + 12-year-old household members 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members able to read and write in Chichewa 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members able to read and write in English 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with First (or most important) School Leaving Certificate 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Junior Certificate 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with M.S.C.E. certificate 
 
 -0.560 ( -1.696) 
 0.0002 ( 1.025) 
 -0.283 ( -3.215) 
 
 -0.440 (-1.369) 
 -0.0002 (-0.962) 
 -0.400 ( -4.085) 
 0.0001 (2.369) 
 0.00002 (0.226) 
 0.078 (2.637) 
 0.093 (3.289) 
 0.030 (3.898) 
 -0.616 ( -2.550) 
 1.058 (3.151) 
 -0.208 (-0.555) 
 0.053 (0.058) 
 -1.148 ( -1.009) 
 
 R2 
 
 0.00004 (0.491) 
 0.074 (2.390) 
 0.089 (3.035) 
 0.029 (3.643) 
 -0.574 ( -2.288) 
 1.016 (2.911) 
 -0.073 ( -0.189) 
 -0.026 ( -0.027) 
 -1.190 ( -1.006) 
 0.608 
 
 0.645 
 
 Note: Numbers in parentheses represent t-ratios; (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) = guessed farm-specific cost inefficiency; weighted sample mean of 
 (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) = 0.646. 
 
 does not by itself significantly affect cost inefficiency. 
 However, the sign of the guessed coefficient of the 
 interaction between tobacco land and credit access, 
 together with the (meaningful numbers) of this (number or thing that changes), hints that the helpful effect of a larger tobacco plot size on cost inefficiency is worn-away by access 
 to credit. Credit in Malawi is often paid in the 
 form of farming-based inputs like fertiliser. The fertiliser 
 packages are standardised for only a small number of 
 plot sizes with the result that a farmer may be lent 
 an too much/too many amount of fertiliser (Diagne and Zeller, 
 2001). To the extent that a household's credit limit is 
 related to its actual loan uptake, 4 this type of loan 
 payment may add/give to the above negative effect of the credit limit upon the gain in cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 from a larger tobacco plot size. In other words, the 
 (making up for something/paying for something) over-use of inputs may reduce with increased tobacco land, but a (happening together) increase 
 in access to credit may add/give to toughness in 
 farmers' too much/too many input application per tobacco area of land. 
 There are some other findings of interest. For 
 example, controlling for tobacco land, total farm 
 land and cost inefficiency in tobacco production are 
 positively related. Holding tobacco land constant, 
 larger farms naturally have more land under crops 
 
 other than tobacco, such as maize, the major Malawian 
 food crop. To the extent that these crops require large 
 applications of market inputs like fertiliser, 5 that farmers are useful thing/valuable supply strapped, and that market inputs are in 
 (compared to other things) short supply, the amounts per area of land  of such 
 inputs applied to tobacco may be inversely related to 
 land under other crops. Allocative inefficiency in 
 input application may result. For example, the reduced 
 use of market inputs in tobacco may be went with 
 by a (making up for something/paying for something) over-application of non-market inputs such as household labour. Cost inefficiency per 
 area of land  may as a result rise. It is important/famous in this connection that the guesses in Table 3 are a strong sign of a 
 habit/desire toward the over-use of family labour on tobacco plots, in that cost inefficiency per area of land  increases 
 in the number of household members. (in almost the same way), an increase in the average age of household members older 
 than 11, agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with a rise in the number of members of working age, raises cost inefficiency per area of land 
 in tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow). There is indication that cost 
 inefficiency is inversely related to household human 
 capital measured as the proportion of household members older than 11 who are able to read and write in Chichewa, the 
 local language. It is confusing, however, that cost inefficiency increases (a lot) in the proportion able to read and write 
 
 4 Sample relationship between the household credit limit and 
 actual loan uptake is 0.764. 
 
 5 Combination maize, for instance, needs/demands large and good fertiliser 
 applications. 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. Alwang I Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 in English. Maybe non-farm earnings opportunities 
 increase in English reading and writing ability so that families with a 
 greater proportion of members able to read and write in English are 
 less (depending on and needing) farm incomes and, therefore, more 
 likely to experience/likely to get inefficiency in tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow). 
 Table 4 presents joint ML guesses of the (random/including random data points) cost edge of something/unexplored area and the (things that decide other things) of mean cost inefficiency, having to do with the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area model 
 by Battese and Coelli (1995). Unfortunately, sampling 
 weights could not be incorporated in the guess 
 given the limits of the Fortran program (Edge of something/unexplored area 
 Version 4.1) developed by these authors. Hence, the 
 point guesses in Table 4 are often very (much) different 
 from those in Tables 2 and 3 even if they are a strong sign of the same broad (popular things/general ways things are going). The cost per area of land  of tobacco production increases (a lot) in the value 
 of tobacco output per area of land, in the hourly wage rate, 
 in the price per kilogram of seed and in the price per 
 kilogram of fertiliser. As before, cost appears negatively related to the price per kilogram of bug-killer 
 though the (number or thing that changes) not (meaningful numbers) by these 
 unweighted guesses. Mean cost inefficiency appears 
 
 107 
 
 negatively and significantly related to tobacco plot 
 size, and, as before, there is indication that the gain in 
 cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) from a larger plot size is reduced by access to credit, though credit access by itself has no (related to numbers) visible effect on mean cost inefficiency. 
 In sum, the major findings in Table 3 are supported/judged as correct. 
 The above findings may be contrasted with the results from two other studies relating (wasting very little while working or producing something) in farming-based production, measured within the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 of (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area analysis, to credit availability and 
 plot size. Parikh et al. (1995) examine the (things that decide other things) 
 of cost inefficiency, including credit availability and 
 farm size, in Pakistani farming. Credit availability 
 is defined as actual loan uptake per farm area of land. The 
 authors find that farmers with greater loan uptake are 
 less cost inefficient. However, since this measure of 
 credit access is possibly endogenous as discussed, 
 the above finding may not be relied upon. The authors 
 also find that cost inefficiency increases in farm size. 
 Note, though, that the authors group across at least 
 four crops, namely, wheat, maize, sugarcane, and vegetables. This study, on the other hand, focuses upon a 
 
 Table 4 
 The (random/including random data points) cost edge of something/unexplored area and (things that decide other things) of mean cost inefficiency guessed both/together: unweighted ML guesses 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Coefficient 
 
 Guesses of the (random/including random data points) cost edge of something/unexplored area 
 Constant 
 ln(value of tobacco production Per acre) 
 ln(hourly wage) 
 ln(price of seed/kg) 
 ln(price of fertiliser/kg) 
 ln(price of bug-killer/kg) 
 
 1.216 
 0.328 
 0.518 
 0.257 
 1.327 
 -0.032 
 
 (things that decide other things) of mean cost inefficiency 
 Constant 
 Household credit limit at formal credit institutions 
 Tobacco land 
 Household credit limit at formal credit institutions x tobacco land 
 Value of farm valuable things 
 Farm land 
 Household size 
 Average age of+ 12-year-old household members 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members able to read and write in Chichewa 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members able to read and write in English 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with First (or most important) School Leaving Certificate 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with Junior Certificate 
 Proportion of + 12-year-old household members with M.S.C.E. certificate 
 
 0.610 (0.726) 
 0.00007 (0.194) 
 -0.722 ( -2.073) 
 0.0002 (1.684) 
 -0.00005 ( -0.286) 
 0.058 (0.972) 
 0.038 (0.708) 
 0.019 (1.220) 
 -0.346 ( -0.673) 
 0.752 (1.264) 
 -0.391 ( -0.563) 
 -0.227 ( -0.189) 
 -0.092 ( -0.037) 
 
 log-chance 
 Note: Numbers in parentheses represent !-ratios. 
 
 49.247 
 
 (1.636) 
 (6.058) 
 (5.137) 
 (2.342) 
 (3.581) 
 ( -0.466) 
 
 108 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 single crop. Therefore, the finding that Malawian tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) is less cost inefficient in larger plots 
 may not be directly compared with the above finding 
 that cost inefficiency in Pakistani farming increases 
 in holding size. 
 Ali and Flinn (1989) examine (money made/good thing received), not cost, 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) among basmati rice producers in the Punjab area of control/area of land of Pakistan. Still, there are (things that are almost the same as other things) 
 between the ideas of cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) and profit 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in that both arise from technical as well 
 as allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something). Farmers, in this study, were 
 asked if a lack of credit slowed their (instance of buying something for money) of 
 fertiliser. Because of this, a (divided into two) indicator of credit 
 non-availability measures access to credit. Credit 
 non-availability was positively and significantly related to (make money/get something good) inefficiency. Since a farmer referring to credit 
 non-availability is one who has tried to borrow, 
 this measure of credit access is, like actual loan uptake, possibly endogenous. The authors also find 
 that profit inefficiency increases in farm size, though 
 not significantly so. 
 
 5. End/end result 
 The promotion of tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) is a key part of the Malawian plan of smallholder-led 
 growth. Given the big capital needed things of 
 tobacco farming, improving farmers' access to credit 
 may be necessary toward (accomplishing or gaining) more (existing all over a large area) 
 burley tobacco production. In fact, there is (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 of positive relationship between access to credit and 
 the cropping share of tobacco in smallholdings (Zeller 
 et al., 1997). However, this paper finds no (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of 
 a positive relation between access to credit from formal sources and (wasting very little while working or producing something) in tobacco farming. So, 
 improving farmers' access to credit in Malawi will 
 likely (help increase/show in a good way) tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) only along the long/big margin. 
 Unlike most analyses of the effects of credit, this 
 paper measures household access to credit from formal sources as the sum of members' (stated by the person doing a survey, etc.) 
 credit limits at credit organisations. It has (before that/before now) 
 been argued that the credit limit is a truer measure 
 of an (coming from the outside of something) credit restriction since it reflects 
 mostly supply-side factors such as the availability of 
 credit programs and the money supplies of lenders 
 (Diagne, 1998; Diagne and Zeller, 2001). 
 
 The paper also finds that tobacco (producing crops/helping something grow) is less 
 cost inefficient on larger plots. This may be taken 
 as a strong sign of an equity-(wasting very little while working or producing something) trade-off in the 
 Malawian tobacco part/area. The finding hints that 
 the Government of Malawi's policy of encouraging tobacco production by smallholders instead of supporting the previous control of the tobacco huge houses, 
 has led to (lowering in number/getting worse) cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the production of 
 this premier cash crop, even if it has (helped increase/showed in a good way) equity 
 in the (away from cities) (process of people making, selling, and buying things). It also hints that increasing 
 the cropping share of tobacco in smallholdings from 
 its current low levels will tend to raise the money-based 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of tobacco production. 
 The paper also uncovers (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that access to 
 credit retards the gain in cost (wasting very little while working or producing something) from an increase in tobacco land. This hints that the methods of credit payment in (away from cities) Malawi are broken. 
 In fact, broken credit payment (machines/methods/ways) may 
 partially explain why access to credit by itself, (even though there is the existence of) 
 its possible benefits, has no (related to numbers) visible 
 effect on cost inefficiency. 
 Our findings have two broad policy effects/results/suggestions. 
 As argued, an increase in the cropping share of tobacco in smallholdings may reduce cost inefficiency 
 in the production of this crop. Therefore, policies that 
 rid farmers of their habit/desire to set apart most of 
 their (areas of owned land) to maize may raise (wasting very little while working or producing something) in tobacco production. Such policies may include efforts to 
 improve the functioning of (away from cities) maize markets so as 
 to reduce the need for independence in maize. Next, 
 credit payment (machines/methods/ways) in Malawi may require a degree of reform. It should be secured/made sure of that 
 farmers are not lent too much/too many amounts of expensive inputs. Tobacco is an very important cash crop to 
 the Malawian (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and it is a good idea that the 
 Government of Malawi energetically chase after policies to 
 raise money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) in its production. 
 
 Uncited references 
 Diagne et al. (1995), CIMMYT (1998). 
 
 Responses 
 Helpful comments from Winford Masanjala are 
 thankfully admitted/recognized. 
 
 G. Hazarika, J. A/wang/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 99-109 
 
 References 
 Aigner, D., Knox Lovell, C.A., Schmidt, P., 1977. Creation and 
 guess of (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function models. J. 
 Econometrics 6, 21-37. 
 Ali, M., Flinn, J.C., 1989. Profit (wasting very little while working or producing something) among basmati rice 
 producers in Pakistan Punjab. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 71, 303310. 
 Battese, G.E., Coelli, T.J., 1995. A model for technical inefficiency 
 effects in a (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area production function for panel 
 data. Scientific Econ. 20, 325-332. 
 CIMMYT Money flow Working Paper 1998-2001, Centro 
 Internacional de Mejormiento de Maiz y Trigo (CIMMYT), 
 Mexico city. 
 David, C., Meyer, W., 1980. Measuring the farm level hit/effect of 
 farming-based loans in poor countries: a review article. 
 In: Howell, J. (Ed.), Borrowers and Lenders: (away from cities) (money-related) 
 Markets and Institutions in Developing Countries. Across the ocean 
 Development Institute, London. 
 Diagne, A., 1998. Hit/effect of Access to Credit on Income and 
 Food Security in Malawi. IFPRI FCND Discussion Paper 
 No. 46, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), 
 Washington, DC. 
 Diagne, A., Zeller, M., 2001. Access to Credit and its 
 Hit/effect on Welfare in Malawi. IFPRI Research Report No. 
 116, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), 
 Washington, DC. 
 Diagne, A., Zeller, M., Mataya, C., 1995. (away from cities) (money-related) Markets 
 and Household Food Security: Hits/affects of Access to Credit 
 on the Socio-Money-based Situation of (away from cities) Families in 
 Malawi. (meantime/temporary time) Report Submitted to the Ministry of Women, 
 
 109 
 
 Children Affairs, Community Services and Social Welfare 
 (MOWCACSSW) and Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische 
 Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) in Malawi. 
 Feder, G., Lau, L.J., Lin, J.Y., Luo, X., 1990. The relationship 
 between credit and working well in Chinese farming: a 
 microeconomic model of unbalance. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 
 72, 1151-1157. 
 Jondrow, J., Knox Lovell, C.A., Materov, I.S., Schmidt, P., 1982. 
 On the guess of technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the (random/including random data points) 
 edge of something/unexplored area production function. J. Econometrics 19, 233-238. 
 Parikh, A., Ali, F., Shah, M.K., 1995. Measurement of money-based 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) in Pakistani farming. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 77, 
 675-685. 
 Smale, M., Phiri, A., 1998. Institutional Change and (instances where things are uneven and interrupted) 
 in Farmers' Use of Combination Maize in Malawi: Findings From 
 the 1996-1997 CIMMYT/MoALD. 
 Zeller, M., Ahmed, A., Babu, S., Broca, S., Diagne, A., Sharma, 
 M., 1996. (away from cities) (money-related) Policies for Food Security of the 
 Poor: Ways of doing things for a Multi-Country Research Project. 
 IFPRI FCND Discussion Paper No. 11, International Food 
 Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC. 
 Zeller, M., Diagne, A., Mataya, C., 1997. Market Access by 
 Smallholder Farmers in Malawi: Effects/results/suggestions for Technology 
 Adoption, Farming-based Working well, and Crop Income. IFPRI 
 FCND Discussion Paper No. 35, International Food Policy 
 Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC. 
 World Bank, 1995. Malawi's (Hiring, training, and firing department) and Poorness: 
 Profiles and (things that are important) for Action. Southern Africa Department, 
 The World Bank, Washington, DC. 
 World Bank, 2000. World Development Report. The World Bank, 
 Washington, DC. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
