AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Attribution and other problems in testing the 
 returns to farming-based R&amp;D 
 Julian M. Alston a,*, Philip G. Pardey b 
 a 
 
 Department of Farming-based and useful thing/valuable supply Money flow, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA 
 b International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC 20006, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 Guessed rates of return to research are twisted/partially untrue/lied about by problems of attributing the credit for particular research results, or for 
 particular research-caused working well increases, among research expenses begun/tried at different times, in different 
 places, and by different (services businesses/government units). A complete test of the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from past money-based tests of the returns 
 to farming-based R&amp;D points to/shows that studies generally report high rates of return, with huge difference/different version among studies, but 
 that much of this (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) has been dirtied by not enough attention to attribution problems. This paper raises these concerns 
 in a general way and illustrates their importance with reference to two particular types of attribution problem. First, we 
 think about/believe the problem of accounting for locational spillovers in attributing varietal-improvement technology among research 
 performers, using US wheat varieties as an example. Second, we think about/believe the time-related parts of the attribution problem 
 using the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of research falls behind  in econometric models to illustrate the problem of attributing group working well 
 gains to research expenses made at different times. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Rates of return; Attribution; Farming-based R&amp;D; Research spillovers 
 
 1. Introduction 
 It is widely believed that (government) farming-based 
 R&amp;D has paid rich dividends for (community of people/all good people in the world) as a 
 whole; opposite views are the exception, e.g. Pasour 
 and Johnson (1982), and Kealey (1996). But even 
 those who believe that farming-based R&amp;D is (or has 
 been) a good investment for (community of people/all good people in the world) may be full of doubt about some of the very high reported guesses of 
 rates of return to research. An interest in the result 
 might lead to (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) guesses sometimes - rate 
 of return guesses are often meant to be used to 
 permit past investments and shore up support for future investments, and both unbelievably high and bad/unhelpful results are less likely to be acceptable for 
 
 * Corresponding author. 
 E-mail address: julian@primal.ucdavis.edu (J.M. Alston). 
 
 this purpose. Rates of return are also likely to involve 
 errors even when the analyst is fair/not interested because 
 it is basically and mostly hard to identify which research investment was responsible for a particular working well 
 improvement (or, (in the opposite way), which parts of the working well benefits are (named after/discovered by/caused by) a particular research investment). 
 Think about/believe an ex post analysis of the (thing that's given/work that's done) of 
 farming-based R&amp;D by the California Farming-based Experiment Station (CAES) to current working well in 
 California. For such an analysis we want to be able to 
 meaningfully measure working well growth and then 
 attribute it among those investments by the CAES, 
 other public R&amp;D investments by the California state 
 government and by other states and the US Department of Farming (USDA), international R&amp;D, and 
 private R&amp;D investments. More than that, we have to attribute the working well growth not just between the 
 
 0169-5150/01/$- see front matter© 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: SO 169-5150(0 1 )00072-X 
 
 142 
 
 J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 CAES research and the other elements at a point in 
 time, but among these elements over time, including 
 the distant as well as the recent past. We want to be 
 able to say which research, managed and did/done (or paid for) by 
 whom, and, especially, when, was responsible for a 
 particular working well improvement. 
 This attribution problem is hard; it relates 
 to the appropriability problem that supports the 
 in-way of thinking/basic truth/rule argument for government involvement in 
 research. Spillover produces of research, where research 
 conducted by one firm (or state or country) yields 
 benefits for free-riders, account for (people and businesses that are not part of the government) 
 under-investment and the possibility of high social 
 rates of return. If it were easy to attribute benefits 
 to particular investments, it should be possible to 
 figure out institutions to make the benefits appropriable. 
 So, the (features/ qualities/ traits) of research that give rise to 
 the (possibility of/possible happening of)  high rates of return also give rise to 
 measurement problems. 
 Griliches (1979) laid out an (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal) for work on 
 understanding the link between R&amp;D and working well change, which he repeated in Griliches (2001). 
 Taking inspiration from these and other (things that are given/work that's done) 
 from Griliches, in this article we retest/re-evaluate the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) 
 on rates of return to farming-based research with a focus on the nature of the attribution problem and the 
 likely effects/results/suggestions of ordinary test methods. We suggest that the effects of attribution problems 
 have not been neutral; on the whole, rate of return guesses are likely to have been (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) up. 
 
 2. Summary of the books 
 The books on returns to farming-based research 
 itself has been the subject of a few studies. For 
 instance, partial occasional tabulations and story 
 reviews can be found in Evenson et al. (1979), 
 Echeverria (1990), Alston and Pardey (1996), and 
 Fuglie et al. (1996). Alston et al. (2000a,b) provide 
 a complete collection, (creation/combination), and (numbers-based) analysis of rate of return guesses that 
 shows/tells about interesting and useful patterns. A total of 292 
 benefit-cost studies of farming-based R&amp;D (including 
 extension) were collected, and these studies provide 
 1886 separate guesses of rates of return to farming-based R&amp;D that range from small negative numbers 
 to more than 700,000% per year. This large range 
 
 reflects difference/different version within groups (such as applied against/compared to/or basic research, or research on valuable things from nature 
 against/compared to/or valuable things) more than among groups, and 
 such large within-group difference/different version makes it hard 
 to see  differences among groups. The guessed 
 once-a-year rates of return averaged 99.6% for research 
 only, 47.6% for research and extension combined, and 
 84.6% for extension only. More than that, the distributions 
 are usually positively skewed, with a significant 
 number of very high rates of return. Table 1 
 shows the ranges of rates of return and the mean, 
 standard moving away, mode, and middle-point rates of return 
 for a sub-sample of the data, according to the nature 
 and valuable thing (direction of pointing/way of thinking/information meeting) of the research and the 
 location of the research performer. The 
 majority of studies reported the returns to all 
 research (mainly returns to group together investments in 
 farming-based R&amp;D), while just over half the (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) related to field crops research and research 
 performed in developed countries. 
 The guesses in Table 1 mostly refer to real 
 (i.e. inflation (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions)), not important (i.e. for (in small steps up) 
 research expenses), ex post (i.e. for past investments), internal rates of return (IRRs). The hint/result/effect 
 when reporting an IRR is that the benefits from the research are being tested like they can be reinvested, along with the original investment, at the same 
 rate of return. Since the benefits often build up to farmers and people who usually do not have opportunities to invest at such high rates, it is worth house/living 
 briefly on what is suggested by high IRRs. If the investment of US$_$ 1.21 billion (bUS$) in 1980 in US public 
 farming-based R&amp;D had earned an IRR of 48% per year, the mean for the studies of US farming in 
 group, the saved stream of benefits would 
 have been worth 3000 bUS$ (1980 dollars) by the year 
 2000, 4.5 months worth of total US GDP, and more 
 than 20 years worth of US farming-based GDP. This is 
 the suggested benefit from the investment in 1980 alone. 
 Such calculations might give rise to doubts about 
 whether the guessed rates of return really represent 
 IRRs, or for that matter the true returns to research. 
 Of course, even though there is a (like nothing else) true rate of 
 return to any particular set of past investments, there 
 is no such thing as the rate of return to farming-based 
 research. In a typical farming-based research (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection), 
 some (maybe most) investments yield no benefits 
 at all, while others yield very high returns, 
 
 J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 143 
 
 Table 1 
 Rates of return to farming-based R&amp;D" 
 Number of 
 guesses (count) 
 
 Rates of return (% per year) 
 Mean 
 
 Standard moving away 
 
 Mode 
 
 Middle-point 
 
 Minimum 
 
 Maximum 
 
 Nature of research 
 Basic 
 Applied 
 All research 
 Research &amp; extension 
 
 30 
 192 
 904 
 643 
 
 79.2 
 163.5 
 88.4 
 46.8 
 
 88.7 
 557.0 
 148.6 
 43.4 
 
 75.0 
 38.0 
 46.0 
 28.0 
 
 61.3 
 46.0 
 49.0 
 36.0 
 
 -1.3 
 6.0 
 -7.4 
 -100 
 
 457 
 5645 
 1720 
 430 
 
 Valuable thing orientation 
 Multicommodity 
 Field crops 
 Animals 
 Tree crops 
 Valuable things from nature 
 
 436 
 916 
 233 
 108 
 78 
 
 80.3 
 74.3 
 120.7 
 87.6 
 37.6 
 
 110.7 
 139.4 
 481.1 
 216.4 
 65.0 
 
 58.0 
 40.0 
 14.0 
 20.0 
 7.0 
 
 47.1 
 43.6 
 53.0 
 33.3 
 16.5 
 
 -1.0 
 -100.0 
 2.5 
 1.4 
 0.0 
 
 1219 
 1720 
 5645 
 1736 
 457 
 
 Location 
 Developed countries 
 Developing countries 
 Multiregional 
 IARC 
 
 990 
 683 
 74 
 62 
 
 98.2 
 60.1 
 58.8 
 77.8 
 
 278.1 
 84.1 
 98.3 
 188.6 
 
 19.0 
 46.0 
 32.0 
 26.0 
 
 46.0 
 43.0 
 34.0 
 40.0 
 
 -14.9 
 -100.0 
 -47.5 
 9.9 
 
 5645 
 1490 
 677 
 1490 
 
 1772 
 
 81.2 
 
 216.1 
 
 46.0 
 
 44.0 
 
 -100.0 
 
 5645 
 
 All studies 
 
 a Source: Changed from Alston et a!. (2000a; Tables 15 and 17). Sample leaves out/keeps out two extreme (things that aren't part of the main group) and includes only returns to 
 research and combined research and extension, so that the overall sample size is 1772. 
 
 (good) enough to make the (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection) as a whole money-making. 
 Even though very high rates of return are not unbelievable in every big picture, they are much less reasonable 
 for the more grouped investments represented by 
 long/big (mixes of stocks, bonds, etc./document collections). 
 
 3. Measurement issues and problems 
 Problems with data, measurement error or mistakes in thinking can result in an guessed rate of return that 
 is higher or lower than the true value. One important 
 problem is to define the (connected/related) (going against known facts) other choice. Especially, to define what the world might 
 be like without the particular research investment being tested, we have to take account of 
 other things that might also be caused to change. Holding the right things constant is necessary to get a 
 stream of benefits that properly matches the stream of 
 expenses being tested. 
 Alston and Pardey (1996, Chapter 6) suggest that 
 the guessed rates of return to R&amp;D in the books 
 have tended to be over-hopeful, relative to the similar true values, because the commonly used 
 
 procedures understate the costs, overstate the benefits, 
 and often pre-plan the research lag structure (that 
 relates changes in working well to past investments in 
 research) in ways that lead to higher guessed rates 
 of return. Some other common practices might lead 
 to misleading statement of benefits, so that a particular guessed rate of return may be too high or too low. 
 Especially, the ordinary guesses may leave out/keep out 
 benefits from 'maintenance' research, benefits from 
 disease prevention, food safety R&amp;D, or social science research related to agriculture (some of which 
 may not show up clearly in valuable thing markets and 
 some of which are not took/taken (prisoners) by force in ordinary working well measures), and the spillover benefits from 
 farming-based R&amp;D into non-farming-based applications. 
 On balance, however, we suspect that the habit/desire to 
 overestimate has ruled. 
 
 3.1. Working well measurement 
 The ex post test of public farming-based R&amp;D 
 investments often begins with an important thing to think about of 
 farming-based working well. At a low value, we want to 
 avoid measurement problems connected with inappro- 
 
 144 
 
 J.M. Alston, PG. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 priate grouping or indexing procedures. Index 
 number problems can account for some errors in the 
 measurement of working well growth (named after/discovered by/caused by) 
 research, and group working well measures can be 
 (related to numbers) sensitive to grouping procedures (e.g. 
 Acquaye et al., 2000). 
 As pointed out by Schultz (1956), growth in the 
 use of ordinary inputs does not account for much 
 of the growth in farming-based output. A part of the attribution problem is to remove the effects of different 
 other (non-research) factors before trying to attribute leftover/extra working well growth to particular research investments. Understanding the sources of the 
 growth not (named after/discovered by/caused by) ordinary inputs is the 
 first step in measuring the benefits from public R&amp;D 
 investments. Other factors, beyond ordinary inputs, include changes in input quality, output quality, improvements in (set of machines), (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size 
 and scale, and improvements in technology. Also, ordinary working well measures do not account for the consumption of unpriced or underpriced 
 valuable thing from nature stocks, such as crop-watering/rinsing with water water, in the 
 process of production. Rate of return studies that use 
 ordinary working well indexes will tend to overstate the social value of (related to computers and science) changes that involve a faster rate of consumption of valuable thing from nature 
 stocks, and will understate the benefits from technologies that involve greater (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) nice things or 
 useful thing/valuable supply stock savings (e.g. Alston et al., 1995; Perrin 
 and Fulginiti, 1996). 
 Schultz (1956) and Griliches (1963) demonstrated 
 the important role of changes in input quality in 
 accounting for measured working well growth in farming. Yet many later studies of returns to 
 (government) R&amp;D have measured group input 
 amounts using index numbers that were not (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) 
 appropriately to account for changes in input quality. 
 Such analysis overstates the working well growth (named after/discovered by/caused by) (government) R&amp;D by giving it credit for 
 effects attributable either to schooling (from private or 
 public investments in education unrelated to R&amp;D) or 
 to private R&amp;D (in the case of clearly shown/included (related to computers and science) 
 change). It is tricky to separate the effects of education 
 from the benefits of training in the big picture  of research 
 programs, a benefit that should be attributed to R&amp;D. 
 Following Griliches (1964 ), some studies have included added/more explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) to represent 
 the effects of factors such as education, (set of machines), 
 
 or private R&amp;D in models of working well. Clearly, 
 the appropriate changes/recalculations of the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) 
 can be different, depending upon the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) other than public R&amp;D that are to be included in 
 the model to account for the effects of input and output quality, and so on. Craig and Pardey (1996, 2001) 
 and Acquaye et al. (2000), among others, have shown 
 that correcting for changes in input quality can have 
 important (possible) results for understanding changes in input 
 use and working well in US farming. Making changes/recalculations for input quality change is likely to lead to 
 a lower guessed rate of return to (government) R&amp;D 
 and a better appreciation of the different roles played 
 by private- and (government) R&amp;D (in farming and 
 in other places), and education. Less is known about the 
 (numbers-based) effects of accounting for research-caused 
 changes in output quality. 
 3.2. Matching benefits and costs: 
 attribution among groups 
 Multifactor working well is the measurable stream of 
 output not here by measured inputs. We can 
 translate the working well measures into measures of 
 streams of research benefits using ordinary procedures. The attribution of these benefits to particular 
 inputs can be thought of as a two-step process. Having accounted for the (thing that's given/work that's done) of factors other than 
 R&amp;D in the first step, a second step involves seeing the share of these leftover/extra benefits most appropriately attributed to research by a particular individual, 
 program, state, nation, or other group. This attribution problem can be thought of as matching streams 
 of research benefits to corresponding streams of costs. 
 Misleading statement of public research costs rises in 
 some ways. As pointed out by Fox (1985), a 
 common source of misleading statement is not allowing for 
 the full social cost of using government money/money income for 
 R&amp;D. General taxation involves a social cost of more 
 than one dollar per dollar raised, an excess load 
 (Ballard and Fullerton, 1992). Most studies have not 
 (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for the effects of the excess load of taxation 
 on costs, an (something left out) that will lead to a planned misleading statement of the social costs and an overstatement 
 of the social rate of return. 
 Sometimes studies of particular research programs do not attribute the right/the proper part of/amount of R&amp;D 
 overhead (including the costs of connected basic 
 
 J.M. Alston, PG. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 research and institutional overheads) to the particular 
 projects being tested, or they leave out parts/pieces of 
 the effort involved in the development and extension 
 phases of a project. It is not easy to guess costs 
 (named after/discovered by/caused by) total research (let alone research on 
 a particular set of issues), but there seems to be a 
 habit/desire to understate the cost of individual research 
 programs, and research overall, through the habit/desire 
 to leave out or underestimate overhead costs. 
 Farming-based research consists of a continuous thing of activities, from basic science through to field extension 
 work, that interact with and complement one another. 
 To properly measure the (thing that's given/work that's done) of one element 
 of the whole, it is important to control for the effects of 
 all of the others. Many previous studies did not 
 take proper account of other elements and, as a result, 
 they have tended to overestimate the gains in working well (named after/discovered by/caused by) a particular element of total expenses on R&amp;D. Equally, many studies have 
 underestimated the total expense (that includes foreign and domestic, private and public, and basic and 
 applied work and extension) needed/demanded to (accomplish or gain with effort) a particular working well gain. 
 Overstatement of benefits sometimes rises from 
 not counting the effects of (people and businesses that are not part of the government) R&amp;D or 
 spillovers of technology from in other places (states, countries, competing institutions, or other businesses) and, 
 instead, attributing all of the gains in working well 
 to only a part of the total (connected/related) R&amp;D spending. 
 Griliches (1992) discussed the problems of accounting for R&amp;D spillovers, and Griliches ( 197 4) explored 
 the role of (people and businesses that are not part of the government) R&amp;D. 
 Private-part/area research is often left out from the 
 analysis, or its effects are carefully thought about/believed but not properly 
 taken into account. This is a problem in econometric 
 studies, especially, where the (something left out) of (connected/related) 
 explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) can lead to (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) guesses of 
 the effects of (numbers that change/things that change) included in the analysis. Private R&amp;D expenses (RP) are likely to be positively 
 related to public R&amp;D expenses (R 0 ), and, 
 as a result, the (something left out) of RP from a working well 
 model can be expected to lead to an upwards bias in 
 guesses of the coefficient on R 0 . The confusing 
 of effects extends beyond overstating the rate of return to R 0 when we go beyond the results of 
 (related to studying numbers) relationship and think about/believe (proof that one thing definitely causes another) connections 
 between the two types of expense and, maybe, 
 (completing/matching) or substitution interactions between 
 
 145 
 
 RP and R0 in affecting working well. The (something left out) 
 
 of (people and businesses that are not part of the government) R&amp;D may also give rise to (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) 
 guesses in (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) (benefit-cost) approaches (i.e. 
 where working well gains are figured out or assumed 
 rather than (related to numbers) guessed), depending on how 
 the growth in working well (named after/discovered by/caused by) (government) 
 R&amp;D is guessed. Almost the same  concerns arise in relation 
 to the treatment of extension, spillovers from privateor (government) research managed and did/done in other places (e.g. 
 across the ocean or in parts/areas other than farming), basic 
 (or pretechnology) research that may support the applied research being tested, and development work 
 without which the commercial adoption of research 
 results would not be possible. 
 R&amp;D spillovers appear widespread and confuse 
 the attribution of research benefits. Using firm-level 
 data from the chemical industry, Mansfield ( 1977) 
 reported that the returns to clever creators (private rates 
 of return) were significantly smaller than 'social' 
 rates of return. More (not very long ago), Jaffe (1986) developed 
 a patent-based way of measuring R&amp;D 'spillover pools' to 
 (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) firm-to-firm spillover effects. He found 
 indirect but convincing econometric (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of the 
 existence of R&amp;D spillovers, (showing or proving) that, on 
 average, firms had higher returns to their own R&amp;D 
 (in terms of accounting (money made/good things received) or market value) if this 
 R&amp;D was done in areas where other firms do 
 much research. The same firm-to-firm spillover effects are no doubt a feature of private research related 
 to agriculture. 
 Farming-based money-flow experts also have been giving 
 attention to (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size, scale, and scope 
 in farming-based R&amp;D, and the related questions of 
 the (related to space or existing in space) spillovers of public farming-based research 
 benefits (and costs), especially over the last few years (e.g. 
 Johnson and Evenson, 1999; Byerlee and Traxler, 
 2001). Econometric efforts to measure the (related to space or existing in space) 
 spillovers of farming-based research have used knowledge stocks figured out/calculated as (related to space or existing in space) groupings of R&amp;D 
 based on (related to how land, rivers, etc. affect a country's rules and relationships) edges and (land-area-based/location) 
 closeness rather than agroecological (thing that's almost the same as another thing) (e.g. 
 Huffman and Evenson, 1993). However, the pattern 
 of (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) spillovers is mostly conditioned by 
 agroecological factors, although money-based and policy 
 factors also play important roles. For example, Binenbaum et al. (2000) analyse the (related to legal control) pattern 
 of copyright/patent rights that affect international 
 flows of germplasm and related scientific procedures. 
 
 146 
 
 J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 In our own work, still in progress, in which we 
 have used measures of agroecological (thing that's almost the same as another thing) to limit/guidelineise (related to computers and science) spillover (possible greatness or power), we found 
 very big spillover effects among US states. An 
 hint/result/effect is that typical studies that do not allow 
 for interstate or international spillovers will overstate 
 own-state research responsibility for state-level working well growth, and, this way, state-clearly stated/particular rates of return to research will be overstated. At the same time, 
 the worldwide  returns to a state's research will be (described something as less than it was) in studies that think about/believe only within-state effects. Some pre-grouping of state-clearly stated/particular research 
 investments into knowledge stocks is (certain to happen) in 
 any attempt to take (prisoner) by force interstate spillover effects in 
 econometric models. Enors in this pre-grouping 
 could distort the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), just as ignoring spillovers 
 completely does, even when the pre-grouping has 
 been done with care and attention to the likely hidden (under) detelTllinants of spillover effects. 
 Some other choices in an analysis may have important effects/results/suggestions for the guessed rate of return, but 
 often we cannot generalise about the size and direction 
 of the resulting biases. For instance, most studies have 
 not tried to conect for the effects of valuable thing programs or other distortions, an (something left out) which 
 Alston et al. (1988) showed might lead to over- or 
 under-statement of the benefits and the rate of return; 
 exceptions include Oehrnke (1988), Zachariah et al. 
 (1989), and Huang and Church assistant (1996). (in almost the same way), selection bias can be a problem - projects may have 
 been selected for analysis because they are known to 
 be winners, without thinking or caring about the high proportion 
 of unsuccessful projects, which could be thought of as 
 adding/giving to overhead costs to be carried by the successful projects. On the other hand, this should not be 
 a problem with studies based on the analysis of group data, and such studies do report lower rates of 
 return (Alston et al., 2000a,b). 
 
 3.3. Research and adoption falls behind: attribution 
 over time 
 In some respects, investing in research is like investing in physical capital: cunent working well does 
 not simply depend on the cunent rate of investment, 
 but rather on the flow from the stock of usable knowledge came/coming from the history of past investments. 
 Hence, investment decisions taken in one period have 
 
 punishes that last into the future. In fact, falls behind  and 
 patterns in farming-based R&amp;D are of greater length of time 
 and importance than for most other types of capital 
 investment. There are falls behind  of a few years, usually, 
 between when an expense is made on research and 
 when the resulting invention of new things or small step forward/upward to knowledge begins to be adopted and to affect production and 
 working well. 
 The effects of a particular investment today can 
 continue over many future production periods, maybe forever. The effects of other R&amp;D investments 
 may be short-lived or non-existent. Guessing the 
 limits/guidelines that describe this overall energetic 
 research-development-adoption-disadoption process 
 is the most challenging scientific problem in testing R&amp;D. In the test of individual process 
 inventions of new things (e.g. Griliches, 1957; Schmitz and Seckler, 1970) it is sometimes possible to get good 
 information on the timing of events. More often (and 
 unavoidably in the case of aggregative analysis across 
 programs and valuable things), however, the information 
 is not directly (easy to get to, use, or understand) and must be either guessed 
 as a part of the analysis, or (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) on it. 
 Even the more data-rich studies of group 
 national research systems usually use only 40-50 
 years of once-a-year (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) on research (and, maybe, extension) expenses to attempt to explain 
 20-30 years of difference/different version in production or working well. 
 Such data are not (good) enough to guess the research 
 lag profile correctly. In fact, to get guesses at 
 all, it has been found necessary to force (on people) a great 
 deal of structure on the lag relationship - including 
 ideas (you think are true) about its length, smoothness, and general shape. These generally untested (or poorly 
 tested) restrictions affect the resulting 
 answers. These ideas (you think are true) are often figured out randomly, with a view to convenience of guess as 
 much as anything, rather than scientifically. For example, studies have usually forced on people a limited lag structure linking R&amp;D spending to changes in working well 
 over less than 20 years. But some types of research 
 have effects that (continue to do/happen)definitely (e.g. we still use 
 electricity), while others have effects that are limited, 
 as the invention of new things loses effect (e.g. pest resistance 
 is worn-away) or is replaced by other inventions of new things and 
 becomes no longer useful/no longer used (e.g. new and better farming-based 
 chemicals), and yet others are very short-lived (e.g. 
 clearly stated/particular computer chips). Because of this, a flexible, (without limits or an end) lag 
 
 J.M. Alston, PG. Pardey/Agricu/tural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 with some (money given/freedom to move) for research unusability because of old age may 
 be appropriate for econometric work; especially work 
 that aims to guess the returns to group together R&amp;D. 
 In way of thinking/basic truth/rule, given (good) enough data, a flexible (without limits or an end) lag model could be done using modern 
 time-series econometric approaches. In practice, given 
 data (and other) restrictions, an (without limits or an end) lag structure 
 might be better came close to by the use of a longer 
 limited lag structure than most studies have used (although the (possibility of/possible happening of)  bias remains). The few studies that have tried to guess lag lengths for 
 group farming-based R&amp;D in the US and the UK 
 econometrically have found that lag lengths of at least 
 30 years may be necessary (e.g. Pardey and Craig, 
 1989; Chavas and Cox, 1992; Huffman and Evenson, 1992, 1993; Schimmelpfennig and Thirtle, 1994; 
 Alston et al., 1998). This hints that the typical study 
 has used a cut short lag structure that is too short. 
 In a (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) study, where the research-caused 
 shifts are given, the cutting off of the lag amounts 
 to leaving out benefits, which would, ceteris paribus, 
 bias the rate of return down. In an econometric study, 
 however, cutting off of the lag amounts to leaving out 
 (connected/related) explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). This will lead to (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) limit/guideline guesses, with too much econometric 
 weight (cooperating with/producing/giving up larger values for the limits/guidelines) on 
 the more recent falls behind. By itself, the (something left out) of long 
 falls behind  here, as with the (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) approach, amounts 
 to understating total benefits: but unlike the (produced by people/not naturally-occurring) 
 studies the present value of the benefits connected 
 with the shorter falls behind  is now greater. In a discounting 
 big picture, given usually high rates of return, the last thing just mentioned effect is likely to rule (since the benefits connected with the long-past research expenses are 
 heavily discounted), so that cutting off of the lag will 
 tend to bias rates of return up. This view is supported 
 by the analysis of Alston et al. (2000a,b) and by 
 the econometric analysis of Alston et al. (1998). 
 Different other (detailed description of exactly what is required) issues arise in econometric studies of research returns. As well as getting 
 the falls behind  right, in some settings it might be necessary 
 to allow for leads. The typical study assumes unidirectional (when one thing definitely causes another) from research to working well, but 
 Pardey and Craig (1989) provide some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), although weak, in support of (going in both directions) (things causing other things to happen) (see 
 also Schimmelpfennig and Thirtle, 1994). (happening together) equations bias has an unknown effect on 
 single-equation guesses of the hit/effect of research on 
 
 147 
 
 working well. (problems, delays, etc.) in uncovering the lead-lag relationships may be confused with other problems if 
 these relationships have gone through (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change, 
 as is likely over the (compared to other things) long guess periods 
 that are more and more being used along with 
 very long falls behind. 
 
 4. Interesting examples of attribution problems 
 To illustrate the nature and the importance of the 
 attribution problems hidden (under) the guesses of rates 
 of return to research, we think about/believe two examples. First 
 is an test of the US benefits from wheat variety improvement R&amp;D managed and did/done by the Advice-giving Group on International Farming-based Research 
 (CGIAR). Second, we think about/believe (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the effects 
 of different treatments of the research lag structure on 
 the test of rates of return to farming-based R&amp;D. 
 
 4.1. Attribution among (people or businesss who give money to help start businesses): US benefits 
 from the CGIAR 
 Pardey et al. ( 1996) (examined closely) the hits/effects in the 
 US of varietal-improvement research performed at the 
 international farming-based research centres given money by 
 the CGIAR. This (act of asking questions and trying to find the truth about something) focused on two cases: 
 the wheat-breeding work carried out at the International Wheat and Maize Improvement Center (CIMMYT) in Mexico (and its earlier event (services businesses/government units)), and 
 the rice-breeding program of the International Rice 
 Research Institute (IRRI) in the Philippines. Both of 
 these programs are very well known: they have been 
 at the centre of efforts to develop the high-cooperating with/producing/giving up 
 grain varieties whose use in developing countries has 
 added/gave to large increases in world-wide food supplies - increases commonly referred to as the Green 
 Revolution. 
 A review of these cases by Pardey et al. ( 1996) 
 shows that big attribution problems can arise 
 even when the details of the technology and the timing of events are well recorded/supported and understood. 
 Think about/believe the case of wheat. Pardey et al. (1996) received/got described/explained data on experimental yields of the 
 many wheat varieties at many locations in each of 
 the different US wheat-growing states. Comparison of 
 experimental-plot yields of new varieties with those 
 in production in 1970 points to/shows that in the (not being there; not being present) 
 
 148 
 
 J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 of the new varieties, overall wheat yields would have 
 been 33% lower in 1993. The authors guessed that 
 over 1970-1993, such yield gains created money-based 
 benefits with a present value in 1993 of about 43 
 bUS$ (1993 dollars). In other words, about 
 l/9th of the total value of wheat production over the 
 period is attributed to increases in yields resulting 
 from the introduction of new varieties. These are the 
 gross benefits to producers and people as a result 
 of the US adoption of the new varieties. 
 One important aspect of the attribution problem involves deciding/figuring out who deserves the credit for these 
 gains. Especially, what is the fraction of the total benefit that can be attributed to the work done at 
 CIMMYT? Pardey et al. (1996) had complete information on the (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) (and breeding) history of each 
 important wheat variety grown in the US, for each 
 wheat-growing state, along with an long/big dataset 
 on experimental yields by variety for multiple experimental places/locations (within states). Unfortunately, even such 
 unusually/amazingly described/explained information is not enough to 
 solve the attribution problem; genotype does not translate simply into yield gains or other phenotypic (features/ qualities/ traits) (such as seed size, colour and protein and fibre 
 content) that translate into able to be touched/real money-based value. 
 How much of the credit for the improvement in US 
 wheat produces /gives up associated with semi-dwarfing should go 
 to Norman Borlaug (who led the effort at CIMMYT, 
 and earlier at the Rockefeller Foundation-sponsored 
 research program in Mexico that began in 1943), compared with the people (who help animals have babies) at Washington State University (who (before that/before now) made the first US angry at the 
 Norin 10 variety from Japan)? How much credit for the 
 excellence oftoday's variety should go to the person (who helps animals have babies) 
 who raised/trained  it, and how much should go to the people (who help animals have babies) 
 and farmers who raised/trained  or selected its parents, grandparents and so on? It is not easy to identify the separate not important product of any particular person (who helps animals have babies) in the 
 chain. As a result, money-flow experts studying this type of 
 issue have ended up using mechanistic rules to give out the total benefits across steps in the history of the 
 development of a new variety. 
 To figure out/calculate  and attribute the benefits from 
 wheat-breeding, Pardey et al. (1996) examined the 
 effects of using a variety of rules to change something (to help someone)/take care of someone 
 different perceptions of the relative importance of 
 earlier and later breeding steps. In general they found 
 that US benefits from the CIMMYT wheat-breeding 
 
 program were very large. Even using their most conservative attribution rule (giving the greatest credit 
 to more recent, US-based inventions of new things, and the least 
 credit to the earlier CIMMYT-based inventions of new things), 
 the added/more wheat produced in the US as a result of the CIMMYT program was worth 3.6 
 bUS$ from 1970 to 1993. US government support of 
 the wheat-breeding program at CIMMYT since 1960 
 was about US$_$ 68 million (in present value terms as 
 of the end of 1993). Counting only the benefits from 
 the yield gains in the US, the benefit-cost ratio of US 
 support was greater than 49: 1. This is the most (probably a little low) guess. Using different attribution rules, 
 the benefit-cost ratio is as high as 199:1. 
 Recall, this is the benefit from US adoption of varieties containing CIMMYT-received/made from germplasm, which 
 is a gross rather than net measure of the benefits to 
 US from CIMMYT' s wheat variety improvement program. It does not account for the costs to the US as 
 a net exporter, which arise when the rest of the world 
 adopts new CIMMYT-based wheat varieties and this 
 leads to a reduction in the demand for and price of US 
 wheat. Testing this effect is a much larger difficult project; it involves measuring the effect ofCIMMYT's 
 wheat-breeding program on the whole world. This is 
 one more form of attribution problem, one which 
 generally has not been recognised in previous studies of the country-clearly stated/particular benefits from international 
 farming-based research (one exception is Brennan and 
 Bantilan, 1999). 
 4.2. Attribution over time: specifying and 
 guessing lag relationships 
 In scientific work on models of the effects of 
 research on group farming-based working well, the 
 number of falls behind  and the shape of the lag structure 
 are usually chosen randomly; rarely is either the lag 
 length or structure tested formally. Common types of 
 lag structures include de Leeuw or inverted-V (e.g. 
 Evenson, 1967), polynomial (e.g. Davis, 1980; Leiby 
 and Adams, 1991; Thirtle and Bottomley, 1988), and 
 trapezoidal (e.g. Huffman and Evenson, 1989, 1992, 
 1993). A small number of studies have used free-form 
 falls behind (e.g. Ravenscraft and Scherer, 1982; Pardey and 
 Craig, 1989; Chavas and Cox, 1992), but most have 
 restricted the lag distribution to be represented by a 
 small number of limits/guidelines because the time span 
 
 J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey/Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 of the dataset is usually not much longer than the 
 assumed maximum lag length. 
 Until quite (not very long ago), it was common to restrict the 
 lag length to less than 20 years. In the first studies, available time-series were short and lag lengths 
 were very short. More recent studies have tended to 
 use more flexible, and longer falls behind. Pardey and Craig 
 (1989) used a free-form lag structure to model the 
 relationship between farming-based working well and 
 (government) farming-based research, and found "strong 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that the hit/effect of research expenses 
 on farming-based output may continue for as long as 30 
 years" (p. 9) and that "long falls behind - at least 30 years 
 - may be necessary to take by force/take control of all of the hit/effect 
 of research on farming-based output" (p. 18). Using 
 a non-parametric approach, Chavas and Cox (1992, 
 p. 590) confirmed Pardey and Craig's result, finding 
 that "at least 30 years of falls behind  are necessary to capture 
 the effects of public research". A few later 
 studies have followed this guidance. However, none of 
 these studies, including the two just referred to, tested how 
 much longer than 30 years the lag length should be. 
 In contrast, Alston et al. (1998) argued for representing an (without limits or an end) lag between research investments 
 
 149 
 
 and working well with a limited lag between research 
 investments and changes in the stock of knowledge. 
 Alston et al. (1998) laid out a model in which current group production depends on the use 
 of the stock of useful knowledge, which is itself a 
 function of the whole history of (connected/related) investments 
 in R&amp;D. What results is possibly an (without limits or an end) lag between past investments in research on the one hand 
 and production on the other. While a short, limited lag 
 may (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) show the link between investments in 
 research and (increases a tiny bit) to the stock of useful knowledge, it would be a significant idea-based error to 
 use the same lag to represent the relation between investments in research and production, since production depends on flows from the whole stock of useful 
 knowledge, and not just on the latest small step forward/upward to this 
 stock. Other recent studies, based on an examination 
 of the time-series nature of the data, rather than reflection about (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) relationships, have been tending in a almost the same  direction (e.g. Akgiingor et al., 1996; 
 Makki et al., 1996). Using time-series methods involving data changes such as first differences, 
 they have found that smaller guessed rates of return 
 result. 
 
 Table 2 
 Lag structure and guessed rates of return to research from econometric models- 
 Mean lag 
 (years) 
 
 Number of 
 guesses (count) 
 
 Rate of return (% per year) 
 Mean 
 
 Mode 
 
 Middle-point 
 
 Form 
 Polynomial 
 Trapezoidal 
 Free-form 
 Inverted-V 
 Other 
 No structure 
 No lag 
 All forms 
 
 13.2 
 32.7 
 28.0b 
 12.0 
 13.3b 
 26.6 
 0 
 16.3b 
 
 285 
 55 
 6 
 33 
 304 
 79 
 36 
 762 
 
 79.9 
 97.7 
 26.5 
 134.5 
 75.6 
 45.8 
 48.0 
 77.9 
 
 58.0 
 95.0 
 6.0 
 30.0 
 46.0 
 54.0 
 46.0 
 58.0 
 
 58.0 
 67.0 
 30.0 
 72.0 
 48.0 
 51.0 
 44.4 
 53.0 
 
 4.5 
 11.0 
 6.0 
 23.0 
 -1.0 
 0.3 
 20.9 
 -1.0 
 
 729.7 
 384.4 
 45.0 
 562.0 
 1219.0 
 185.0 
 111.0 
 1219.0 
 
 Length (years) 
 0 
 1-4 
 0-15 
 &amp;gt;30 
 Unknown 
 
 0 
 9.9 
 22.3 
 38.0b 
 Unknown 
 
 36 
 408 
 174 
 144 
 100 
 
 48.0 
 95.2 
 58.1 
 60.1 
 60.0 
 
 46.0 
 58.0 
 46.0 
 40.0 
 27.0 
 
 44.4 
 60.7 
 49.9 
 41.6 
 41.2 
 
 20.9 
 0.0 
 4.5 
 -1.0 
 8.9 
 
 111.0 
 1219.0 
 260.0 
 384.4 
 337.0 
 
 Lag structure 
 
 Minimum 
 
 Maximum 
 
 a The figures in this table include studies reporting econometrically guessed rates of return to farming-based research only, and to 
 research &amp; extension, reported in Alston et al. (2000a; Table 16). 
 b Represents the mean length of the R&amp;D falls behind  for rate of return guesses based on limited lag structures. One of the 6 free-fonn 
 guesses is based on an (without limits or an end) lag structure, as are 43 of the 304 other guesses, 44 of the 762 all forms guesses, and 44 of the 144 
 &amp;gt;30 years guesses. 
 
 150 
 
 J.M. Alston, P. G. Pardey I Farming-based Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 Table 2 summarises the results from past econometric studies of returns to farming-based research across 
 countries, classified according to the length and form 
 of the research lag. It can be seen that the results are 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with expectations; most studies have used 
 short falls behind (and other restrictions on the form of the 
 lag), and shorter falls behind  tend to occur with larger guessed rates of return. 
 To illustrate their ideas and put into use the 
 arguments, Alston et al. (1998) developed a model 
 of farming-based working well that can be used to test typical ideas (you think are true) about the shape of the research lag, as well as the understood ideas (you think are true) about 
 knowledge (lowering of value) connected with clear ideas (you think are true) about the research lag length. They applied this model to data on US group farming-based 
 working well for the period 1949-1991, making use 
 of once-a-year data on total farming-based R&amp;D (including 
 extension) expenses by the federal government 
 and 48 state governments, for the period 1890-1991. 
 The farming-based input data were (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for quality change over time, which will account for certain 
 types of private R&amp;D expenses and workers improvements, and so on, but leave outted-(numbers that change/things that change) 
 bias may still result from the (when something is kept out or not included) of private 
 R&amp;D and spillover effects (the details of the data 
 and guess procedures can be found in Alston 
 et al. (1998)). The first (or most important) end/end result reinforces the 
 view that farming-based research affects working well 
 for much longer than most previous studies have 
 allowed, possibly forever. A model agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with 
 (without limits or an end) falls behind  was (related to numbers) preferred over a more 
 ordinary model with limited falls behind. The effects/results/suggestions 
 for reported rates of return were quite dramatic. The 
 (related to numbers) preferred model pointed to/showed a much lower 
 real, not important IRR to public farming-based research in 
 the US than was suggested by a model using shorter 
 falls behind. 
 
 5. End/end result 
 Taken (at the dollar amount written on it/as it appears to be), studies of returns to farming-based research point to/show that the investment has been 
 hugely socially money-making. Some research investments no doubt have cooperated with/produced/gave up amazingly high returns and a little bit the overall picture has been 
 twisted/partially untrue/lied about by sampling bias. Also, however, many 
 
 of the guesses are likely to have been (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) up as a 
 result of attribution problems. We have presented arguments and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) about the nature of these 
 attribution problems and the resulting bias in reported 
 rates of return to research. 
 For a start, many of the guesses at the upper end of 
 the range are simply unbelievable. Especially, some 
 very large guesses of IRRs to group together R&amp;D investments, if taken literally as IRRs over long time 
 periods, suggest unbelievable hits/effects of farming-based research. Part of the problem here is that the internal 
 rate of return measure may not (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) represent 
 the relationship between research and returns. Especially, it is (possibly not true, good, or honest) whether the first (or most important) receivers of money - the farmers and people to whom the 
 benefits build up - could reinvest research returns at a 
 rate anything like the typical guessed rate of return 
 to research. Because of this, even if the rate of return as calculated corresponds mathally to the stream of benefits and costs, other summary measures may be more 
 meaningful. 
 Also, however, there are issues surrounding 
 the measures of benefits and costs and their (understanding/ explanation). Significant problems arise in trying to decide/figure out what the pattern of working well growth would 
 have been without a particular research investment. Some of these problems concern the use 
 of appropriate index number explanation and making appropriate corrections for changes in quality and other 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of inputs and outputs. Others arise in 
 defining the (connected/related) (going against known facts) other choice in order to meaningfully match streams of research benefits 
 and costs. 
 Further problems can arise in the (detailed description of exactly what is required) of 
 the research-returns relationship, especially in econometric applications. The typical approaches understate 
 the period over which research affects working well 
 and, in econometric studies using time-series data, 
 this means they overstate the shorter-term hits/effects, 
 leading to overstated rates of return. Most studies also 
 do not fully account for the effects of work done by 
 others in the research-development-extension continuous thing, and this gives too much credit to the particular 
 (person or business who gives money to help start a business) being tested. Work remains to be done 
 to establish the scientific importance of bias due to 
 incomplete correction for the locational spillovers 
 of research results in guessed rates of return to 
 research. 
 
 J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey!Agricultural Money flow 25 (2001) 141-152 
 
 Responses 
 
 Partial support for this work was given by USAID, Worldwide  Bureau, the Giannini Foundation of Farming-based Money flow, and a grant from the UC Pacific 
 Rim research project. The authors thank Albert Acquaye and Connie Chan-Kang for valuable research 
 help, and John Brennan, David Colman, Ruben 
 Echeverria, Will Masters and Michel Petit for comments on an earlier version of the work. 
 References 
 Acquaye, Also known as, Alston, J.M., Pardey P.G., 2000. A disaggregated 
 opinion about  (after the war) working well growth in US farming: 
 isn't that (related to space or existing in space)? In: (series of events) of the NC-208 Conference on 
 Farming-based Working well: Data, Methods, and Measures, Waugh 
 Large room, USDA-ERS, Washington, DC, 9-10 March 2000. 
 Akgiingor, S., Makanda, D.W., Oehmke, J.F., Myers, R.J., Choe, 
 Y.C., 1996. Energetic analysis of Kenyan wheat research and 
 rate of return. In: Added/gave Paper (series of events) from the 
 Conference on Worldwide  Farming-based Science Policy for the 21st 
 Century, Melbourne, Australia, 26-28 August 1996, pp. 1-32. 
 Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G., 1996. Making Science Pay: the 
 Money flow of Farming-based R&amp;D Policy. Washington, DC. 
 Alston, J.M., Edwards, G.W., Freebaim, J.W., 1988. Market 
 distortions and the benefits from research. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 
 70, 281-288. 
 Alston, J.M., Anderson, J.R., Pardey, P.G., 1995. Perceived 
 working well, previous/unavoidable future farm (quality of producing a lot), and (away from cities) 
 research useful thing/valuable supply (reasons). In: Peters, G.H., Hedley, 
 D.D. (Eds.), (series of events) of the 22nd International Conference 
 of Farming-based Money-flow experts on Farming-based (wanting to beat others in contests): 
 Market Forces and Policy Choice, Busheshot, Dartmouth, 
 pp. 639-651. 
 Alston, J.M., Craig, B.J., Pardey, P.G., 1998. Patterns in 
 the creation and (lowering of value) of know ledge, and the returns 
 to research. EPTD Discussion Paper no. 35, August 1998, 
 International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC. 
 Alston, J.M., Chan-Kang, C., Marra, M.C., Pardey, P.G., Wyatt, 
 T.J., 2000a. A analysis of rates of return to farming-based 
 R&amp;D: ex pede herculem? Research Report no. 113. International 
 Food Policy Research Institute, Washington DC. 
 Alston, J.M., Marra, M.C., Pardey, P.G., Wyatt, T.J., 200Gb. 
 Research returns redux: a analysis of the returns to 
 farming-based R&amp;D. Aust. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 44 (2), 185215. 
 Ballard, C.L., Fullerton, D., 1992. Distortionary taxes and the 
 provision of public products (that are bought and sold). J. Econ. Perspect. 6, 117-131. 
 Binenbaum, E., Nottenburg, C., Pardey, P.G., Wright, B.D., 
 Zambrano, P., 2000. South-North trade, copyright/patent 
 controls, and freedom to operate in farming-based research on 
 staple crops. EPTD Discussion Paper no. 70, December 2000, 
 International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC. 
 
 151 
 
 Brennan, J.P., Bantilan, M.C.S., 1999. Hit/effect of ICRISAT research 
 on Australian farming. Report prepared for Australian Centre 
 for International Farming-based Research, Money-based Research 
 Report no. I. NSW Farming, Wagga Wagga. 
 Byerlee, D., Traxler, G., 200 I. The role of technology spillovers 
 and (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size in the (producing a lot with very little waste) design of farming-based 
 research systems. In: Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G., Taylor, M.J. 
 (Eds.), Farming-based Science Policy: Changing Worldwide  (lists of things to deal with/desires to reach goals). 
 Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD (Chap. 9). 
 Chavas, J.-P., Cox, T.L., 1992. A nonparametric analysis of the 
 effects of research on farming-based working well. Am. J. Agric. 
 Econ. 74, 583-591. 
 Craig, B.J., Pardey, P.G., 1996. Working well in the presence of 
 quality change. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 78 (5), 1349-1354. 
 Craig, B.J., Pardey, P.G., 2001. Input, output, and working well 
 developments in US farming. In: Alston, J.M., Pardey, P.G., 
 Taylor, M.J. (Eds.), Farming-based Science Policy: Changing 
 Worldwide  (lists of things to deal with/desires to reach goals). Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 
 MD. 
 Davis, J.S., 1980. A note on the use of other choice lag structures for 
 research expense in group production function models. 
 Can. J. Agric. Econ. 28, 72-76. 
 Echeverria, R.G., 1990. Testing the hit/effect of farming-based 
 research. In: Echeverria, R.G. (Ed.), Methods for (identifying a disease or its cause) 
 Research System Restrictions and Testing the Hit/effect of 
 Farming-based Research: Testing the Hit/effect of Farming-based 
 Research, Vol. II. International Service for National Farming-based 
 Research, The Hague. 
 Evenson, R.E., 1967. The (thing that's given/work that's done) of farming-based research to 
 production. J. Farm Econ. 49, 1415-1425. 
 Evenson, R.E., Waggoner, P.E., Ruttan, V.W., 1979. Money-based 
 benefits from research: an example from farming. Science 
 205, 1101-1107. 
 Fox, G., 1985. Is the United States really underinvesting in 
 farming-based research? Am. J. Agric. Econ. 67, 806-812. 
 Fuglie, K., Ballenger, N., Day, K., Klotz, C., Ollinger, M., 
 Reilly, J., Vasavada, U., Yee, J., Fisher, J., Payson, S., 
 1996. Farming-based research and development: public and 
 private investments under different markets and institutions. 
 USDA-ERS-NRED Farming-based Money-based Report 735. US 
 Department of Farming, Washington, DC. 
 Griliches, Z., 1957. Mixed-version corn: an exploring things in the money flow/money-based studies 
 of (related to computers and science) change. Econometrica 25 (4), 501-522. 
 Griliches, Z., 1963. The sources of measured working well growth: 
 farming, 1940-1960. J. Poli<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
