AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 11 (1994) 191-196 
 
 Hits/effects of land breaking (up) on the cost of producing wheat 
 in the rain-fed area of northern Jordan 
 Amer S. Jabarin 
 b 
 
 a, 
 
 Francis M. Epplin 
 
 b, * 
 
 - Department of Farming-based Money flow, University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma 74078-0505, USA 
 
 Accepted 20 June 1994 
 
 Abstract 
 In some cultures (something valuable you get when older relatives die) customs results in land breaking (up) such that over time operating farms become 
 composed of a collection of (related to space or existing in space)ly broke up fields rather than a touching land unit. This study was managed and did/done to 
 decide/figure out the hit/effect of land breaking (up) as measured by average field size on the average cost of producing 
 wheat in the rain-fed area of Northern Jordan. First (or most important) data were collected from farmers in the area. 
 Generalized Least Squares was used to guess the average changeable cost of producing wheat. It was serious and stubborn 
 that the average changeable cost of producing wheat is a decreasing function of field size. Land breaking (up) increases 
 production costs. Continued land breaking (up) will lead to decreasing (wasting very little while working or producing something) and is filled with problems when it results 
 in small fields. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 Small farm size and land breaking (up) have 
 been guessed to be obstacles to money-saving wheat production in Jordan. They are believed to be a principal cause of Jordan's low 
 working well and major (blocking or stopping things) to the development of the rain-fed farming-based area (ElHurani and Duwayri, 1986). 
 In some cultures the want to leave each heir 
 an equal part of/amount of the farm leads farmers to 
 divide each field in each generation (Binns, 1950). 
 
 * Corresponding author. 
 
 Partial (something valuable you get when older relatives die) leads to ever-reducing field 
 size (Punch/power, 1972; Moore, 1972; Burton and King, 
 1983). Operating farms are often composed of a 
 collection of (related to space or existing in space)ly broke up fields rather than 
 a touching land unit. 
 Land breaking (up) is defined as the division 
 of a single farm into a few separate, clear/separate 
 parcels (Binns, 1950). Many developed and developing countries meet with a  land breaking (up) 
 problem. Some think about/believe land breaking (up) to be 
 a major obstacle to (producing a lot with very little waste) field crop production (Binns, 1950; Dovering, 1965; Grigg, 1983; 
 Jacoby, 1971; Karouzis, 1971; King and Burton, 
 1982). Small and irregular fields increase the costs 
 of moving workers and equipment and reduces 
 the field (wasting very little while working or producing something) of machines relative to that 
 
 0169-5150j94j$07.00 © 1994 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
 SSDI 0169-5150(94)00027-Y 
 
 192 
 
 A.S. Jabarin, F.M. Epplin /Agricultural Money flow 11 (1994) 191-196 
 
 available in large, rectangular fields (Buller and 
 Bruning, 1979). 
 While there are costs connected with land 
 breaking (up), sometimes (related to space or existing in space) 
 breaking up/spreading out may be helpful. An individual farmer 
 who manages a few broke up parcels may fully use differences in height from the ground or soil type by 
 scheduling plantings to reduce risk and distribute 
 labor needed things over time (Bentley, 1987). In 
 addition, fields in different zones may permit a 
 farmer to produce a more (smart money saving) of 
 crops (Cole and Wolf, 1974; Forbes, 1976; Friedl, 
 1974; Weinberg, 1972). In mountain areas, crops 
 at lower elevations mature before those at higher 
 elevations. A farm family may fully use differences 
 in height from the ground to agree harvest with available 
 family labor, reduce needed things for hired labor, 
 and spread out fresh food supplies over time 
 (Netting, 1972; Forbes, 1976; Friedl, 1974; Galt, 
 1979). 
 Land breaking (up) may help risk management through (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) even in (compared to other things) 
 (group of things that are all pretty much the same) (surrounding conditions) such as that found in 
 the Great Plains of the USA For example, hail 
 storms are often (only happening or existing in one small place) such that the chance of a total loss is less for a farmer with (related to space or existing in space)ly 
 broke up land areas. (in almost the same way), rain from (huge rainstorms with lightning and thunder) is often (only happening or existing in one small place) such that some fields 
 may produce well in certain years, while others 
 do well in other years (Carlyle, 1983; Heston and 
 Kumar, 1983). 
 
 2. Land breaking (up) in Jordan 
 
 One factor which influences land breaking (up) in Jordan is the law which controls the separating of land into a single landholding. Outside 
 the city or village limits, the biggest size of a 
 landholding which can be divided into a separate 
 holding is one hectare. However, the law permits 
 for common ownership of one single piece of 
 land (in some areas as small as one-tenth hectare). 
 Common ownership is a (usually done) result of 
 (something valuable you get when older relatives die) under Islamic law or (instance of buying something for money). Land 
 owned by an individual passes to heirs after death. 
 Available data point to/show that the average farm 
 size in the rain-fed areas of Jordan is 8 ha 
 (Farming-based Statistics Indicator, 1988). However, 
 most farms are composed of broke up parcels. 
 The average landholding is divided into 2.5 pieces 
 such that the average touching field size in one 
 location is 32 dunums (a dunum is one-tenth of a 
 hectare). 
 Arabiat and Al-Kadi (1988), decided that 
 the degree of farming-based land breaking (up) as 
 measured by an index they developed, is very 
 high in northern Jordan. Qasem (1985) has reported that land breaking (up) is a continuous 
 process. The number of people who got 
 ownership rights increased every year from 1976 
 to 1981. The data in Table 1 show that in 1976, 
 for example, 2657 individually owned land parcels 
 changed ownership in Jordan. The ownership of 
 
 Table 1 
 Number of individually owned land parcels which changed ownership in Jordan (1976-1981) and number of people owning 
 ownership 
 Year 
 
 Number of individually 
 owned land parcels which 
 changed ownership 
 
 Number of people 
 owning ownership of 
 the moved (from one place to another) land 
 
 1976 
 1977 
 1978 
 1979 
 1980 
 1981 
 Total 
 
 2657 
 2445 
 2898 
 3028 
 3160 
 3480 
 17668 
 
 7033 
 8313 
 9853 
 10295 
 10744 
 11832 
 59070 
 
 Source: Qasem, 1985. 
 
 A.S. Jabarin, F.M. Epplin /Agricultural Money flow II (1994) 191-196 
 
 these parcels was moved (from one place to another) to 7033 people. 
 During the period from 1976 to 1981, a total of 
 17 668 individually owned parcels were moved (from one place to another) to 59 070 people. The number of owners of the moved (from one place to another) land almost tripled. These 
 data do not face/deal with the issue of parcel breaking up/spreading out 
 for individual farmers. While the number of owners may have increased, data are not available to 
 decide/figure out the change in the number of farmers 
 over this time period. 
 Data are not available to directly measure the 
 hit/effect of decreasing parcel size on farm size or 
 the size of fields farmed. For example, a single 
 farmer may get the rights to farm a number 
 of touching but independently owned parcels 
 through different (living somewhere) arrangements. However, 
 for a given size of farm, the transactions costs of 
 renting could be expected to be an increasing 
 function of the number of (managers of apartment buildings). For example, a farmer with 100 units of land and two 
 (managers of apartment buildings) is likely to get/cause  less transactions cost 
 than a farmer with 100 units of land and twenty 
 (managers of apartment buildings). An hidden (under) idea (you think is true) of the analysis presented in this paper is that the average 
 field size available for farming decreases as the 
 number of individual land owners increases. 
 Arabiat and Al-Kadi (1988) have decided/figured out 
 that land breaking (up) is a serious problem in 
 Jordan. The analysis presented by Qasem (1985) 
 points to/shows that the degree of land breaking (up) 
 has increased. However, it remains to be decided/figured out if this breaking (up) reduces money-based 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) or (using other choices), if the benefits of breaking (up) go beyond the costs. No research has been 
 conducted to measure the hit/effect of breaking (up) on production costs. 
 The goal of the research reported in this 
 paper is to decide/figure out if field size influences production costs. One measure of money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) is average per unit production costs. Because of this, 
 the clearly stated/particular goal is to guess the average 
 (number or thing that changes) costs of producing wheat in the rain-fed 
 area of Northern Jordan and to decide/figure out if 
 land breaking (up) as measured by average field 
 size is helpful, expensive, or an unimportant factor. 
 The results are expected to be of use to those 
 Jordanian farmers who have flexibility (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 field size. Also, the results may be of value 
 
 193 
 
 to those responsible for setting and changing 
 Jordanian public policies which influence land 
 breaking (up). 
 
 3. Data and model 
 First (or most important) data were collected by personal interviews of 63 farmers in the northern part of Jordan. The survey was done in July 1992 to 
 get information (related to/looking at/thinking about) production practices. The area is (compared to other things) (group of things that are all pretty much the same). However, for the (related to studying numbers) analysis the farms were 
 classified into one of three (next to) (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) 
 areas. The areas differ (a) little in height from the ground, 
 soil, and expected (rain, snow, etc.). 
 Wheat business/project cost and return budgets were 
 prepared for each farm. The cost of land preparation, seed, seeding, (material that makes plants grow better), combine or unmoving thresher rental, hired harvest labor, and 
 sacks were included as changeable costs. Costs of 
 land use, family labor, overhead and management 
 were not received/got in the survey, and were not 
 included as (number or thing that changes) costs. The average changeable 
 cost of producing wheat was created for each 
 farm by dividing the total (number or thing that changes) costs by yield 
 and is expressed in terms of Jordanian dinar per 
 kilogram (JD /kg) of wheat produced. 
 Some of the farmers reported that they used a 
 traditional harvest method which needs/demands the 
 move (from one place to another) of wheat shocks from the field to a 
 unmoving thresher for grain separation. Others 
 reported that they hired a custom harvester who 
 used a combine. All farmers who were surveyed 
 and who reported the use of (material that makes plants grow better) pointed to/showed 
 that they used ammonium sulfate. The (material that makes plants grow better) 
 levels are expressed in kg of (material that makes plants grow better) used per 
 dunum. Wheat grain yield is expressed in kg per 
 dunum. 
 To decide/figure out if field size influences production costs, the guessed average changeable cost is 
 fitted as a function of the production area, 
 (material that makes plants grow better) applied, harvest method, land seeded to 
 wheat on the farm, and average wheat field size. 
 The full model is represented in Eq. 1. The 
 first (or most important) purpose of the model is to decide/figure out if 
 production (wasting very little while working or producing something) as measured by the average 
 
 194 
 
 A.S. Jabarin, F.M. Epplin /Agricultural Money flow 11 (1994) 191-196 
 
 changeable cost of producing wheat is influenced by 
 field size: 
 Ave;= F(R1;,R2;,FERT;,HARV;,SIZE;,AFs;) 
 
 (1) 
 
 where Ave; represents cost of land preparation, 
 seed, seeding, (material that makes plants grow better), combine rental, thresher 
 rental, hired harvest labor, and sacks per kilogram of wheat produced (JD jkg); R1; = 1 if farm 
 i is located in production area one and 0 otherwise; R2; = 1 if farm i is located in production 
 area two and 0 otherwise; FERT; is (material that makes plants grow better) 
 level in kg per dunum used on farm i; HARV; = 1 
 if the wheat on farm i was collected with a 
 combine and 0 if collected with a unmoving 
 thresher; SIZE; is land area (dunums) seeded to 
 wheat on farm i; and AFS; average field size 
 (dunums) on farm i. 
 
 4. (related to studying numbers) method 
 
 The Glejser test confirmed the presence of 
 heteroskedasticity which is a common problem 
 with thin sliceal data (Kennedy, 1989; Berndt, 
 1991; Judge et al., 1985; Salvatore, 1982). Heteroskedasticity is the term used to describe the 
 violation of the ordinary least squares idea (you think is true) 
 that all the disturbance (error) terms have the 
 same variance. In these events ordinary least 
 squares creates inefficient guesses of the 
 standard errors and so wrong (related to studying numbers) tests. 
 Because of the presence of heteroskedasticity, 
 Guessed Generalized Least Squares (EGLS) 
 
 (Judge et al., 1985) was used to guess the 
 model. A three-step procedure was used to get the EGLS guesses. In the first step, ordinary least squares was used to fit the model. The 
 (value of a number, ignoring its sign)s of the ordinary least squares 
 extras/payments from the first step were moved backward on 
 the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) of the full model. The 
 (described the future) extras/payments received/got from the second step 
 were squared and their two-ways were used to 
 weight the original (numbers that change/things that change). The weighted average changeable cost values were moved backward on the 
 weighted (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) to get the 
 EGLS limit/guideline guesses. 
 
 5. Results 
 
 (related to studying numbers) results are presented in Table 2. 
 The first model includes two (related to a large area) dummy 
 (numbers that change/things that change), the dummy (number or thing that changes) for harvest method, 
 and continuous (numbers that change/things that change) for (material that makes plants grow better), land 
 seeded to wheat, and average field size. Based 
 upon the t-tests, the use of (material that makes plants grow better) decreases 
 the average changeable cost of producing wheat. The 
 use of a combine also decreases average changeable 
 cost. The guessed coefficient for the land seeded 
 to wheat on the farm (number or thing that changes) is not (related to numbers) 
 significant. However, the average field size (number or thing that changes) is significant. 
 The (number or thing that changes) for farm size (land seeded to 
 wheat) was dropped and Model 2 was guessed. 
 All limit/guideline guesses in Model 2 are significant at the 191a level except for the (stopping or interfering with something) 
 
 Table 2 
 (related to studying numbers) guesses of the average changeable cost of producing wheat in Northern Jordan 
 
 a 
 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Modell 
 
 Model2 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 Area 1 
 Area 2 
 (material that makes plants grow better) applied (kg/ dunum) 
 Combine harvester 
 Land seeded to wheat 
 Average size of wheat field 
 F 
 
 0.196 (14.75) b 
 - 0.018 (1.08) 
 0.00003 (0.003) 
 -0.0034 (3.54) 
 -0.0913 (10.09) 
 -0.00006 (0.80) 
 -0.00051 (2.08) 
 24.1 
 
 0.197 (14.99) 
 - 0.026 (2.08) 
 0.0003 (0.032) 
 -0.0033 (3.52) 
 -0.0919 (10.35) 
 
 a 
 b 
 
 The (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) is the average changeable cost of producing a kilogram of wheat. 
 The values in parentheses are t-statistics (total value). 
 
 - 0.00065 (3.43) 
 35.6 
 
 A.S. Jabarin, F.M. Epplin I Farming-based Money flow 11 (1994) 191-196 
 
 Table 3 
 Guessed average changeable cost of producing wheat in Jordan 
 (dinar jkg) for selected average field sizes a 
 Field size (dunums) 
 
 10 
 20 
 30 
 a 
 
 (material that makes plants grow better) level kgjdunum{) 
 0.0 
 
 10.3 
 
 0.182 
 0.175 
 0.169 
 
 0.148 
 0.141 
 0.135 
 
 (described the future) values came/coming from Model 2. 
 
 shifting dummy (number or thing that changes) for area 2. The F-statistics for both models are also significant at the 
 1% level. The results point to/show that (the adding of things to soil to make plants grow better), 
 harvest method, and average field size significantly influence the changeable cost of producing a 
 kilogram of wheat. 
 The model confirms the guess that average changeable cost is a decreasing function of average field size. Average changeable cost of producing 
 wheat on the farms included in the survey is 
 greater with small fields. That is, land breaking (up) is an (money-based)/cheaply important issue. 
 Table 3 includes guesses of the A VC of 
 producing wheat for three different field sizes 
 based on limit/guideline guesses of Model 2. As the 
 field size increases the average changeable cost decreases. A further decrease in the average changeable cost resulted when as the (material that makes plants grow better) level was 
 increased from zero to 10.3 kgjdunum which was 
 the average level of (material that makes plants grow better) applied by those 
 farmers who used (material that makes plants grow better). For a given field size 
 (AFS), say 20 dunums, the AVC decreases from 
 JD 0.175 to JD 0.141, when the (material that makes plants grow better) level 
 increases from 0.0 kgjdunum to 10.3 kgjdunum. 
 In other words the A VC curve moves/changes up, pointing to/showing an increase in the AVC when the field size 
 decreases. 
 
 6. Ends/end results 
 
 Upon death of the owner, it is common for 
 farming-based land in the rain-fed area of northern Jordan to be divided among heirs. Over time 
 
 195 
 
 the size of an average land holding has decreased. This process of land breaking (up) has 
 been referred to/been given a ticket as a major obstacle to (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 production of field crops. However, the results of land breaking (up) on the cost of 
 producing wheat in Jordan has not been serious and stubborn. 
 The goal of the research reported in this 
 paper was to decide/figure out if field size influences 
 production costs. The clearly stated/particular goal was to 
 decide/figure out if land breaking (up) as measured by 
 average size of wheat fields is helpful, expensive, 
 or an unimportant factor. First (or most important) data were gotten from a sample of 63 Jordanian farmers. 
 Guessed Generalized Least Squares was used 
 to get limit/guideline guesses. Land breaking (up) as reflected in average field size was found 
 to be significant. The average (number or thing that changes) costs of 
 producing a kilogram of wheat in the area 
 increases as the average field size decreases. 
 The modelling effort leads to a few effects/results/suggestions. Land breaking (up) is in fact an obstacle to (producing a lot with very little waste) wheat production in the area. 
 Clearly, within (compared to other things) large families, if land 
 division among heirs is continued over a few 
 generations, at some point, fields would become 
 so small that they could not be farmed. Individual 
 farmers may have limited options to increase 
 average field size and so reduce average changeable cost of production. However, if the land 
 market is fluid, as the average field size decreases 
 and the cost of production increases, there is an 
 (reward or reason for doing something) for an businessperson to get and 
 combine small (next to) plots into larger more 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) fields. The question remains as to what 
 type of public policies may be put into place to 
 reduce the degree of land breaking (up) or to 
 lessen the cost (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) by land breaking (up). 
 If the land market in the area is well developed, there may be some possibility for individual 
 farmers to increase average field size by owning 
 the rights to farm touching units. The transactions costs of working with many (managers of apartment buildings) 
 has not been talked to/looked at. It is not clear if government policy can add/give to this process. However, it is clear that continued land breaking (up), will lead to decreasing (wasting very little while working or producing something) and is 
 filled with problems when it results in small fields. 
 
 196 
 
 A.S. Jabarin, F.M Epplinj Farming-based Money flow 11 (1994) 191-196 
 
 Responses 
 
 The authors thank A. Stoecker, R.J. Schatzer, 
 D. Schreiner, unnamed referees and the editor 
 for useful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. Appreciation is also extended to the International Center for Farming-based Research in the Dry Areas for help 
 with the survey. Remaining errors and faults/problems are the authors' responsibility. 
 
 References 
 Farming-based Statistics Indicators, 1988. (book, magazine, etc.), Government of Jordan, Amman. 
 Arabiat, S. and Al-Kadi, A., 1988. The (related to how much money and power people have) part of the (related to a large area) project for rain-fed farming-based systems in Jordan. Arab Center for Research in the Dry 
 Lands, Amman. 
 Bentley, J.W., 1987. Money-based and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) approaches to 
 land breaking (up). In: Defense of a Much-Disliked Thing/event. Annu. Rev. Anthropol., 16: 31-67. 
 Berndt, E.R., 1991. The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and 
 Modern. Addison-Wesley, New York. 
 Binns, B.O., 1950. The combining of broken-up farming-based holdings. FAO Agric. Stud. 11, UN Food and Farming Organization, Washington, DC. 
 Buller, 0. and Bruning, G., 1979. Management produces of 
 (related to space or existing in space)ly broke up land areas: a (testing out) analysis. West. 
 J. Agric. Econ., 4: 129-142. 
 Burton, S. and King, R., 1983. Land breaking (up) and combining in Cyprus. Agric. Admin., 11: 183-200. 
 Carlyle, W.J., 1983. Breaking (up) and combining in Manitoba. Can. Geogr., 27:17-34. 
 Punch/power, J.D., 1972. (away from cities) (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.). Pergamon, Oxford. 
 Cole, J.W. and Wolf, E.R., 1974. The Hidden Edge of something/unexplored area: Ecology and (family and cultural characteristics) in an Mountain-related Village. School-related Press, 
 New York. 
 Dovering, F., 1965. Land, and Labour in Europe in the 
 
 Twentieth Century (3rd Edition). Nijhoff, The Hague, The 
 Netherlands. 
 El-Hurani, M. and Duwayri, M., 1986. Farming-based policy in 
 Jordan - Policies affecting field crop production in the 
 rain-fed part/area. Abdul Hameed Healer Foundation, Amman. 
 Forbes, J., 1976. We have a little of everything: the (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 basis of some farming-based practices in Methana, Trizinia. 
 In: M. Dimen and E. Friedl (Editors) (related to a large area) Difference/different version 
 in Modern Greece and Cyprus: Towards a Possible/likely on 
 the (writing about people) of Greece. Records of the New York 
 College/school Science, New York. 
 Friedl, J., 1974. Kippel: A Changing Village in the Alps. Holt, 
 Rinehart and Winston, New York. 
 Galt, A.H., 1979. Exploring the cultural ecology of field 
 breaking (up) and scattering in the island of Pantellaria. J. 
 Anthropol. Res., 35: 93-108. 
 Grigg, D., 1983. Farming-based (the study of (or the location of) mountains, rivers, hills, etc.). Prog. Human Geogr., 
 7: 255-260. 
 Heston, A. and Kumar, D., 1983. The constant state of land 
 breaking (up) in poor (person) farming: an analysis of South 
 Asian cases. Explan. Econ. Hist., 20: 199-220. 
 Jacoby, E.H., 1971. Man and Land. Andre Deutsch, London. 
 Judge, G., Hill, R., Griffiths, W., Lutkepohl, H. and Lee, T., 
 1985. Introduction to the Explanation and Practice of Econometrics (2nd Edition). Wiley, New York. 
 Karouzis, G., 1971. Time wasted and distance travelled by the 
 average Cypriot farmer in order to visit his scattered and 
 broken-up farming-based holdings. Geogr. Chron., 1: 39--58. 
 Kennedy, P., 1989. A Guide to Econometrics. MIT Press, 
 Cambridge, MA. 
 King, R.L. and Burton, S.P., 1982. Land breaking (up), a 
 basic (away from cities) (related to space or existing in space) problem. Prog. Human Geogr., 
 6: 475-494. 
 Moore, W.E., 1972. Money-based Demography of Eastern and 
 Southern Europe. Arno Press, New York. 
 Netting, R.McC., 1972. Of men and large grassy areas: plans of 
 Mountain-related land use. Anthropol. Q., 45: 145-157. 
 Qasem, S., 1985. Farming-based policy creation and management in the farming-based section of Jordan. Ithaca Press, 
 London. 
 Salvatore, D., 1982. Explanation and Problems of Statistics and 
 Econometrics. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
 Weinberg, D., 1972. Cutting the pie in the Swiss Alps. Anthropol. Q., 45: 125-131. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
