 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
 SCIENCE @DIRECT- 
 
 AGRICULTURAL 
 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Factors deciding/figuring out intercropping by rubber 
 smallholders in Sri Skinnya: a logit analysis 
 P.H.M.U. Herath*, Hiroyuki Takeya 1 
 (how money affects people's lives) Science of Food Production, Graduate School of (story of a person's life)  Farming-based Sciences, 
 Nagoya University, Chikusa-Ku, 464-01 Nagoya, Japan 
 
 Received 14 August 2001; received in changed form 3 June 2002; accepted 26 August 2002 
 
 Abstract 
 
 (numbers that change/things that change) related to farmers' knowledge and attitudes towards intercropping of immature rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) stands, 
 extension contacts, education level, and experience with farming other crops are positively connected with the chance 
 of adoption. Higher levels of off-farm income are related to reduced intercropping in immature rubber stands. Farmers 
 who are only owners of the land and working at full or part-time rubber farming show lower adoption rates than other land 
 ownership groups. Social participation, family size, experience with farming rubber, immature and mature rubber stands size, 
 and the nature of the land (fiat/sloped) do not significantly influence adoption. These ends/end results were gotten from a logit 
 model guessed by employing the results of a survey of 588 smallholder rubber farmers from five major rubber-growing 
 areas in Sri Skinnya. 
 © 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: C25; Q16; 012 
 Keywords: Adoption; Logit model; Intercropping; Rubber; Sri Skinnya 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) is produced on around 
 8% (161,500ha) of the farming-based land in Sri 
 Skinnya (Farming-based Crops and Animals Survey, 
 1992-1993). About 33% of this area is grown in the 
 smallholder part/area (Unnamed, 1993). 70% of total 
 rubber growers are smallholders (land size of less 
 than 4 ha). According to the farming-based crops and 
 animals survey in 1992-1993, around 60% of the 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-52-789-4045; 
 fax: +81-52-789-4042. 
 E-mail addresses: herathupul@hotmail.com (P.H.M.U. Heratb), 
 sdtakakeya@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp (H. Takeya). 
 1 Tel.: +81-52-789-4041; fax: +81-52-789-4042. 
 
 smallholder farmers own less than 1 ha. Because of this, average smallholder rubber land size is very small compared to the estate part/area where around 67% of land 
 area is owned by 30% of the total rubber growers. 
 The small size of rubber holdings has (irritated/made worse) 
 the problems connected with the long immature period of rubber. After replanting or new planting, farmers face a gap in income of 5-7 years during which 
 the immature rubber cannot be tapped for latex. The 
 estate part/area has solved this problem by adopting an 
 once-a-year replanting cycle, with the aim of maintaining 
 less than 20% of the rubber stands in the immature 
 phase. Because of the limited land available, this option is not very effective for smallholders, as even if 
 they replant only part of their land, the income loss is 
 quite (large/relatively large). After identifying this important  problem 
 
 0169-5150/$ -see front matter© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 doi: 10.1 016/S0169-5150(03)00045-8 
 
 160 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 in the part/area, in 1979 the Rubber Research Institute of 
 Sri Skinnya introduced the intercropping of immature 
 rubber with crops such as banana, pineapple, passion 
 fruit and coffee (Chandrasekera, 1979). The list of 
 recommended crops grew over time to include cocoa, 
 cinnamon, and tea. However, (even though there is the existence of) research interest for more than 20 years, survey studies show the 
 intercropping among rubber holders is not very attractive. According to Jayasena and Herath (1986), only 
 about 30-40% of smallholders with immature rubber stands were intercropping. About 30% 
 of smallholders, who did not intercrop, believed that 
 the companion crop would (use/put into action) a negative effect on 
 growth of the young rubber trees. A more recent study 
 by Stirling et al. (1998) shows that around 40% of the 
 smallholders are involved in intercropping. This study 
 also identified the problems of theft and lack of knowledge as major reasons for not intercropping. However, 
 none of these studies have tried to number 
 the factors influencing adoption of this farming 
 system. 
 According to a complete review on the adoption of farming-based inventions of new things by Feder and Umali 
 (1993), the green revolution from the 1960s to the 
 early 1980s (gave a reason to do something) many studies to explain 
 the (things that decide other things) of adoption during the early stages 
 of the diffusion process. After that, studies (focused mental and physical effort) on farming-based inventions of new things that have reached 
 maturity. Mostly these included the adoption of high 
 cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties in particular and a package of connected technologies. Related to this, few 
 scientific studies have examined the adoption of 
 cropping systems. Neill and Lee (1999) attempt to 
 explain the adoption of cover crops in maize (producing crops/helping something grow). A case study in northwest India discusses the 
 factors influencing an agro-forestry farming system 
 in which sugarcane, wheat, (grass grown for food) and turmeric 
 are grown with a poplar forestry crop (Sharma and 
 Kumar, 2000). Nganje et al. (2001) analyse the factors 
 involved in the adoption of destroy farming 
 against/compared to/or multi- and mono-cropping systems by farmers 
 in Cameroon. However, to our knowledge clearly stated/particular research on the adoption of a farming system in which 
 repeating cash crops such as rubber are intercropped 
 with (for only a short time) crops is not (did/done/completed) in the books. So, the present study tries to number the 
 factors influencing this important  aspect in the smallholder 
 rubber part/area in Sri Skinnya. 
 
 2. Study area and data 
 A sample survey was managed and did/done between October 
 1997 and March 1998, covering the five major 
 rubber-growing areas (Kalutara, Kegalle, Colombo, 
 Gampaha and Ratnapura) where over 80% of Sir 
 Skinnya's rubber is (helped to grow). Intercropping is generally restricted to the immature phase of rubber. 
 Therefore, the survey was restricted to smallholders 
 with rubber (large farms with crops) less than 6 years old. A layered random sampling way(s) of doing things was employed in 
 selecting farmers. Following the sampling procedure 
 of Cochran (1963), the number of farmers for each 
 area was serious and stubborn (thinking about/when one thinks about) the cost factor and 
 the total budget available. The number of farmers for 
 different land sizes within a range was figured out by/decided by 
 the (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) portion method. 
 Many technology adoption studies tell the difference between the rate of adoption (e.g. the proportion of 
 farmers adopting intercropping) and the strength of 
 adoption (defined based on the level of use of a technology, e.g. the proportion of the farmer's immature 
 rubber land planted to other crops). In the smallholder rubber part/area in Sri Skinnya, farmers tend to 
 intercrop their whole immature rubber stands when 
 they adopt this new rubber farming system. This may 
 be due to the very small land size and the (state of knowing someone or something well) 
 of farmers with this farming system (around 20 years 
 ago this farming system was introduced). So, the 
 level of intercropping immature rubber is either the 
 whole stand (100%) or not at all (0%). Because of this, in this 
 study, data have been gathered on the rate of adoption 
 alone. Also, different other (related to how much money and power people have) factors and 
 attitudes towards intercropping were recorded. 
 The total budget gave out to the survey was 100,000 
 Sri Skinnyan rupees (the exchange rate at the time of 
 this study was US $1 = Rs. 70), which was divided 
 equally between the five areas. The guessed unit 
 cost for surveying a smallholder in the Kalutara area, 
 which is nearest to the operational area (the Rubber 
 Research Institute of Sri Skinnya), was Rs. 125, while 
 that of all other areas was Rs. 150. As a result, the 
 number of smallholders to be interviewed in Kegalle, 
 Colombo, Gampaha and Ratnapura was 167, and 200 
 in Kalutara. However, while it was possible to interview all selected smallholders in the Kalutara area, 
 problems with transport and the availability of farmers within the 6-month survey period resulted in fewer 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 case studies in Colombo (88), Gampaha (70), Ratnapura (90), and Kegalle (140). In the same way/in that way, the total 
 sample size is 588 farmers. List of questions-based structured interviews were managed and did/done for each smallholder, 
 and a visual test was used to gather site information. 
 
 3. Modelling technology adoption 
 The decision to intercrop or not to intercrop immature rubber stands can be explained as a separate 
 (number or thing that changes). Because of this, (related to/looking at/thinking about) choice of models, the most 
 important aspect of the decision (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) is the (divided into two) (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)). Classical linear methods are inappropriate for (divided into two) choices since 
 they can lead to heteroscedasticity variances. This 
 problem is usually healed/made better by using maximum 
 chance guess (MLE), although heteroscedasticity in MLE is also a possibly serious problem 
 leading to (not agreeing/not happening in the same way) estimators (Greene, 2000). 
 According to Wooldridge (2000), when heteroscedasticity is watched/followed, such models require more general 
 guess. However, such models are not often used 
 in practice, since logit and probit models with flexible 
 functional forms in the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) tend to 
 work well. 
 In making decisions about the adoption of a given 
 technology, a farmer tests the new technology 
 in terms of its (in small steps up) benefit. If the money-based 
 benefit of using the technology is higher than the old 
 technology, the preference or utility (U) for that technology (assuming monotonic relationship between 
 utility and benefits) will be higher than the old technology. According to Greene (2000), random utility 
 models address these types of individual choice situations. A common (detailed description of exactly what is required) is the linear random 
 utility model. 
 Suppose an individual farmer's utility after adopting the new technology (intercropping immature rubber stands) for a given vector of money-based, social, and 
 physical factors (Z) is represented by Ure (Z), and the 
 utility without adoption by UNre (Z). Then, the preference for adopting or not adopting can be defined as 
 a linear relationship 
 Urc(Z) 
 
 = 
 
 Zf3re +ere 
 
 YNrc(Z) = Zf3Nre + eNre 
 
 161 
 
 In this case, f3re, f3Nre and before, eNre are response 
 coefficients and random disturbances connected with 
 the adoption and non-adoption of intercropping, (match up each pair of items in order). Assuming that the (not numbers-based) (number or thing that changes) Yindexes the adoption decision, then it will take a value 
 of one if the farmer adopts the technology and zero 
 otherwise. The chance that a given farmer will intercrop his immature rubber land can be expressed as 
 a function of Z as follows 
 P(Y = 1) = P(Ure &amp;gt; UNie) 
 = P(Zf3re +ere &amp;gt; Zf3Nie + eNie) 
 = PZ{(f3re - f3Nie) &amp;gt; eNre- ere} 
 = P(Zf3 &amp;gt; &#126;) = F(Zf3) 
 
 where P is a chance function, &#126; = eNre - before  is a 
 random disturbance term, f3 = (f3re- f3Nie) a vector of 
 unknown limits/guidelines which can be understood/explained as the 
 net influence of the vector of (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) on 
 adoption of intercropping, and F (Zf3) is the total amount of 
 distribution function for &#126; tested at Zf3. 
 The exact distribution of F depends on the distribution of the random term &#126;- The probit model rises 
 from assuming a (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) distribution, and a logit model 
 rises from assuming a logistic distribution. Under the 
 standard ideas (you think are true) about the error term, there is 
 no good  reason to prefer probit to logit guess 
 (Greene, 2000). In the same way/in that way, in most applications, it 
 seems not to make much difference. (thinking about/when one thinks about) all 
 these aspects, a logit model was developed to study 
 the factors affecting intercropping in the smallholder 
 rubber part/area in Sri Skinnya. 
 According to the logit model, the chance of an 
 individual rubber farmer adopting intercropping (IC) 
 in his immature rubber stands, given money-based, social, 
 and physical (features/ qualities/ traits) (Z) is, P(ICI Z) and can 
 be specified as 
 P(ICIZ) = 
 
 exp(ZJ{ + &#126;) 
 1 + exp(Zf3 + &#126;) 
 
 where a&amp;lt; Zf3 &amp;lt;a. 
 The chance of not adopting intercropping, 
 P(NICIZ), is therefore, 
 exp(Zf3 + &#126;) ]_) 
 P(NICIZ) = 1- P(ICIZ) = 1- [_( 1 + exp(ZJ{ + &#126;) 
 1 
 
 1 + exp(Zf3 + 
 
 &#126;) 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya!Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 162 
 
 The relative odds of adopting against/compared to/or not adopting intercropping in immature rubber stands are given by 
 P(ICjZ) 
 P(NICjZ) 
 
 [exp(Z,B + &#126;)][1 + exp(Z,B + 
 [1 + exp(Z,B + 
 = exp(Z,B + &#126;) 
 
 m 
 
 m 
 
 By taking the logarithms of both sides, 
 P(ICjZ) 
 ln [_( P(NICIZ) 
 
 J = Z,B + &#126; 
 
 (1) 
 
 The maximum chance approach can be used to 
 guess the above Eq. (1). 
 
 4. Scientific model 
 The farm and farmer clearly stated/particular factors included in 
 the model are based on invention of new things diffusion explanation 
 and earlier studies. Described/explained reviews of these factors 
 are given by Feder and Umali (1993). The selected 
 (numbers that change/things that change) for this study included the farmer's experience with rubber-growing (FEXR), experience with 
 the other crops recommended for intercropping (FEXOCRO), immature rubber land size (IMRLS-only 
 land good for intercropping is carefully thought about/believed), mature 
 rubber land size (MARA-as a source of income), 
 whether the rubber land is sloped or flat (TERR), availability of off-farm income (OFI), contacts with extension agents (NEVM), social participation (SOPC), 
 decision maker's education level (DMEDUL), farm 
 family size (FAMSIZE), nature of land ownership 
 (OWNSHIP), distance between a farmer's residence 
 and the rubber land (DIS-as a measure of security), 
 and a farmer's (point of view/way of behaving) towards intercropping with 
 immature rubber (ATT). A complete description of 
 the (numbers that change/things that change) specified and the types of measures that 
 have been employed is given in Table 1. 
 (putting into) use of the model must account for different (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) conditions (e.g. soil quality and rainfall patterns) among the five different areas selected 
 for the study. Therefore, (related to a large area) dummy (numbers that change/things that change) for 
 four different areas are also included into the 
 early/incomplete guess of the model. The Ratnapura 
 area, where the lowest share of intercropping was 
 recorded serves as the reference. Also, the Wald test 
 (the equal of the Chow test in OLS guesses) 
 was managed and did/done to (check for truth/prove true) the (state where all things are equal) of the coefficients 
 across these areas. 
 
 In many studies, farm size has been shown to positively affect adoption decisions. A study by Cancel 
 and Parrikh (1999) points to/shows a good effect of farm 
 size on the adoption of improved wheat varieties. 
 Also, a study by Doss and Morris (2001) showed/told about that 
 the adoption of improved maize varieties is positively 
 connected with the amount of land owned. Therefore, 
 it is guessed that the sign on this (number or thing that changes), the 
 immature rubber land size in the scientific model, is 
 positive. 
 Mature rubber land size has been thought about/believed as a 
 separate explanatory (number or thing that changes) in this study as it could 
 act as a source of income for intercropping activities in 
 immature rubber stands. Related to this, it might have a 
 good effect on intercropping. However, (thinking about/when one thinks about) problems related to mature rubber such as (not enough of something) 
 of tapping labour and high price ups and downs, this (number or thing that changes) might also reduce the immature rubber activities 
 of the farmer. Therefore, the sign of the (number or thing that changes) mature rubber area cannot be decided good. 
 In this study, the availability of workers is 
 pointed to/showed by education level and years of farming 
 experience, both in rubber and other crops. Many 
 studies of the adoption and diffusion of inventions of new things 
 (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) the effect of workers investments on 
 adoption behaviour. Some of the (away from cities) social books (Shoemaker, 1971) has suggested that adoption 
 depends on the decision makers' education and information level. Mittal and Kumar (2000) find a positive 
 hit/effect of (away from cities) reading and writing ability on the adoption of high cooperating with/producing/giving up varieties of rice and wheat in India. Also, Doss 
 and Morris (2001) point to/show that education is a significant (thing that decides something) of the adoption of modern varieties 
 of maize in Ghana. So, the hit/effect of the main decision maker's education level on the intercropping 
 of immature rubber is assumed to be positive. 
 The hit/effect of experience on adoption is confusing good. As experience increases (and therefore 
 age increases), the time (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  in which to collect 
 the benefits of adoption decreases, while risk disgust and learning by doing with current management 
 practices may increase. On the other hand, greater 
 experience could also lead to better knowledge of 
 (related to space or existing in space) (quality of changing over time or at different places) in the field and more correct test of the benefits of adoption. Shiyami et al. 
 (2000) find that the more experience with growing 
 chickpea, the higher the adoption of new varieties. 
 (thinking about/when one thinks about) the above factors, the hit/effect of farming 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 163 
 
 Table 1 
 Description of the (numbers that change/things that change) specified in the model 
 (number or thing that changes) (word made up from the first letters of words) 
 (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) 
 !CONOT 
 (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) 
 NEVM 
 OFI 
 IMRLS 
 MARA 
 TERR 
 DIS 
 
 SOPC 
 FEXR 
 DMEDUL 
 FEOCRO 
 OWNS HI 
 
 (number or thing that changes) meaning 
 
 Type of measure 
 
 Whether a rubber farmer has intercropped 
 his immature rubber land or not 
 
 Dnmmy (intercropped 
 intercropped = 0) 
 
 Average number of visits made by an 
 extension officer to farmer per month 
 Whether the farmer has any off-farm 
 income or not 
 Size of the immature rubber land 
 Size of the mature rubber land 
 Nature of the land 
 Average distance from rnbber land to 
 farmer's residence 
 Whether a farmer is a member of any farm 
 organization or not 
 Farmer's actual involvement of growing 
 rubber as a decision maker 
 Education level of the main decision maker 
 of the rubber (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 Farming experience of other crops as an 
 actual decision maker 
 Nature of land ownership and farmers 
 Involvement in real farming 
 
 Days per month 
 
 + 
 
 Dnmmy (with off-farm income = 1, 
 without off-farm income = 0) 
 In hectares 
 In hectares 
 Dnmmy (flat land = 1; sloped = 0) 
 In kilometers 
 
 + 
 
 Dnmmy (member = 1, non-member = 0) 
 
 + 
 
 Number of years 
 
 + 
 
 Number of years of formal education 
 
 + 
 
 Number of years 
 
 + 
 
 Expected sign 
 = I, 
 
 not 
 
 ? 
 
 + 
 
 Dnmmy (single ownerships with fnll or 
 part-time farming = 1: other type of 
 ownerships with full or part-time farming 
 = 0) 
 
 ATT 
 
 Attitudes of farmer towards intercropping 
 
 FAMSIZE 
 
 Farm family size 
 Farmers from Colombo area 
 Farmers from Kegalle area 
 Farmers from Gampaha area 
 Farmers from Kalntara area 
 
 Dcolombo 
 
 DKegalle 
 Doampaha 
 DKalutara 
 
 experience in rubber and the other crops is expected 
 to be positive. 
 Contacts with extension agents and social participation are expected to have a positive effect on adoption 
 based upon invention of new things diffusion explanation. Such contacts, 
 by exposing farmers to information, can be expected 
 to stimulate adoption. Higher visitation rates by extension personnel reduces not only the chance of 
 farmers choosing destroy farming, but also 
 (helps increase/shows in a good way) movement into multi- and mono-cropping in 
 Cameroon (Nganje et al., 2001). Therefore, the hit/effect 
 of changeable extension contacts is expected to be positive in this model. The hit/effect of the (number or thing that changes) social 
 
 Dummy (number or thing that changes) (farmer who feels that 
 intercropping will have positive effects or 
 there will not be any bad effects on cropping 
 system = 1: feel there will be bad Hits/effects 
 on rubber or not sure of the hit/effect = 0) 
 Total number of members 
 Dnmmy (Colombo = I: rest = 0) 
 Dummy (Kegalle = 1: rest = 0) 
 Dnmmy (Gampaha = I: rest = 0) 
 Dummy (Kalutara = 1: rest = 0) 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 participation is guessed to be positive based on 
 a study by Sharma and Kumar (2000). In the same way/in that way, 
 (how rich or poor people are) improves/increases the 
 adoption of agro-forestry inventions of new things in the Haryana 
 State of India. In this study, an index has been developed to measure the (how rich or poor people are). Social 
 participation is one of the major parts/pieces of that 
 index. 
 The role of off-farm income on the decision to 
 adopt is not very clear. It is watched/followed that farmers 
 with off-farm income are less (not wanting to do anything dangerous) than farmers 
 without sources of off-farm income. Off-farm activities will reduce the management useful things/valuable supplies available 
 
 164 
 
 P.H.M. U. Herath, H. Takeya/ Farming-based Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 for the adoption process, but access to outside information may have positive effects. Given that most 
 of rubber small holders depend on family labour for 
 their farming, off-farm activities might worsens/decreases intercropping. According to Dimara 
 and Skurass (1998), an increase in the off-farm once-a-year work units decreases the chance of adopting 
 flue-cured tobacco varieties in Greece, but this relationship is not statically significant. (thinking about/when one thinks about) all 
 these factors, it is hard to (describe the future) the sign of this 
 (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)) in the model. 
 There is mixed (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) about the hit/effect of land 
 ownership and full time operation of a farm on (rewards or reasons for doing something) to adopt a new technology. On the one hand, land 
 ownership is guessed to increase (rewards or reasons for doing something) by 
 lengthening planning horizons and the share of benefits building up to the adopters while lowering the rates 
 of time preference. Related to this, full time operators 
 are expected to be more likely to adopt a time and 
 management intensive technology (Barrel-maker  and Keirn, 
 1996). On the other hand, the (possibility of/possible happening of)  such technologies to (use less) input use, reduce cost, and provide money-based benefits even in the short run could 
 create (rewards or reasons for doing something) for adoption even among renters and 
 part-time operators as watched/followed by Lee and Stewart 
 (1983). In the same way/in that way, the sign of the (number or thing that changes), land 
 ownership, has not been assigned. 
 The influence of household size on the decision 
 to adopt is not clear. If an farming-based technology 
 increases the seasonal demand for labour, it would 
 be less attractive to a household with limited family 
 labour. Besides labour demand, the other factor related to family size, talked about/said as an important thing to think about in 
 adoption decisions, is the consumption pressure the 
 household faces, (in other words) the responsibility of the head of 
 the household to make sure that the minimum food needed thing of the family is met. If the technology is a 
 staple crop, the direction of effect on adoption in survival/income farming is confusing. While the higher 
 consumption pressure a larger family faces may (give a reason to do something) adoption, the risk involved with a new and 
 untried variety may stop the head of a larger household from adopting it. (thinking about/when one thinks about) the above factors, 
 the hit/effect of family size on intercropping is assumed 
 to be positive, as there is no increased seasonal demand of labour in the recommended major crops such 
 as banana and pineapple; however, this could be an 
 ideal option for dealing with consumption pressure. 
 
 Attitudes towards intercropping have been thought about/believed in the model as a mental factor that would 
 affect this new system of rubber farming. In the books, attitudes have been defined as the degree of a 
 farmer's positive or negative feelings towards an invention of new things. It is assumed that attitudes mostly depend on 
 household values, beliefs and facts or conditions (that surround someone) (Sharma 
 and Kumar, 2000). In this study, (point of view/way of behaving) towards intercropping immature rubber stands was tested by 
 (using/getting to) the farmer's opinion directly through interviews. Farmers who have stated either that they believe 
 that this cropping system would improve the growth 
 of rubber, or those who believe that there will not be 
 any negative effects on rubber are carefully thought about/believed to have 
 positive feelings towards this cropping system. In contrast, farmers who believe that there would be some 
 negative effects on rubber or those who express doubt (related to/looking at/thinking about) the results of this farming 
 system are categorised as farmers with negative feelings towards the system. In this model, attitudes have 
 been included as a dummy (number or thing that changes). Farmers with negative feelings towards the intercropping are carefully thought about/believed 
 as the base category. Farmers with positive feelings 
 towards this farming system, guessed to have a 
 good effect on intercropping, are compared to the 
 base category. 
 The distance between a farmer's residence and the 
 rubber land is employed as a measure of security 
 and expected to have a negative sign. This is based 
 on previous survey studies in which theft was identified as one of the major problems in intercropping. 
 Finally, nature of the rubber land is included in the 
 model as a dummy (number or thing that changes). Farmers with sloped 
 lands are carefully thought about/believed as the base category. So, level 
 land is guessed to have a positive influence on 
 intercropping compared to this base category. 
 
 5. Scientific results 
 5.1. (features/ qualities/ traits) of the sample farmers 
 A summary of the mean (features/ qualities/ traits) of the 
 whole study population, adopters and non-adopters, 
 is presented in Table 2. There is a a big difference in the mean values of the number of extension 
 visits, off-farm income, nature of the land, farming experience of other crops (FEOCRO) and the 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya!Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 165 
 
 Table 2 
 Mean values of the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 All farmers' 
 
 Adopters 
 
 Non-adopters 
 
 t-test for equal means 
 
 ?-value 
 
 ICO NOT 
 NEVM 
 OFI 
 IMRLS 
 MARA 
 TERR 
 DIS 
 SOPC 
 FEXR 
 DMEDUL 
 FEXOCRO 
 OWN SHIP 
 ATT 
 FAMSIZE 
 
 0.3 
 6.5 
 0.63 
 1.91 
 1.7 
 0.34 
 2.3 
 0.24 
 16.3 
 8.25 
 2.6 
 0.89 
 0.68 
 5.39 
 
 10.3 
 0.16 
 1.95 
 1.52 
 0.43 
 1.8 
 0.28 
 16.7 
 7.9 
 6.2 
 0.84 
 0.92 
 5.48 
 
 4.9 
 0.84 
 1.82 
 1.72 
 0.25 
 2.5 
 0.22 
 16.1 
 8.6 
 1.0 
 0.91 
 0.57 
 5.35 
 
 -33.1 
 20.9 
 0.64 
 0.83 
 -4.2 
 1.05 
 -1.41 
 -0.45 
 -1.98 
 -8.72 
 1.59 
 -10.69 
 -1.25 
 
 0.0001 
 0.0001 
 0.51 
 0.40 
 0.0001 
 0.29 
 0.15 
 0.64 
 0.47 
 0.001 
 0.11 
 0.001 
 0.21 
 
 Source: own calculations. 
 
 attitude towards intercropping between the adopter 
 and non-adopter (groups of people/animals/things). Extension agents visited 
 the adopters often, and most of them (92%) have 
 positive feelings towards intercropping compared to 
 the non-adopters (57%). Most of the non-adopters 
 have access to off-farm income (84%) compared to 
 the adopters (16%). Adopters' farming experience 
 with other crops (6.2 years) is higher than that of the 
 non-adopters (1 year). About half the population of 
 adopters (43%) has level land whereas only about a 
 quarter of people/of the group (27%) of non-adopters has 
 level land. There is no a big difference between 
 the population means of the adopters and non-adopters 
 for the (numbers that change/things that change) immature rubber land size, distance 
 between residence and land, social participation, land 
 ownership, decision maker's education level, farming 
 experience with rubber, mature rubber area size, and 
 family size. 
 5.2. Guessed logit model 
 This section presents the results of guessing 
 the model with combined data across all five areas. 
 The scientific logit model (1) was guessed using 
 SHAZAM econometric software, version 9 (Whistler 
 et al., 2001). The guessed coefficients and the similar t-ratios are given in Table 3. The guess 
 of the limits/guidelines is received/got by the Newton-Raphson 
 repeating/repetitive procedure. To avoid the possibility of false 
 combining of data, the Wald test (the equal of the 
 
 Chow test in OLS guesses) was managed and did/done to (check for truth/prove true) 
 the (state where all things are equal) of coefficients across the different areas. This test does not reject the null guess that 
 these coefficients are equal (Table 3). The guesses 
 of the dummy (numbers that change/things that change) included in the model to represent different areas also show that there are no 
 a big differences in adoption among the areas 
 (Table 3). The chance-ratio test of the guess 
 that the coefficients of all the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change) 
 are zero, has a Chi-squared value of 533.2 with 15 
 d.f., suggesting that the guessed model is highly 
 significant. The goodness of fit measure, Estrella R 2 
 (0.8) points to/shows a very acceptable fit. Estrella (1998) 
 has suggested that this measure may be understood/explained 
 obviously in a almost the same  way to R 2 in the linear moving backward big picture. The model correctly (describes the future) 95% (554 
 out of 581) of the responses. Conect (statements about the future) are 
 (a) little higher for the non-adopters, 95% (388 out of 
 407), than for the adopters, 92% (166 out of 181). 
 In addition to the guessed coefficients, the 
 not important hits/effects of changes in the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) on the chance of intercropping are also 
 presented. The (understandings/ explanations) of these not important hits/effects are dependent on the unit of measurement of the 
 (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)). For example, the not important hits/effects show that for a 1% increase in extension visits 
 per month, the chance of intercropping immature 
 rubber stands increases by 0.05%. This hints a 
 highly elastic response of 6.89 when tested at the 
 mean values of the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)). 
 
 166 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 Table 3 
 Limit/guideline guesses of the logit model 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Coefficient guess 
 
 Standard error 
 
 Asymptotic t-ratio 
 
 Ability to stretch at means 
 
 Slope- 
 
 NEVM 
 ATT 
 OFI 
 IMRLS 
 MARA 
 TERR 
 DIS 
 SOPC 
 FEXR 
 DMEDUL 
 FEOCRO 
 OWNS HI 
 FAMSIZE 
 
 1.10 
 2.31 
 -2.44 
 -0.071 
 -0.062 
 0.48 
 0.007 
 0.29 
 0.002 
 0.10 
 0.17 
 -0.93 
 0.004 
 -0.42 
 -0.31 
 1.31 
 -0.39 
 
 0.13 
 0.55 
 0.45 
 0.11 
 0.091 
 0.46 
 0.04 
 0.54 
 0.017 
 0.06 
 0.039 
 0.65 
 0.20 
 0.86 
 0.82 
 0.99 
 0.76 
 
 8.15*** 
 4.16*** 
 -5.31 *** 
 -0.60 
 -0.68 
 1.05 
 0.17 
 0.53 
 0.14 
 1.59* 
 4.44*** 
 -1.62*** 
 0.023 
 -0.48 
 0.37 
 1.32 
 -0.51 
 
 6.89 
 1.50 
 -1.48 
 -0.13 
 -0.099 
 0.14 
 0.15 
 0.067 
 0.03 
 0.78 
 0.441 
 -0.79 
 0.024 
 
 0.046 
 0.097 
 -0.103 
 -0.003 
 -0.0026 
 0.021 
 0.0003 
 -0.012 
 0.0001 
 0.0043 
 0.0074 
 -0.039 
 0.0002 
 
 Dco!ombo 
 DKegalle 
 DGampaha 
 DKalutara 
 
 Log chance function: -74.34; log chance (0): -363; chance ratio: 577.3; Estrella R2 : 0.85 (Estrella, 1998); R 2 (adj.): 0.79; 
 percentage of conect (statements about the future): 0.95; Wald Chi-square statistic: 2.5, P-value: 0.47. Source: own calculations. 
 a Not important effects tested at the sample means. 
 * P &amp;lt; 0.1 (one-tailed). 
 *** p &amp;lt; 0.01. 
 
 According to Greene (2000), the not important effect 
 of a binary (thing that you control (like study time), that causes something else to change (like a test score)) can be guessed 
 by simply taking the derivative with respect to the 
 binary (number or thing that changes) as if it were a continuous (number or thing that changes). 
 What's more, the computation of the derivatives of 
 the (may or may not happen, depending on something) mean function is useful when the 
 (number or thing that changes) in question is continuous. However, when 
 the explanatory (number or thing that changes) is a dummy, the not important 
 effects generally produce a reasonable guess 
 to the change in the chance that Y = 1, at a point 
 such as the mean of the move backwardors. Following this, 
 the guessed not important effects of dummy explanatory 
 (numbers that change/things that change) could be defined. For an example, the guessed coefficient for the changeable (point of view/way of behaving) hints that 
 for the farm population as a whole, a 10% increase in 
 the number of farmers with positive attitudes towards 
 intercropping immature rubber will result in a 0.1% 
 increase in the chance of intercropping, which 
 represents an elastic response of 1.5. For most of 
 the explanatory (numbers that change/things that change), except NEVM, ATT, and 
 OFI, the intercropping of immature rubber stands was 
 found to be inelastic with respect to changes in these 
 (numbers that change/things that change). The most elastic response was watched/followed for 
 a change in extension visits, whereas the most inelas- 
 
 muscle twitch/weird behavior  response was watched/followed for a change in (number or thing that changes) 
 FAMSIZE. 
 
 6. Scientific findings and policy design 
 (numbers that change/things that change) representing the farmers' knowledge of 
 the intercropping immature rubber stands, extension 
 contacts, education level, and experience with farming other crops are shown to have significant positive 
 hits/effects on the chance of adoption. In fact, extension contacts are shown to have the biggest hit/effect 
 with the highest guessed ability to stretch. Experience with 
 farming rubber and the social participation of farmers 
 are not significant. In this study social participation 
 is came close to by the farmers' actual involvement 
 in co-operative (communities of people). During the survey, it was 
 watched/followed that the rubber farmers' main co-operative 
 association is with rubber smallholders' co-operative 
 (communities of people). The main goal of these (communities of people) is to 
 help farmers with marketing rubber. However, our 
 results suggest that a described/explained study of the activities of 
 these (communities of people) is needed in order to (help increase/show in a good way) their involvement in other productive measures in the part/area. 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 Related to this, an active involvement of extension officers in these (communities of people) may be useful. What's more, 
 the results show that increasing farmers' knowledge 
 through extension and education programs could very improve intercropping practices in immature 
 smallholder rubber stands. 
 The dummy (number or thing that changes) representing the fanner's (point of view/way of behaving) towards intercropping immature rubber stands 
 affects the chance of adoption. The base category this way was the farmers 
 who believe that intercropping would be harmful 
 to the rubber crop or who are uncertain about the 
 possible results of this new farming system. 
 The scientific results point to/show that about 82% of 
 the total population and about 57% of the intercroppers belong to this base category, while 92% of 
 the non-intercroppers believe that this farming practice would be harmful or are uncertain. In terms of 
 not important hits/effects, an increase of 10% in the farmers 
 with a positive (point of view/way of behaving) towards intercropping would 
 increase the numbered intercroppers by nearly 1%. 
 These figures suggest how important the improvement 
 of knowledge is in order to improve intercropping in 
 the smallholder rubber part/area in Sri Skinnya. 
 The dummy (number or thing that changes) representing the ownership of 
 land shows a significant bad effect on the intercropping. This points to/shows that when there is single 
 ownership and the farmer is involved full or part-time 
 in farming, the chance of intercropping tends to 
 be lower compared to the base category, where rubber 
 lands have been rented or the immature rubber lands 
 have been leased for part-time operators for farming 
 during the immature period. According to Lee and 
 Stewart (1983), the (possibility of/possible happening of)  technologies to (protect something natural/use less fuel, water, etc.) input use, reduce costs, and provide money-based 
 benefits even in the short run could create (rewards or reasons for doing something) 
 for adoption even among renters and part-time operators. During this survey, it was watched/followed that renting 
 out rubber land during the immature period for intercropping is becoming popular among some smallholders. However, Gray (1997) decided that most 
 of the farmers in one of the main rubber-growing 
 districts, Kegalle, are not aware of this land leasing 
 system. Also, some of the farmers are fearful to 
 lease the land due to a lack of proper legal arrangements. Involvement by extension officers and other 
 related government institutions could help this 
 activity. 
 
 167 
 
 Off-farm income is negatively connected with the 
 chance of adoption. The hit/effect is significant. In 
 terms of not important hits/effects, an increase of around 10% 
 in the number of farmers with off-farm income will 
 lead to a decline in the chance of intercropping 
 of about 1%. This may be due to a lack of useful things/valuable supplies 
 such as labour for farming activities due to off-farm 
 activities. However, the farmers with off-farm income 
 also include those who are receiving (money-related) and 
 other help under government poorness help 
 programs such as Samurdhi (richness movement). 
 In fact, this survey showed/told about that around 70% of the 
 farmers' main off-farm income was reported to be government help. Therefore, a proper co-(process where people are made priests, rabbis, etc.) 
 of productive farming activities with these types of 
 poorness help programs should be given due policy attention. 
 The distance between the rubber land and the 
 farmer's residence (a substitute for the theft problem) 
 doesn't have explanatory power. This result was unexpected 
 as previous surveys by Jayasena and Herath (1986) 
 and Stirling et a!. (1998) show/tell about that theft is one of the 
 major causes stopping intercropping activities in the 
 part/area. The present results suggest that the theft problem does not affect the intercropping decision, or it 
 could point to/show that the changeable distance is not a good 
 indicator of this problem. The effect of immature and 
 mature rubber land size and the nature (fiat/sloped) 
 of the rubber lands is not significant in the model. 
 
 Responses 
 Field research for this paper was done/tried while 
 the first author was an Farming-based Money-flow expert of the 
 Rubber Research Institute of Sri Skinnya. We are thankful to the Rubber Research Institute of Sri Skinnya for 
 helping this study. Cooperation of the staff of the 
 Rubber Development Department of Sri Skinnya and 
 the participating farmers is warmly admitted/recognized. 
 Valuable comments by unnamed reviewers are also 
 highly appreciated. 
 
 References 
 Unnamed, 1993. Ferguson Sri Skinnya Directory, vol. 125. The 
 Connected Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd., Colombo. 
 
 168 
 
 P.H.M.U. Herath, H. Takeya/Agricultural Money flow 29 (2003) 159-168 
 
 Barrel-maker, J.E., Keirn, R.W., 1996. (reward or reason for doing something) payments to encourage 
 farmer adoption of water quality protection practices. Am. J. 
 Agric. Econ. 78, 54-64. 
 Chandrasekera, B.L., 1979. Research Review of Plant Science 
 Department, Once-a-year Review Report 97. Rubber Research 
 Institute of Sri Skinnya. 
 Cochran, W.G., 1963. Sampling Ways of doing things, vol. 2. Wiley, New 
 York. 
 Doss, C.R., Morris, M.L., 2001. How does (male/female status) affect the 
 adoption of farming-based inventions of new things? The case of improved 
 maize technology in Ghana. Agric. Econ. 25, 27-39. 
 Dimara, E., Skurass, D., 1998. Adoption of new tobacco varieties 
 in Greece: hit/effect of scientific findings on policy design. Agric. 
 Econ. 19, 297-307. 
 Estrella, A., 1998. A new measure of fit for equations with 
 (divided into two) (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)). J. Business Econ. Stat. 16 (2), 
 198-205. 
 Feder, G., Umali, D., 1993. The adoption of farming-based 
 inventions of new things: a review. Techno!. Forecast. Soc. Change 43, 215239. 
 Greene, W.H., 2000. Models with Separate Dependent (numbers that change/things that change). 
 Econometric Analysis, vol. 4. Prentice-Hall, NJ, pp. 499-521. 
 Gray, A., 1997. Market hit/effect of a possible increase in production 
 of banana resulting from high density intercropping of banana 
 with rubber. Report for the Institute of Land-based Ecology 
 (Bangor), Natural useful thing/valuable supply Institute, Central Avenue, UK. 
 Jayasena, W.G., Herath, H.M.G., 1986. Invention of new things Receptivity and 
 Adoption in Rubber Mallholdings of Sri Skinnya. SRRP Research 
 Study 71, ARTI, Sri Skinnya, pp. 79-88. 
 Lee, L.K., Stewart, W.H., 1983. Land ownership and the adoption 
 of minimum land. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 65, 256-264. 
 Mittal, S., Kumar, P., 2000. Reading and writing ability, technology adoption, factor 
 demand and working well: an econometric analysis. Ind. J. Agric. 
 Econ. 55 (3), 490-499. 
 
 Nganje, W., Schuck, E.C., Yantio, D., Aquach, E., 2001. 
 Farmer education and adoption of destroy farming. 
 Farming and Applied Money flow Miscellaneous Report 
 No. 190, Department of Farming and Applied Money flow, 
 North Dakota State University, Fargo, North Dakota. 
 Neill, S.P., Lee, D.R., 1999. Explaining the adoption and 
 disadoption of (able to last/helping the planet) farming: the case of cover crops 
 in Northern Honduras, vol. 31. Working Paper, Department 
 of Farming-based useful thing/valuable supply and Managerial Money flow, Cornell 
 University, Cornell. 
 Cancel, W., Parrikh, A., 1999. The hit/effect of perception and other 
 factors on the adoption of farming-based technology in the Moret 
 and Jiru districts of Ethiopia. Aglic. Econ. 21, 205-216. 
 Shoemaker, F.F., 1971. Communication of Inventions of new things, vol. 2. Free 
 Press, New York. 
 Sharma, V.P., Kumar, A., 2000. Factors influencing adoption of 
 agro forestry program: a case study from North-West India. 
 Ind. J. Agric. Econ. 55 (3), 500-509. 
 Shiyami, R.L., Joshi, P.K., Asokan, M., Bantilan, M.C.S., 2000. 
 Adoption of improved Chickpea varieties: (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from tribial 
 area of Gujarat. Ind. J. Agric. Econ. 55 (2), 159-171. 
 Stirling, C.M., Rodrigo, V.H.L., Janowsky, M., Gray, A., 1998. 
 High-density banana rubber intercrops: working well, job, 
 person (who is interested in a project or business) and market analysis. Final Technical Report, 
 Department for International Development, Plant Science 
 Research Programme, UK, p. 41. 
 Whistler, D., White, K.J., Wong, S.D., Bates, D., 2001. SHAZAM 
 for Windows, Professional Edition, Version 9.0. Econometric 
 Software, Northwest Econometrics Ltd., Vancouver, BC, 
 Canada. 
 Wooldridge, J.M., 2000. Limited (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) models and 
 sample selection corrections. In: Introductory Econometrics: A 
 Modern Approach. South Western College Publishing, USA, 
 pp. 529-569. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
