AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 The money-based and (money-related) gains from water markets in Chile 
 Robert R. Hearne 
 b 
 
 a,* , 
 
 K. William Easter 
 
 b 
 
 - International Institute for (surrounding conditions) and Development, 3 Ends leigh St., London, WCI H ODD, UK 
 Department of Applied Money flow, University of Minnesota, I994 Buford Ave. #3I7, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA 
 
 Accepted 19 August 1996 
 
 Abstract 
 Chile is one of the few countries that has encouraged the use of markets in water useful thing/valuable supply management. In order to test the hit/effect of 
 water markets and transactions costs in Chile, four river valleys, the Maipo, Elqui, Limari, and the Azapa were selected as case studies. 
 Transactions from the Elqui and Limari valleys, during the years 1986 to 1993, were carefully studied to decide/figure out the gains-from-trade from 
 market moves (from one place to another). 
 In the money-based and (money-related) analysis of water markets, crop budgets were used to guess the value of water in farming-based 
 production. The value of water-use rights to city-based  water-supply companies was guessed using the avoided cost of an different 
 investment in a water-storage holding tank. The analysis (showed/shown or proved) that the market move (from one place to another) of water-use rights does produce big 
 money-based gains-from-trade in both the Elqui and Limari Valleys. These money-based gains produce rents for both buyers and sellers. But 
 buyers, especially farmers growing money-making crops who buy water-use rights and people buying water-use rights for drinkable water 
 supply, receive higher rents then sellers. Large table-grape producers in the Limari Valley and people buying water for human 
 consumption in the Elqui Valley received the highest rents. In the Elqui Valley net gains-from-trade per share were within the range of 
 recent move (from one place to another) prices of US$1000. In the Limari Valley, gains-from-trade per share are 3.4 times the recent prices of US$3000 for a share of 
 water from the Cogoti Holding tank. 
 Where trading was active, especially in the Limari Valley, transactions costs have not presented an noticeable (blocking thing) to trading. 
 Anyway, in the large narrow waterway systems with fixed flow dividers in the Elqui and Maipo Valley there have been very few transactions. 
 Different factors add/give to the lack of trading, but the (not being there; not being present) of trading in these large narrow waterway systems highlights the costs of changing 
 fixed (set of machines), especially for trades between farmers. 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 With the growing concern about the increased 
 (not enough of something) and inefficient portion and use of water 
 useful things/valuable supplies, much attention has been focused on the 
 use of markets in water portion. A market based 
 portion could secure water supplies for high-value 
 uses in city-based  and areas away from cities without the need to 
 develop expensive, new sources of supply that may be 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) damaging. Also by securing com- 
 
 ' Corresponding author. 
 
 pensation for water moved (from one place to another) from low valued uses, 
 water markets provide an (reward or reason for doing something) for (producing more with less waste) 
 water use in farming-based, industrial, and city-based 
 uses. What's more, if markets work properly, price 
 signals can provide the information needed for (producing a lot with very little waste) water portion more effectively than models 
 developed by a central water supplies management 
 (service business/government unit/power/functioning) (Rosegrant and Binswanger, 1994). 
 The effectiveness of water markets is held back 
 by the ability of buyers and sellers to measure and 
 transport water, to (make something permitted by law) and enforce transactions, 
 and to account for water quality. So, the effect of 
 transactions costs and the (set of machines) and institu- 
 
 0169-5150/97 j$17.00 Copyright © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PI/ S0\69-5150(96)01205-4 
 
 188 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 tions that reduce these transactions costs are critical 
 to the effectiveness of water markets. Also, the 
 (free to move around/without rules or restrictions) movement of water via private exchanges can produce negative external effects on 
 third party users. There is also the fear that the free 
 exchange of water may disadvantage poor people. 
 Because of these concerns there is continued doubt 
 among water useful thing/valuable supply managers, policy makers, and 
 analysts of the type and extent of benefits that happen 
 with (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) move (from one place to another)able water-use 
 rights. There is continued doubt that (the creation of/the beginning of the existence of) move (from one place to another)able water-use rights is (good) enough for 
 the creation of an active market that will fairly 
 (give out things in a different way) water. And there is concern that if trading 
 does happen that the benefits of these trades will be 
 captured by only a small group of landowners and 
 (people or businesss who give money to help start businesses). 
 As a result, it is important to carefully study Chile's 
 experience with move (from one place to another)able water-use rights since 
 Chile is one of the few countries that has encouraged 
 the use of water markets. Market portion in Chile 
 is possible, in part, because a system of move (from one place to another)able 
 water-use rights was reestablished in 1981. These 
 rights are independent of land use and land ownership, this way trade of water rights is fairly (having no limits, rules, or barriers). 
 The (putting something into law) of these water-use rights (happened at the same time 
 with a series of changes in the Chilean (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 including (turned over from the government to private companies) land rights and liberalized trade. 
 This paper presents a description and an analysis 
 of water portion and water markets in Chile, with 
 a focus on areas of (compared to other things) frequent trades. 
 The first part of the paper provides a brief introduction. This is followed by an analysis of money-based 
 and (money-related) gains-from-trade as well as a description of the water markets. The paper then ends/decides 
 with some (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) about the water markets in Chile and the institutions that help trading. 
 1.1. Water markets, transactions costs, and institutions 
 
 As an introduction to a discussion of water markets it is useful to tell the difference between the exchange 
 of water and the exchange of water-use rights. This 
 is appropriate because the honor/difference highlights the 
 importance of the institutional arrangements for water useful thing/valuable supply portion. The former - sometimes 
 
 referred to as a 'spot market' - happens when the 
 owner of a legal or (related to giving rules and instructions) right to a certain 
 volume or flow of water sells a part of/amount of that water, 
 sometimes outside of punishment, to a neighbor in 
 a simple transaction. These exchanges are for a limited 
 period of time - sometimes for only a few hours of 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water. Although the unit of sales may not be 
 metered volumetrically, both buyer and seller have 
 good information on the amount/quantity involved. A more 
 permanent transaction involves the exchange of the 
 water-use right itself. This generally needs/demands legal 
 sanction to maintain the security of the right after the 
 move (from one place to another). These moves (from one place to another) are usually permanent, but 
 can be for a limited, but extended period of time - at 
 least one crop-watering/rinsing with water season. And the load of uncertain supply will fall on the purchaser of the right. 
 Where water is very hard to find and legally defined move (from one place to another)able water-use rights exist, market trades can be 
 expected when the difference in the value of water 
 between two uses is greater than the costs of moving (from one place to another) the water. Without transactions costs 
 money-based (rewards or reasons for doing something) would cause water users to 
 trade water-use rights until the not important value of 
 these rights was equal across all users. Of course; 
 transactions costs do limit the movement of water 
 and the move (from one place to another) of water-use rights. Transactions 
 costs for water market moves (from one place to another) include: (i) the cost 
 of the physical (set of machines) needed to measure and 
 transport water, including the (change from a liquid to a gas) and filtration losses during transportation; (ii) the cost of searching and finding willing buyers and sellers, and nego&#126; 
 tiating a contract; and (iii) the cost of validating legal 
 ownership of the water-use right, (making something permitted by law) the contract, enforcing contract (legal rules), and owning 
 the necessary permission from legal/law-based people in charge 
 to move (from one place to another) water. Because these transactions costs 
 can be large, the number of possible buyers and 
 sellers may be limited - which may result in non&#126; 
 competitive pricing. 
 The market exchange of water and water-use 
 rights is a (compared to other things) rare thing/event, and so the 
 money-based analyses of actual exchanges are rare. A 
 few studies have tested out the effects of market and 
 (related to managing and running a company or organization) moves (from one place to another) in the western USA (Vaux 
 and Howitt, 1984; Carve and reducesey and Houston, 1984; 
 Hamilton et al., 1989; Dinar and Letey, 1991; Rosen 
 and Church assistant, 1993; and Weinberg et al., 1993). Other 
 studies have depended on data from actual trades in 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 order to test the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of water markets. 
 Maass and Anderson (1978) tested the water 
 market in Alicante, Spain, and found that the market 
 system produced greater net increases in (related to a large area) 
 income than the rotation systems. Chang and Griffin 
 (1992) guessed the gains-from-trade for moves (from one place to another) 
 from farming to city-based water supply. Finally, 
 Colby (1990) guessed the transactions costs needed/demanded to get approval of water moves (from one place to another) and the 
 lawsuits costs of third party challenges and suggests 
 that this is not overly heavy. 
 
 1.2. Water portion institutions in Chile 
 Chile has a tradition of private development of 
 water supplies and private rights to shares of river 
 and narrow waterway flows that dates to the colonial time. This 
 tradition was reestablished in the National Water 
 Code of 1981 (D.F.L. Number 1122) which allows 
 private move (from one place to another)able property rights for water use. 
 The 1981 water law says that water is a national 
 useful thing/valuable supply for public use but that permanent and move (from one place to another)able rights to use water can be granted to 
 people obeying the law. Water-use 
 rights can be granted by the government upon written request, can be (bought something for money) from an individual owner, or 
 can be kept/held based on traditional use. Now, 
 there is no condition that water-use rights must be 
 used in order to be kept/held. 
 The law says that rights are to be specified 
 by volume of flow per unit of time. But in most river 
 valleys rights are defined as a share of stream flow, 
 because the high (quality of changing over time or at different places) of natural river flows 
 prohibits volumetric (detailed description of exactly what is required). Since sick use rights are granted for the full use of all the 
 water said in the right, no downstream user has 
 any right to return flows created from upstream 
 users. Downstream rights holders are not protected 
 by law from any change in upstream water use that 
 reduces (a lot) return flows. There is also no 
 restriction on the move (from one place to another) of upstream water to another (bowl/area drained by a river). 
 The Direcci6n General de Aguas is responsible 
 for water supplies planning and the development 
 and abuse of water supplies. It collects data 
 on water supplies, maintains cadastres of water use, 
 and has limited authority to get involved and help in conflicts 
 between water users. The Direcci6n General de 
 
 189 
 
 Aguas also grants, upon petition, water-use rights for 
 surface and ground water that is not already claimed. 
 These grants are a matter of public record. During 
 times of drought the Direcci6n General de Aguas can 
 (take and hold) water, with payment to holders of 
 water-use rights. 
 Although the Direcci6n General de Aguas does 
 have broad authority in water supplies management, 
 much of the actual control over river flows is exercised by the local river watching people in charge, the 
 (rulers)s de lookoutancia (JDV). These JDV manage and 
 maintain storage holding tanks, and are responsible for 
 reducing the flow of water to narrow waterways during times of 
 water (not enough of something). The JDV are controlled by the river's 
 water-use rights holders on a particular section of a 
 river. This way in some river (bowls/areas drained by a river), irrigators, mining 
 companies, and water supply companies are part of 
 the same JDV. Now, the court system is the 
 final judge of water-use conflicts. 
 (in the past), the development of crop-watering/rinsing with water in Chile 
 has been ruled by the (people and businesses that are not part of the government). All privately developed crop-watering/rinsing with water systems and many of 
 those developed by the state are owned and controlled by independent water user associations 
 (WUAs). These WUAs are owned and operated by 
 their members, and charge fees based on the their 
 capital and operating costs. The WUAs maintain the 
 narrow waterway systems, keep records of rights holders, give out water to individual rights holders according to 
 their recorded shares, and enforce water rights. The 
 1981 Water Code specifies rules for the (creation and construction/ group of objects), 
 control, and responsibilities of these WUAs. 
 
 2. Calculation of gains-from-trade and money-based 
 rents 
 In order to test the hit/effect of water markets and 
 transactions costs in Chile, four river valleys, the 
 upper Maipo in Chile's central valley, and the Elqui 
 and Limarf valleys in north-central Chile, and the 
 Azapa Valley in the far north of Chile were selected 
 as case studies (Hearne, 1995; Hearne and Easter, 
 1995). These valleys were identified based on prior 
 information that suggested that there was - or should 
 be - active trading in the area. Attempts were made 
 to identify all transactions of water-use rights in 
 these areas for the years 1986-1993. These years 
 
 190 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter j Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 were chosen because of reports of more active water 
 trading over the last few years, because they include both 
 wet and dry years, and because farmers were expected to provide more correct information on recent transactions. Water transactions in conjunction 
 with land transactions were generally not thought about/believed, 
 because they usually do not represent a change in 
 water-use patterns. 
 A survey test/list of questions was developed to ask for/encourage 
 information from farmers who have participated in 
 water market transactions. This information included: (i) individual (features/ qualities/ traits) of buyers and 
 sellers; (ii) water transactions, including price, amount, and transactions costs; and (iii) farmer's crop 
 yields. In order to maintain the confidence of the 
 person who responded in the survey procedure questions on 
 incomes and tax rates were avoided. 1 
 People making transactions were identified 
 from records of WUAs, from local real estate registries, and from other transacting parties. 
 Farm experts from the Universidad Cat6lica of Santiago were recruited as enumerators. Attempts were 
 made to contact all people who had made transactions in the areas selected for analysis. Managers 
 of city-based  water-supply companies and industrial users 
 of water were also interviewed. 
 2.1. Crop budget analysis in valuing water rights 
 
 The net returns, calculated using farm budget 
 analyses, is an upper bound to farmer's desire 
 to pay for water in crop-watering/rinsing with water. This is not a not important 
 analysis, but an guess of the average value of 
 water. The net returns to a farmer are the maximum 
 that a farmer could pay for water and land, and still 
 break even. In this study, farm budgets are used for 
 both an money-based and (money-related) analysis of water 
 markets. Net returns are divided between land and 
 water according to relative market values (asked for/encouraged 
 
 1 In general, people who responded had no (reward or reason for doing something) to bias responses. 
 Anyway, private nature of  individual survey responses was 
 promised and respected. Because fees paid to (person authorized to serve as a witness for the signing of important documents) republics are 
 based on transaction prices, there might be an (reward or reason for doing something) for buyers 
 to report low transaction prices at the registration of the title. 
 However, transaction prices were often public knowledge, and 
 many buyers wanted transaction prices to be known in order to 
 attract more sellers. 
 
 in this study using a survey of farmers) of land and 
 water used in crop production. The (money-related) analysis 
 is performed to decide/figure out individual (rewards or reasons for doing something) to 
 participate in water markets. In contrast, the money-based analysis provides the net return to (community of people/all good people in the world) 
 from market moves (from one place to another). In an money-based analysis, 
 move (from one place to another) payments are left out/kept out and prices are (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for money-based values (explained in more detail 
 later in this paper). The following paragraphs explain 
 this procedure and the ideas (you think are true) used. 
 Farmer's per hectare produces /gives up are based on survey 
 data. In the case where farmers didn't answer 
 this question, average yields from other surveyed 
 farmers were used. 2 Output price and cost of production information were taken from representative 
 crop budgets used by the Direcci6n de Riego and the 
 Department of Money flow of The Universidad 
 Cat61ica of Chile in the (money-related) and money-based 
 evaluation of crop-watering/rinsing with water projects in the Elqui and Limarf valleys, dated 1991 and 1992. 
 Because a time series of input prices was not 
 available, relative input and output prices are assumed to remain constant. Farmer's cost in supplying work hard to clean common narrow waterways and water fees 
 paid to WUAs are included as production costs, 
 because they account only for the cost of water 
 delivery (WUAs are non-profit organizations, and 
 they decide/figure out their own fees obeying 
 their capital and operating costs). The cost of labor 
 to clean narrow waterways within the farm is included in the 
 labor cost of the crop budget. To set apart water costs 
 among crops the farmer's total expense for water 
 is multiplied by the percentage of water used for 
 each crop as decided/figured out in the interview. 
 The cost of servicing a (money owed)  to cover the costs of 
 initial crop development is included for all permanent crops. These costs are taken from the same crop 
 budget information. Net money/money income are discounted by 
 7% in order to account for management services. In 
 order to account for the risk soaked up by a farmer, a 
 15% commercial loan rate was used for both interseasonal finance and crop development, since the 
 rate includes a risk payment. 
 
 2 For major crops such as table grapes missing (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) on 
 yields were rare. Overall, 20% of the people who responded did not 
 report yields. 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter I Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 In Chile farming-based taxes are fairly complex. A 
 simple option for farmers is to pay a land tax of 10% 
 of the tested value. Because land tests are 
 generally not up to date, the stated tested value is 
 probably much less than the market value reported in 
 the survey, and for this reason reported market values are discounted by 50%. Land taxes payments 
 were deducted from net money/money income in the (money-related) 
 analysis of rents to buyers and sellers. These payments were not deducted from net money/money income in the 
 money-based analysis because they are move (from one place to another) payments and do not reflect a net loss to (community of people/all good people in the world). 
 2.2. Value of water for drinkable water supply in the 
 Elqui Valley 
 The value of water-use rights in the Elqui River 
 for drinkable water supply can be figured out by/decided by the 
 purchaser's ability to go before the need to invest in 
 more expensive other choices to get water supplies. 
 Since the demand for water in this service area will 
 continue to rise, the least cost other choice for meeting 
 this demand - without effective water 
 markets - is the appropriate way(s) of doing things for testing the value of water. Ground water in this area is 
 very deep, and of poor quality, and would not be a 
 (producing a lot for a given amount of money) other choice, except for emergency supplies in summer months. 
 The first (or most important) other choice for drinkable water supply 
 would be to construct a holding tank in the Elqui Valley. 
 In fact, ESSCO, the city-based water-supply company which services the valley's crowded coastal 
 area, (chose to not do something) of a proposed group effort with the 
 Ministry of Public Work's Direcci6n de Riego to 
 construct the Puclaro Dam on the Rfo Elqui. At a 
 cost of US$23 500 000, ESSCO was offered (good) enough ability (to hold or do something) in the proposed holding tank to meet its 
 needs for secure water supplies well into the next 
 century. 3 ESSCO's refusal of this offer (happened at the same time 
 with its current program to buy water-use rights 
 on the Elqui River. 
 Information for the calculation of the value of 
 
 3 Conversation with Direcci6n de Riego, Santiago, June 1992. 
 The Direcci6n de Riego also offered holding tank water at a lower 
 price but without tbe security of delivery that ESSCO is needed/demanded 
 to have. 
 
 191 
 
 delaying the construction of this water project is 
 taken from a 1991 (investigation to see if something can be done) of the Puclaro 
 project (CIAPEP, 1991) and from conversations with 
 ESSCO's planning department. According to the 
 CIAPEP study, the demand for water in the city-based 
 coastal area is growing at a rate of 2.1% per year. 
 At this rate ESSCO's current supply of water will be 
 not enough to meet its needs by the year 2011 
 (which also is a reasonable date to have expected in 1992 - the full completion of the Puclaro Dam 
 project). Following a procedure organized and listed by Moncur 
 and Pollack (1988), the value of a water-use right is 
 equal to the costs saved in delaying the need for 
 introducing a more expensive water supply. The 
 value, C/&amp;gt;1' is the 1992 value of the 570000 m 3 of 
 water needed in 2010 to cover the increased demand 
 for water, as shown in Eq. (1): 
 
 cl 
 
 C/&amp;gt;=-I 
 er(T-t) 
 
 (1) 
 
 where: r = 0.12, T = 2010, t = 1992, C 1 = 
 Ch$1 006 054 000 = the yearly payment for a loan of 
 US$23 500 000, at 12% interest for 35 years, at a 
 1992 exchange rate of Ch$350 = US$1.00. So, 
 C/&amp;gt; 1 = Ch$116 023 303 which is the 1992 value of the 
 water needed to fulfil ESSCO's unmet water demand 
 in 2010. One interesting feature of this calculation is 
 that the volume of water needed in 2011 is not a 
 factor in the desire/decision of its value. This is 
 because the Puclaro Holding tank would be large enough 
 to meet any reasonable increase in demand. 
 Once the value of the amount of water needed to 
 delay the investment in the more expensive technology is serious and stubborn, it is necessary to convert this 
 value into a per-share basis. It is assumed that 2.5 
 shares of the Elqui River are needed to secure/make sure of each 
 liter per second, because in 95 of 100 months, the 
 lower Elqui River delivers at least 0.41js per wateruse right. 4 So, C/&amp;gt; 1 = Ch$116023 303 is divided 
 by 45.3 shares to reach a value of Ch$2561220 for 
 
 4 City-based water-supply companies are, by law, needed/demanded to 
 have 95% security in water delivery. The guess of 2.5 shares 
 per literI second, is taken from a review of tbe (rulers) de Lookoutancia 
 de Rfo Elqui's records of water flow in tbe river, and corresponds 
 witb ESSCO's stated plan to buy 1300 added/more shares of 
 the Elqui River by 2020. 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 192 
 
 each of the first 45.3 shares (bought something for money) in 1992. The 
 value of all 217.8 net shares of Elqui water (bought something for money) by ESSCO in 1992-1993 are listed in Table 
 1. 
 Many of the water-use rights transactions in the 
 Elqui Valley involved the move (from one place to another) of water from 
 farming to drinkable water uses outside of ESSCO's 
 service area. The most likely different source of 
 (raw oil from the ground) water supplies for all of these (where there are lots of homes) and 
 tourist developments is the same source as ESSCO's. 
 Therefore, the avoided cost of water for ESSCO is 
 also the value of a water-use right to others needing 
 drinkable water supplies downstream of the proposed 
 Puclaro Dam. 
 2.3. Money-based analysis of gains-from-trade 
 (money-related) prices taken from representative crop 
 budgets were (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) to present money-based values. 
 Information from the 1991 CIAPEP study of the 
 Puclaro Dam was used in this (change to make better/related to changing something) because it 
 contains both money-based and (money-related) prices. Because 
 Chile has a (compared to other things) open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) with low taxes/import taxes, 
 free exchange rates, and open markets, the difference 
 between money-based and (money-related) prices are small. For 
 exportable products (that are bought and sold), such as table grapes, a percentage 
 of the exporter's commission is added to the farmgate price in order to account for this move (from one place to another) payment. For imported inputs, (money-related) prices are (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for both import taxes/import taxes (11 %) and the foreign 
 exchange higher cost (10%). An (change to make better/related to changing something) was not 
 made to tell/show the difference between the money-based and 
 (money-related) costs of building the Puclaro Holding tank, 
 because the (change to make better/related to changing something) factor is very close to one 
 
 Table I 
 Value of water rights for ESSCO's purchases 
 Year of 
 (instance of buying something for money) 
 1992 
 1992 
 1993 
 1993 
 1993 
 1993 
 a 
 b 
 
 a 
 
 Year of 
 demand 
 2010 
 2011 
 2011 
 2012 
 2013 
 2014 
 
 b 
 
 Number of 
 shares 
 
 Value of 
 a share ( Ch$) 
 
 45.3 
 21.9 
 25.0 
 47.7 
 48.5 
 36.6 
 
 2561220 
 2204690 
 2475505 
 2157305 
 1881 798 
 1643589 
 
 ESSCO (bought something for money) 67.2 shares in 1992 and !57 .8 shares in 1993. 
 Projected demand based on current growth in water use. 
 
 (0.991) and the percentage of imported products (that are bought and sold)  is 
 assumed to be (compared to other things) small. 
 Gross gains-from-trade were calculated by subtracting the value of water to the seller before a sale 
 from that of the buyer after a (instance of buying something for money), as in Eq. (2): 
 GFT/' 5 (w) = v/[w{(W1 &#126; 1 +w)]_) 
 
 - V/[ w(W/"_ 1 - w)]}- TCb,s( w) 
 (2) 
 where: GFI'/' 5 ( w) = the gains-from-trade to (community of people/all good people in the world) 
 of a move (from one place to another) in time t, of a water-use right w, from 
 seller s, to buyer b; TCb,s( w) = the total transactions 
 costs of a move (from one place to another) of w from s to b; V/[ w(W1 &#126; 1 + 
 w )]_) =the buyer's value of w, as a percentage of the 
 average value of total after-trade water-use rights 
 (W1 &#126; 1 + w ); and V/[ w(W1 &#126; 1 - w )]_) =the seller's 
 value of w, as a percentage of the average value of 
 total after-trade water-use rights (W1 &#126; 1 - w ). Efforts 
 were made to identify and interview both buyer and 
 seller of each transaction. When only the buyer was 
 interviewed, the value of water from sellers on the 
 same narrow waterway or area for the same year was used to 
 substitute for the other party. When only the seller 
 was interviewed, the value of water to almost the same  buyers 
 was used. 
 In cases where the seller of a water-use right was 
 known not to have used the water before the 
 transaction, the right was valued at the weighted 
 average value of water to close-by buyers and 
 sellers of water. This is because unused water is 
 generally distributed to other water users, along the 
 same narrow waterway or river. (This would tend to place a high 
 value on the moved (from one place to another) water-use right - because 
 the weighted average focuses on the value of water 
 to the larger farmers who are buying water because 
 they own very money-making farms - and as a result 
 make the guess of gains-from-trade conservative.) 
 Because of the interconnections in the Limarf Valley, 
 average values of water for above and below the 
 Paloma Holding tank were used. In the Elqui Valley 
 water was divided among users of the Rfo Claro and 
 Rfo Cochiguaz, users of the Rfo Elqui, and users of 
 the Herradura Narrow waterway. 
 All values were (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) to June 1993 values 
 using Chile's personal price index. Transactions 
 costs were gotten in the survey. These costs in- 
 
 193 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 escape: fees for lawyers, notaries, and engineers; 
 payments for changes of narrow waterways or gates; the 
 costs of asking for/encouraging information; and the value of the 
 time involved in the process. A summary of total 
 transactions costs for the Elqui and Limarf Valleys is 
 presented in Table 2. Net gains-from-trade were 
 calculated by subtracting the transactions costs to 
 both buyers and sellers from gross gains-from-trade. 
 2.4. (money-related) analysis of money-based rents to buyers 
 and sellers 
 (money-related) prices were employed in the crop budgets used in the analysis of individual money-based 
 rents to buyers and sellers. In this analysis, a wateruse right that was not used by the seller before the 
 transaction was valued at zero. The seller's net rent 
 is the sale price, (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) to 1993 values using 
 Chile's personal price index, less both the value of 
 the water to the seller and the seller's transactions 
 cost, as shown in Eq. (3): 
 NR;(w) =P,W(b,slw- vs[w{(Wi&#126; 1 - w)]_) 
 
 + TCS ( w)} 
 
 ( 3) 
 
 where: P,w(b,s) =the move (from one place to another) price of w (worked to reach agreement/got through) 
 between seller s, and buyer b; NR:( w) = the net 
 rent to seller s of a sale of w to the buyer b; and 
 res( w) =seller s's transactions costs. To the buyer, 
 the net rent is the difference between the value of 
 water to the buyer and the sum of the buyer's 
 purchase price and transactions cost, as shown in Eq. 
 (4): 
 NR&#126;( w) 
 
 = 
 
 V/( w)- [P,w(b,slw 
 
 + TCb( w)]_). 
 
 ( 4) 
 
 As reported, the sum of rents to buyers and sellers 
 does not equal the calculated gains-from-trade. This 
 is because money-based gains differ from (money-related) rents. 
 Also, for some transactions both buyer and seller 
 were not interviewed, and (money-related) rents are calculated and reported only for interviewed parties. 
 
 3. Results 
 Only the transactions from the Elqui and Limarf 
 valleys were carefully studied to decide/figure out the gains-fromtrade from market moves (from one place to another). In the upper Maipo 
 valley transactions were rare - except for water-use 
 rights gave up to city-based water companies from 
 developers of crowded land - and were not included in the analysis. (in almost the same way), in the Azapa valley 
 only a few transactions were identified and gainsfrom-trade were not calculated. In the Elqui valley 
 transactions were rare, but there is significant 
 intersectoral move (from one place to another) as well as a slow move (from one place to another) of 
 water-use rights within farming. In the Limarf 
 Valley, with its well-developed system of crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 (set of machines) and well-organized WUAs, transactions are fairly frequent. 
 3 .1. The Elqui Valley 
 The Elqui Valley in Chile's Area IV supplies 
 water for 18 700 ha of farmland as well as drinkable 
 water for a medium-sized city (250 000 residents) 
 with a very large summer population. A small tourist 
 industry in a few small communities in the beautiful 
 
 Table 2 
 Transactions costs 
 Limarf Valley 
 
 Elqui Valley 
 
 Total transactions costs as a percentage of transaction price 
 Costs of lawyers, notaries, and getting legal written saying of rights as 
 percentage of total transactions costs 
 Costs of engineering and changing narrow waterway (set of machines) as a percentage of 
 total transactions costs a 
 Opportunity cost of time invested as a percentage of total transactions costs 
 Costs of gathering information on buyers and sellers as a percentage of 
 total transactions costs 
 
 Buyers 
 
 Sellers 
 
 Buyers 
 
 Sellers 
 
 0.21 
 0.59 
 
 0.02 
 0.79 
 
 0.05 
 0.16 
 
 0.02 
 0.34 
 
 0.20 
 
 0.03 
 
 0.64 
 
 0.62 
 
 0.20 
 0.00 
 
 0.18 
 0.00 
 
 0.18 
 0.02 
 
 0.00 
 0.04 
 
 Guessed expenses for engineering services, change of gates and narrow waterways, and (promises to pay money back for a loss) for moving (from one place to another) water through narrow waterways. 
 Includes expenses through I 993 and does not include planned expenses for changes needed in the future. 
 
 a 
 
 194 
 
 R.R. Hearne. K.W. Easter j Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 valley (completes/goes along with) the large coastal tourism boom. 
 Major crops include table grapes, pisco grapes, other 
 fruit crops, potatoes, and (area of grassy land). One small mine in 
 the upper reaches of the (bowl/area drained by a river)  uses water from a 
 stream of the Rfo Elqui. Rainfall is rare/not enough  in this 
 area with average yearly (rain, snow, etc.) of less than 
 120 mm. Wet and dry years follow a (happening in cycles) pattern, 
 with two and three-year droughts common. The Rfo 
 Elqui is divided into 25 000 total shares. Each share 
 is supposed to deliver 1 ljs in a good year, although 
 0.5 ljs is generally thought about/believed to be the actual 
 average delivery. 
 In the Elqui Valley a limited population of 47 
 permanent transactions for the period of 1986-1993 
 were identified with the help of the JDV and 
 other WUAs in the Elqui Valley. For 41 of these 
 transactions representing a total of 712 shares of the 
 river, either the buyer or seller or both were interviewed. In total, 14 people selling 491 shares 
 and 18 buyers buying 467 shares were interviewed. 5 Some people were involved in more 
 than one transaction. 
 Of the shares sold in this valley, 90% had not 
 been used by their sellers over the last few years. Some of 
 these sellers had extra water, others had rights to 
 water along narrow waterways that did not conduct water (in a way that produces a lot with very little waste), others had quit farming, and sti11 other sellers owned rights to water but did not own land. In 
 general water that is not used by its owner is used by 
 close-by farmers in the same narrow waterway or section of 
 the river. 
 (instance of buying something for money) prices of shares of the Rfo Elqui are 
 quite changeable, reflecting differences in transactions 
 costs and in many cases the particular conditions of 
 buyers and sellers. ESSCO's average purchase price 
 in 1992-1993 was near US$1100 per share. During 
 the same period, small plot developers in the lower 
 E1qui Valley were paying US$2500 per share for 
 water in a conveniently located narrow waterway. Exchange 
 prices between individual irrigators ranged from 
 US$250 to US$1 000 per share. Often these weird differences in prices reflect the individual situation of 
 the seller. Transactions costs for most moves (from one place to another) were 
 
 5 The number of transactions for which both buyer and seller 
 were interviewed was (compared to other things) small and the use of only these 
 transactions would limit the study results. 
 
 Table 3 
 Money-based analysis of gains-from-trade: Elqui Valley 
 Number of 
 shares 
 Total gains-from-trade 
 Net gains-from-trade 
 Trades with ESSCO total 
 gains-from-trade 
 Trades with ESSCO net 
 gains-from-trade 
 Other intersectoral trades total 
 gains-from-trade 
 Other intersectoral trades net 
 gains-from-trade 
 Intra-farming-based trades total 
 gains-from -trade 
 Intra-farming-based trades net 
 gains-from- trade 
 a 
 
 US$_$ per 
 share a 
 
 712 
 712 
 298 
 
 846 
 790 
 675 
 
 298 
 
 658 
 
 63 
 
 1160 
 
 63 
 
 1139 
 
 351 
 
 934 
 
 351 
 
 839 
 
 The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used. 
 
 low because this is a narrow valley with many short 
 narrow waterways flowing directly from the Rfo Elqui and its 
 streams (see Table 2). 
 Results of the money-based analysis of gains-fromtrade in the Elqui Valley are shown in Table 3. The 
 average gross gains from trade for the 712 shares 
 were US$846 6 per share. With an average transactions cost of US$56 per share, net gains-from-trade 
 are US$790 per share. ESSCO has (bought something for money) 292 
 shares, which amounts to 28% of its current water-use 
 rights. The guessed net money-based gains from these 
 moves (from one place to another) (US$658 per share) are small. 
 One reason for this is that much of the water sold to 
 ESSCO was not used by its previous owners, and the 
 procedure of using the value of water to close-by 
 farmers may be (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) by more productive farmers. 
 This bias would result from the fact that a weighted 
 average of water values is greatly influenced by the 
 value of water to a few money-making buyers of water-use 
 rights. 
 There are some small moves (from one place to another) of water to developers of small (where there are lots of homes) and tourist housing along 
 the valley and on the coast north of La Serena. The 
 gains-from-trade from these moves (from one place to another) are higher than 
 those for moves (from one place to another) to ESSCO. This reflects the fact 
 
 6 The average exchange rate reported by the Central Bank of 
 Chile for June 1993 was used. This rate is Ch$403 = US$1.00. 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 Table 4 
 (money-related) analysis of money-based rents to buyers and sellers: Elqui 
 Valley 
 Number of 
 buyers 
 or sellers 
 All sellers 
 All buyers 
 People selling to 
 ESSCO 
 ESSCO 
 Other sellers of 
 intersectoral moves (from one place to another) 
 Other buyers of 
 intersectoral moves (from one place to another) 
 Other sellers 
 Other buyers 
 
 Number of 
 shares 
 
 Mean 
 net rent 
 per share 
 (US$_$) a 
 
 14 
 18 
 4 
 
 491 
 452 
 292 
 
 1156 
 3047 
 1071 
 
 I 
 
 3 
 
 218 b 
 32 
 
 3104 
 1041 
 
 6 
 
 40 
 
 4890 
 
 7 
 
 167 
 194 
 
 1327 
 2603 
 
 II 
 
 The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used. 
 Some of ESSCO's shares are reduced upon (instance of buying something for money) by the 
 (rulers) de Lookoutancia de Rio Elqui in order to account for conduction losses. 
 a 
 
 b 
 
 that the value of water to the sellers of these shares 
 is (compared to other things) low. The large gains-from-trade in intrasectoral trades reflects the high value of water to a 
 few money-making farmers buying water-use rights. 
 Results of the (money-related) analysis of individual 
 rents in the Elqui Valley are presented in Table 4. 
 The net rent to 14 people selling 491 shares of 
 Elqui water averaged US$1156 per share. In contrast, net rent to 18 buyers, buying 452 shares, 
 averaged US$3047 per share. In general people 
 and firms buying water-use rights received larger net 
 rents than water sellers. Intersectoral trades produced 
 higher net rents than trades between farmers. The 
 fact that many of the water-use rights sold in this 
 valley were valued at zero because they were not 
 employed by their owners at the time of sale is a 
 large factor in these high money-based rents. 
 3.2. The Limarf Valley 
 
 South of the Elqui Valley in Area IV is the 
 productive Limarf Valley, which contains the Rfo 
 Limarf and its streams the Cogotf, Grande, Guatalame, Hurtado, and Rapel. This valley has 50000 ha 
 of watered farmland producing table grapes, pisco 
 grapes, (plant-related) products, basic grains, and pas- 
 
 195 
 
 ture. A central feature of this valley is the presence 
 of a large interconnected system of three interseasonal storage holding tanks: Paloma (750 million m 3 ), 
 Cogotf (150 million m 3 ), and Recoleta (100 million 
 m 3 ). This storage along with gated narrow waterways and wellorganized WUAs allows for volumetric (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 of water-use rights. This is a dry area with mean 
 once-a-year (rain, snow, etc.) of 140 mm. There is one small 
 city, Ovalle, with a population of 80000 that draws 
 water from the Rfo Limarf. 
 In the Limarf Valley, a population of all water 
 transactions was not developed. Instead, data collection was (focused mental and physical effort) on areas with frequent transactions and people with many transactions. Attempts were made to balance interviews in these 
 areas with other areas of less market activity. In the 
 areas of the Rfo Hurtado and Rfo Grande which 
 irrigate a total of 5400 ha above the Recoleta and 
 Paloma Dams (match up each pair of items in order), only a handful of transactions were identified. All other identified transactions 
 were in areas below the holding tanks. Each WUA 
 assigns a different amount of water to each share. 7 
 Because of this all water-use rights were converted 
 to an average volumetric (religious group/category of paper money), based on 
 survey results. 
 The low transactions costs and frequent trades in 
 the valley can be attributed to both modem (set of machines) and well-developed WUAs. Because of 
 holding tank storage and gated narrow waterways, water is delivered 
 to farmers on demand and a water move (from one place to another) is almost 
 costless. So, the frequency of move (from one place to another) is high and 
 the market for water-use rights is active. People 
 easily separate water from land and farmers make 
 not important water-use decisions. 
 In total, 37 farmers selling water-use rights accounting for 2 million m 3 jyear were interviewed 
 along with 19 buyers buying 7.2 million 
 m3 jyear. 8 Results of the money-based analysis of 
 
 7 Because of the volumetric (religious group/category of paper money), it is dangerous to 
 directly compare the volume of water rights in the Elqui River to 
 those of the Limarl Valley. In the first thing just mentioned, 15750 m3 are delivered 
 in an average year, but without regard to the time of delivery. In 
 the last thing just mentioned, water is delivered to farmers at times that they request 
 water. 
 8 The number of transactions for which both buyer and seller 
 were interviewed was (compared to other things) small and the use of only these 
 transactions would limit the study results. 
 
 196 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 Table 5 
 Money-based analysis of gains-from-trade: Limarf Valley, constant 
 table-grape prices 
 
 Table 6 
 (money-related) analysis of money-based rents to buyers and sellers: Limarf 
 Valley, constant table-grape prices 
 
 Cubic meters US$_$ a per 
 per year 
 cubic meter 
 per year 
 Total gains-from-trade 
 Net gains-from-trade 
 Total gains-from-trade (instances of buying things for money) of 
 large table-grape producers b 
 Net gains-from-trade (instances of buying things for money) of 
 large table-grape producers 
 Total gains-from-trade other (instances of buying things for money) 
 Net gains-from-trade other (instances of buying things for money) 
 
 9218000 
 9218000 
 5834000 
 
 2.47 
 2.40 
 2.85 
 
 5834000 
 
 2.84 
 
 3384000 
 3384000 
 
 1.81 
 1.65 
 
 - The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used. 
 b Table grape producers with over 100 ha in production. 
 
 gains-from-trade in the Limarf Valley are presented 
 in Table 5. An average gross gains-from-trade of 
 US$2.47 for each m 3 jyear moved (from one place to another) was guessed. After subtracting transactions costs the average net gains-from-trade is US$2.40 for each 
 m 3 jyear. Trades that involved the move (from one place to another) of water 
 to large grape producers produced higher net returns 
 than other trades. 
 Results of the (money-related) analysis of individual 
 rents show net rents to 37 people selling water 
 rights, amounting to 1.7 million m 3 jyear averaged 
 US$0.00 per m3 jyear 9 (Table 6). Net rents to 19 
 people buying water-use rights that deliver 
 7.5 million m3 averaged US$1.78 m 3 jyear. The zero 
 net rents to people selling water reflects the need 
 of many farmers to sell their water-use rights to help 
 make (money owed)  payments, even though the water was 
 (a) little more valuable to them in crop production 
 than the price they got. 
 Rents to buyers are usually higher than those of 
 sellers. For example, rents to large table-grape producers - buying 78% of the water-use rights 
 included in this analysis - are high relative to all 
 sellers. This reflects the high value of water to these 
 money-making farms. Much of this difference in individual rents from market transactions is due to the short 
 term (money-related) stress of many sellers and the market 
 
 9 
 
 The actual figure is -0.0023. 
 
 Number of Cubic meters Mean 
 buyers 
 per year 
 net rent 
 or sellers 
 per m 3 /year 
 (US$_$) a 
 All sellers 
 37 
 All buyers 
 19 
 People selling to 
 20 
 large table-grape producers 
 Large table-grape 
 3 
 producers 
 Other sellers 
 17 
 Other buyers 
 16 
 a 
 
 1708000 
 7510000 
 857000 
 
 0.00 
 1.78 
 0.08 
 
 5834000 
 
 2.05 
 
 851000 
 1677000 
 
 -0.08 
 0.84 
 
 The June 1993 exchange rate of Ch$403 = US$1.00 was used. 
 
 power enjoyed by buyers. 10 Since transaction prices 
 are usually well known in these valleys, little 
 advantage is taken from not mirror-images information. 
 Prices range from US$3000 for a right with an 
 average amount/quantity of 4500 m 3 jyear in the table-grape 
 producing area above the Paloma Holding tank to 
 US$500 for a share with the same amount/quantity below 
 Paloma. This difference in price reflects both the 
 higher cost placed on water in the hot, dry sunny 
 uplands, and the prohibition on moving (from one place to another) water-use 
 rights from below Paloma Holding tank to narrow waterways above 
 the dam. 11 Also, the value of holding tank storage is 
 demonstrated by the fact that a water-use right in the 
 Limarf Valley is worth more than a water-use right 
 in the Elqui Valley that in some years delivers five 
 times as much water. 
 Many of the permanent moves (from one place to another) of water-use 
 rights in this area involve large purchases of both 
 land and water by a few large table-grape exporters. 
 The land and transactions are usually reported 
 separately because of the ability to move around of water rights in 
 this valley. Some of these transactions involve a shift 
 away from traditional crops to higher valued fruit 
 crops. Also, in the last few years, many small and 
 medium sized farmers have lost (as punishment) land and water 
 
 10 Although there are many possible buyers in the valley, in 
 each narrow waterway one or two large farmers can decide/figure out the 
 price. 
 11 Without this prohibition it would be cheap to 
 pump water directly from the Paloma Holding tank to the (next-to) 
 grape producing areas watered by upstream narrow waterways. 
 
 R.R. Hearne. K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (/997) 187-199 
 
 rights to fruit-exporting companies instead of (money owed) 
 owed to the companies. 
 3.3. The Maipo Valley 
 
 The first section of the Maipo River supplies 
 water to 4.5 million people in the Santiago area as 
 well as watering over 30 000 ha. The river is divided 
 into 8133 shares, each representing 8ljs, 85% of the 
 time. In this first section of the river, there have been 
 very few transactions of water-use rights in the past 
 eight years. The City-based (keeping things clean and disease-free) Works 
 Company (EMOS) has contracted a team of lawyers 
 to buy rights but has (bought something for money) only 33 shares 
 of the upper Maipo in the last eight years, with 
 prices averaging US$1 0 000 per share. The only 
 industrial concern to buy water rights was a 
 paper mill which made two (instances of buying things for money) totalling 4.5 
 shares. There are also very few permanent trades 
 between farmers. In the large narrow waterway systems of five 
 WUAs, distributing 65% of the crop-watering/rinsing with water water in 
 this section of the river, there were only a handful of 
 trades between farmers. All of the narrow waterways serving 
 these five WUAs have fixed flow dividers controlling 
 the distribution of water. 
 3.4. The Azapa Valley 
 
 The Azapa Valley, which is located in the downstream section of the San Jose river (bowl/area drained by a river)  in Chile's 
 far north Area I, supports 3280 areas of land of watered 
 farmland and the city of Arica (population 160000). 
 This valley, bordering the very dry Atacama 
 Desert, is very dry and rainfall in the lower reaches 
 is very small. The Water Supply and (keeping things clean and disease-free) Company of Tarapaca (ESSAT), which supplies water to 
 Arica, has been able to use rental agreements to meet 
 the (for only a short time) (very simple/rough and rude) water needs of the city of Arica. 
 ESSAT rents wells from owners of ground-water 
 rights. Different government (services businesses/government units), responding to a 
 presidential order to give the Arica water supply a 
 priority in government action, have helped in the 
 process of renting wells. In the (back-and-forth conversations to agree on something) process, 
 ESSAT was able to call for/use both the government's 
 appeal to farmers to release water for Arica and the 
 possibility that the state could (take and hold) water during 
 periods of extreme water shortage. ESSA T has not 
 needed to buy water from users of a surface 
 narrow waterway in the Azapa valley, because the ground-water 
 
 197 
 
 supplies were made available. This way the recent additions to the Arica water supply is much more a result 
 of government action than of market activity. 
 In these arrangements ESSAT digs or heals 
 a well, installs and operates a pump, delivers free of 
 charge a few hours of water per week to the rights 
 owner, and pays a rental fee for the use of the well. 
 ESSAT will then pump water from the well continuously, whereas an irrigator only uses the water a few 
 hours per week. This rental arrangement is quite 
 moneymaking to the individual irrigator, who does not 
 soak up the negative externality of a used up/reduced underground water, 
 at least in the short run. Since these rental contracts 
 can be ended/fired by either party, it is probable that 
 a few will be ended/fired after ESSAT receives water 
 from the wells that are now being healed 
 in the Andean highlands. 
 
 4. (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) and ends/end results 
 Chile's history of privately developed crop-watering/rinsing with water, 
 and its traditional portion of river water by shares, 
 has created a good climate for the establishment 
 of move (from one place to another)able water-use rights. These rights have 
 secured water supply to irrigators and so gave/given 
 an enabling (surrounding conditions) for investment in permanent fruit crops and improved crop-watering/rinsing with water technology. 
 The overall growth in the value of Chile's farming-based output during the last ten years can be attributed 
 to different changes in both input and output markets. 
 The effects of the 1981 Water Code on the farming-based part/area cannot be fully separated from the effects 
 of liberalized trade and secured land rights. But the 
 farming-based part/area that is highly dependent on crop-watering/rinsing with water has expanded without new investments in crop-watering/rinsing with water (set of machines). 
 This research has (showed/shown or proved) that the market 
 move (from one place to another) of water-use rights does produce big 
 money-based gains-from-trade in both the Elqui and 
 Limarf Valleys in north-central Chile. These money-based gains happen in intersectoral trades and in 
 trades between farmers, and they produce rents for 
 both buyers and sellers. Yet buyers, especially large 
 table-grape producers in the Limarf Valley and people buying water-use rights for drinkable water 
 supply in the Elqui Valley, receive higher rents then 
 sellers. In the Elqui Valley total and net gains-from- 
 
 198 
 
 R.R. Hearne, K.W. Easter/ Farming-based Money flow 15 (1997) 187-199 
 
 trade per share were within the range of recent 
 move (from one place to another) prices of US$1 000 per share. In the Limarf 
 Valley, gains-from-trade from shares of water-use 
 rights are 3.4 times the recent transaction prices of 
 US$3000 for a share of water from the Cogotf 
 Holding tank (one share delivers 4250 m 3 in an average 
 year). 
 One of the most interesting result of this analysis 
 is the small money-based gains from intersectoral trade in the Elqui Valley. Although the value 
 of water in city-based water supply is high, the value 
 of water to money-making farmers is also high. When 
 water is moved (from one place to another) from these money-making farmers, the 
 money-based gains from this (giving out things in a different way) are small. 
 Even if water is not used by its owner, it is generally 
 used by other farmers. If these farmers are money-making, 
 then the money-based gains of the (giving out things in a different way) are small, 
 even though the (money-related) gain to the seller is large. 
 These four case studies (show or prove) the (many different kinds of people or things) 
 of water portion and water management in northern and central Chile. In three of the four areas 
 studied, especially where large narrow waterway systems use 
 fixed flow dividers, market transactions were rare. Even though these valleys were chosen 
 for analysis because of expectations that they had 
 (compared to other things) active local water markets, only the Limarf 
 Valley had active trading. In this valley, transactions 
 costs are low and trade between farmers is helped 
 by the presence of holding tank storage, gated narrow waterways 
 with flow meters, and well-organized WUAs. In the 
 Elqui Valley, the presence of many short narrow waterways 
 flowing from the river also reduces the costs of 
 physically changing the flow of water. 
 In large narrow waterway systems with fixed flow dividers, 
 the cost of changing stream flows might be way too high especially for trades among farmers, as suggested by the lack of trading in the Narrow waterway Bellavista system in the Elqui Valley and the large narrow waterway 
 systems in the upper Maipo Valley. Sales of not important 
 amounts of extra water are far from typical. Many 
 decisions on investment and crop selection have 
 been based on the joint landjwater portion that 
 resulted from the final stages of land reform. 12 
 12 In the final stages of land reform, land stolen/stole before 
 1974 was divided into family farms equal in value to 8 
 watered ha. Water rights usually/(in the past) assigned to the land were 
 distributed to the landowners. 
 
 What's more, WUAs play an important role in 
 helping the market (giving out things in a different way) of water, especially in the Limarf Valley where trading is active 
 and in the Elqui Valley where intersectoral trading 
 happens. Many of these WUAs have been able to 
 change to fit the needs of their members for services that 
 help or stop transactions. 
 The proposed Puclaro Dam project, on the Elqui 
 River upstream of La Serena, is an example of how 
 the presence of a market other choice to water portion may reduce politica<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
