Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 P olicy R esearch W orking P aper 
 
 Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 4594 
 
 Effects/results/suggestions of Higher Worldwide  Food Prices 
 for Poorness in Low-Income Countries 
 Maros Ivanic 
 Will Martin 
 
 Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 Public (telling to people) Approved 
 
 WPS4594 
 
 The World Bank 
 Development Research Group 
 Trade Team 
 April 2008 
 
 Policy Research Working Paper 4594 
 
 Abstract 
 In many poor countries, the recent increases in prices of 
 staple foods raise the real incomes of those selling food, 
 many of whom are (compared to other things) poor, while hurting net food 
 people, many of whom are also (compared to other things) poor. The 
 hits/effects on poorness will certainly be very (many different kinds of people or things), but the 
 average hit/effect on poorness depends upon the balance 
 between these two effects, and can only be decided/figured out 
 by looking at real-world data. Results using household 
 
 data for ten (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) on nine poor countries 
 show that the short-run hits/effects of higher staple food 
 prices on poorness differ much by valuable thing and 
 by country, but, that poorness increases are much more 
 frequent, and larger, than poorness reductions. The recent 
 large increases in food prices appear likely to raise overall 
 poorness in poor countries (in a big way). 
 
 This paper--a product of the Trade Team, Development Research Group--is part of a larger effort in the department to 
 understand the effects/results/suggestions of trade policies and world price developments for poorness. Policy Research Working Papers 
 are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted at wmartin1@worldbank.org. 
 
 The Policy Research Working Paper Series spreads around the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
 issues. An goal of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
 names of the authors and should be referred to/be given a ticket in the same way/in that way. The findings, (understandings/ explanations), and ends/end results expressed in this paper are completely those 
 of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
 its connected organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. 
 
 Produced by the Research Support Team 
 
 Implications of Higher Worldwide  Food Prices for Poorness in 
 Low-Income Countries 
 
 Maros Ivanic * 
 Will Martin 
 
 * 
 
 The findings, (understandings/ explanations), and ends/end results expressed in this paper are completely those of the authors. They do 
 not represent the views of the World Bank or any other individual or organization. 
 
 Implications of Higher Worldwide  Food Prices for Poorness in 
 Low-Income Countries 
 1 Introduction 
 Since 2005, the world has experienced a dramatic rush in the price of many staple food 
 valuable things. The price of maize increased by 80 percent between 2005 and 2007, and has 
 since risen further. Many other valuable thing prices also rose sharply over this period: milk 
 powder by 90 percent, wheat by 70 percent and rice by about 25 percent. Once-a-year average 
 prices of important staple foods are shown in Figure 1. Clearly, such large increases in prices may 
 have huge/extreme hits/effects on the real incomes of poor families in developing countries. 
 (even though there is the existence of) (existing all over a large area) concern about the hits/effects of high food prices on poor people and 
 on social (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength) (eg FAO 2007; World Bank 2008a), little hard information appears to be 
 available on actual hits/effects on poor people. The overall hit/effect on poorness rates in poor 
 countries depends on whether the gains to poor net producers outweigh the bad hits/effects 
 on poor people. Whether higher food prices improve or worsen the situation of particular 
 families depends importantly on the products involved; the patterns of household incomes 
 and expenses; and the policy responses of governments (World Bank 2008b). 
 Existing analyses tell us that the hits/effects of higher food prices on poorness are likely to 
 be very (many different kinds of people or things), depending upon the reasons for the price change and on the structure of the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) (Hertel and Winters 2006; Ravallion and Lokhsin 2005). A great deal depends on 
 the distribution of net buyers and net sellers of food among poor families (Aksoy 
 and Isik-Dikmelik 2007). Only with careful examination of results at the household level 
 is it possible to tell whether changes in the prices of clearly stated/particular staple foods will help or hurt 
 poor people. 
 A particular reason for concern about the hits/effects of high food prices on poor 
 countries rises from the fact that the poorest people spend roughly three quarters of the 
 
 incomes on staple foods (Cranfield, Preckel and Hertel 2007). On the other hand, the incomes 
 of farm families--often one of the poorest groups in poor countries--may be 
 increased by higher valuable thing prices (Hertel, Ivanic, Preckel and Cranfield 2004). However, 
 the benefits of higher food prices to poor farm families may be less than they might at first 
 appear, since these benefits depends not on what they produce, but on their net sales of these 
 products (that are bought and sold). 
 In this study, we attempt to deal with the/to speak to the  main effects/results/suggestions of higher food prices on 
 poorness following the (related to how something was done) simple yet data-intensive approach of calculating the 
 short-run hits/effects on families' income and costs of living following the changes in food 
 prices. We do so using household surveys containing at least a thousand families in each 
 of nine poor countries, for which the data on consumption and production of the main 
 food valuable things are available. Besides calculating the change in household real income, we 
 also guess the hit/effect of food prices on poorness rates and poorness gaps. 
 We think about/believe two experiments in this paper. First we guess the importance of small 
 changes in the prices of individual valuable things on poorness rates in each of our sample 
 countries. We do so by managing and doing a pretty/interesting (testing out) in which we increase individual 
 prices by 10 percent to test the effect of a small change in the price of each valuable thing. 
 Second, we guess the hit/effect of the actual food price changes between 2005 and 2007 on 
 poorness in our sample of countries. In the first analysis, we assume that changes in 
 international prices are fully transmitted into domestic markets, and think about/believe only the direct 
 hits/effects of valuable thing price changes. We also think about/believe pictures/situations under which valuable thing 
 price changes lead to changes in the wage rate for unskilled labor--the other key source of 
 income for most poor families identified in Ravallion (1990). 
 
 2 
 
 2 Way(s) of doing things 
 In this study, we think about/believe some of the welfare and poorness hits/effects of changes in the world 
 prices of important staple food valuable things. Basic food valuable things that are traded around the world and 
 are important for small farmers and people in poor countries include wheat, rice, 
 dairy products, maize, sugar, beef and (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.). We carefully study the hits/effects of changes in the 
 prices of these valuable things using household-level data for nine poor countries. 
 To begin/try the analysis, we needed information on families' production, 
 (instances of buying things for money), own-consumption and sales of these farming-based products, a need that limited us to 
 countries with high-quality household surveys containing this information. This need also 
 prevented using many of the models and information files prepared for the Hertel and Winters 
 (2006) amount/quantity, since many of these did not include described/explained information on enough of the 
 valuable things central to our analysis. 
 To test the household hits/effects of changes in valuable thing prices, we use a very 
 simple way(s) of doing things based on Singh, Squire and Strauss (1986) and Deaton (1989; 1997, 
 p185) (see Add on A). We represent the hit/effect of price changes on an individual 
 household, using an expense function to show household consumption and factor 
 supply behavior and a profit function to represent household production activities through 
 unincorporated businesses/projects such as family farms. This produces /gives up a simple expression for the 
 welfare hits/effects of small price changes that involves multiplying the price changes resulting 
 from trade reform by the shares of income and expense affected by these price changes. 
 Where a household uses/eats its own output of, for instance, staple foods, the share of the 
 good's production in total output value is offset by its share in consumption so the only effect 
 on income is through the household's net sales of the good. 
 Our (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) is partial balance in that we think about/believe only the direct hits/effects of 
 changes in the prices of staple foods on families, except that, like Ravallion (1990), we 
 3 
 
 also think about/believe the possible results on poor families through caused changes in the wage 
 rate for their net sales of unskilled labor. We ignore changes in the returns to skilled labor on 
 the grounds that these returns make an very small (thing that's given/work that's done) to the incomes of the 
 poor. Our focus is on real price changes, and we ignore the possibly serious costs (Easterly 
 and Fischer 2001; Ravallion and Datt 2002) (forced (on people)/caused an inconvenient situation) on the poor through the market 
 disequilibria created by inflation. This (something left out) seemed reasonable given that the average 
 rate of inflation in developing countries 2 has been very medium-level by historical standards until 
 very (not very long ago). It averaged 5 percent in the period from 2000 to 2007 before rising to 7 
 percent by January 2007 and 8 percent in February 2008. However, to the extent that 
 valuable thing price changes are adding/giving to inflation increases in developing countries, there 
 may be some important added/more costs--the Ravallion and Datt (2002, p389) estimate 
 hints that a rise in the inflation rate of three percentage points would increase the poorness 
 headcount by 1.2 percentage points. 
 When we take into account hits/effects through changes in unskilled wage rates, we use 
 national versions of the GTAP model to test the short run hits/effects of changes in 
 valuable thing prices on wage rates--mostly measuring the Stolper-Samuelson relationship 
 between the prices of products (that are bought and sold)  and the prices of factors. Given our short-run focus, we specify 
 the standard specific-factors model of production, with capital fixed in each part/area. Under our 
 standard labor market closure, we assume that unskilled labor is mobile between farming-based 
 and non-farming-based employment so that the benefits of an increase in demand for unskilled 
 labor are shared between farming-based and non-farming-based workers. This idea (you think is true) of 
 ability to move around between farming-based and non-farming-based labor is supported by studies such as 
 Bertrand and Squire's (1980) classic analysis of (away from cities)-city-based  labor ability to move around in Thailand. To 
 test the strength of our results to this idea (you think is true), we examine in Add on B a second 
 
 2 
 
 Data from the World Bank's Projections Group (DECPG) were kind/nicely given by Hans Timmer. 
 
 4 
 
 labor market closure where the ability to move around of labor between farming-based and nonagricultural 
 labor markets is very (not totally pure/not totally correct). 
 Agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with many other studies (thinking about/when one thinks about) the hits/effects of price changes on 
 poorness (e.g. Chen and Ravallion 2004), we think about/believe only the first-order hits/effects of food 
 price changes on the poor. This seems a reasonable approach because the behavioral 
 responses hidden (under) the second-order effects we think about/believe would need to be especially large 
 to change the direction of the effects we think about/believe. 3 Demand elasticities for staple foods 
 generally appear to be low (Tyers and Anderson 1992), and the scope for reducing 
 consumption of staple foods in total when the prices of all these products (that are bought and sold)  rise together is even 
 less 4. Most of the scope for making large amount changes/recalculations is on the supply side, where 
 the scope for (change to make better/related to changing something) is less when many product prices rise together, and where major 
 changes/recalculations can take an extended period. The fact that valuable thing booms are usually shortlived (Deaton and Laroque 1992) further reduces the chance of large second-order hits/effects 
 (overloading and surrounding with too much of something) the first order hits/effects on which we focus--unless producers believe that 
 higher prices will be sustained for a longer period, they are unlikely to make the investments 
 needed for big supply responses. 
 We also leave out from (serious thought/something to think about/respect) in all but our analysis from 2005 to the first quarter 
 of 2008 any policy measures that might insulate poor net buyers of food from increases in the 
 prices of staple foods. Clearly, such policies could reduce the hit/effect of an increase in 
 domestic prices of staple foods on poor people. However, the details of such programs 
 are very important for their hit/effect, with possibly big risks of incomplete 
 coverage of the poor. Described/explained studies of the operation of such policies would be important in 
 
 3 
 
 (thinking about/when one thinks about) the net trade position of a household, or a country, reversal of the sign of the welfare hit/effect 
 needs/demands that the net trade position be more than reversed when only the direct hits/effects of the price changes are 
 carefully thought about/believed. We relax this idea (you think is true) in the scientific analysis by (thinking about/when one thinks about) hits/effects through changes in the 
 wage rate for unskilled labor. 
 4 
 Although small changes in the consumption of near-survival/income families may create large (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) 
 changes in their net sales. 
 
 5 
 
 studies of individual countries. The results presented in this study point to/show the effects on 
 poorness without functioning big plans/layouts/dishonest plans of this type. 
 In all of the analyses reported in this paper, we assume full transmission from world 
 market prices to the prices facing producers and people, a finding supported by Mundlak 
 and Larson (1992). The resulting poorness hits/effects will certainly be sensitive to this 
 idea (you think is true). However, the nature of the hit/effect will depend on the clearly stated/particular situation. In some 
 countries, where many poor people are in areas strongly (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) with world markets, 
 and net sellers are to some degree insulated, the hits/effects on poorness may be more bad 
 than under our idea (you think is true). Very differently, in other countries, people may be more insulated 
 than producers, maybe by using/eating products (that are bought and sold)  that are more strongly (made different) from 
 imported products (that are bought and sold), and the hits/effects on poorness may be more good than under our 
 idea (you think is true). The extent and nature of price transmission should be taken into account when 
 (thinking about/when one thinks about) the actual hits/effects in particular countries. 
 We calculate the real income level after the change in food prices by adding the 
 change in families' real incomes their initial income levels in order to find their real 
 incomes after the price changes. By comparing the new (able to be done) level of expense with 
 the established poorness-line level of expense for each country, we can use 
 individual survey records to identify and count the number of families in poorness and the 
 gap between their income level and the poorness line after the change in policy. We then 
 cumulate these shocks to see the hit/effect on poorness, and compare these hits/effects with those 
 winning/most common when wages are also able to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions). Finally, we use these data to calculate two 
 (completing/matching) poorness measures (Ravallion and van der Walle 1991)--the poorness 
 headcount and the poorness gap. The first measures the percentage of people falling below the 
 poorness line and the second the average percentage of the poorness line by which the incomes 
 of the poor fall below the poorness line relative to the poorness line. 
 6 
 
 3 The Data 
 For this study, we needed household survey information on supply, demand and net sales of 
 food products--a restriction that narrowed the range of countries we could think about/believe. We 
 searched for/tried to get (compared to other things) poor countries from different areas, with different relationships between 
 poorness and location, and between poorness and sources of income household; and with 
 different net trade positions in farming. Because of the very fast (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change 
 in the Vietnamese (process of people making, selling, and buying things), we received/got two (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) at different periods. 5 
 The sample sizes for each of the ten country-periods for which were able to get 
 good, high-quality survey data are listed in Table 1. These were Bolivia 2005, Cambodia 
 2003, Madagascar 2001, Malawi 2004, Nicaragua 2001, Pakistan 1999, Peru 2003, Vietnam 
 1998 and 2004, and Zambia 1998. For our first poorness rates and poorness gaps, we used the 
 standard "dollar-a-day" 6 expense-based measures of poorness from the 2007 World Bank 
 World Development Indicators (WDI). We ranked the families in our surveys by income 
 and placed the poorness line at the income level that reproduced the poorness rate in the 
 (often different) year used in the WDI. This process keeps/holds the survey information on 
 the sources and distribution of income, while updating the poorness line to the latest 
 year for which information is available. 
 Because of the generally higher poorness rates in (away from cities) than in city-based  areas, the greater 
 frequency of net seller families in areas away from cities, and the focus of this study on food prices, 
 we labeled each household as either (away from cities) or city-based  based on the classification used in the 
 national survey. For lack of information on city-based  against/compared to/or (away from cities) costs of living, we have 
 
 5 
 
 We would like to thank Carolyn Turk and Martin Rama for making available the 2004 data. 
 
 6 
 
 According to this definition, a person is poor if he/she uses/eats less that 1.08 USD in 1993 (buying things for money) Power 
 Equality terms. The years for the poorness lines by country were: Bolivia 2002, Cambodia 1997, Madagascar 2001, 
 Malawi 2004, Nicaragua 2001, Pakistan 2002, Peru 2002, Vietnam 2002, and Zambia 2002-3 
 
 7 
 
 ignored these differences, which are possibly important for the level of poorness, but much 
 less so for the changes in welfare levels on which we focus. 
 Figure 2 shows the net sales position as a share of total expenses for each of these 
 basic food valuable things by (away from cities) and city-based  families in each income quintile. Luckily, 
 most of the products thought about/believed are traded in (compared to other things) raw form, and we added consumption 
 of (able to be seen or picked out) products such as bread to the consumption data for raw products such as 
 wheat. 7 These figures for the groups near the poorness line are helpful in understanding our 
 poorness results. However, they are not definite in their effects on poorness, since the poor are 
 very (many different kinds of people or things) and those on the dividing line of poorness may have quite different (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 from others in their overall income quintile. Figure 3 shows sales of unskilled labor as a share 
 of total expenses. 
 The first poorness headcount and poorness gap numbers are presented in the first 
 column of Table 2. The first national poorness headcounts varied much between 
 countries, from 75.8 percent in Zambia to 12.5 percent in Peru with the other six countries 
 widely distributed in the (in-between/helping) range. In almost all countries, the poorness headcount 
 was higher in areas away from cities, with 40.8 percent of (away from cities) people poor on average, as against 24.5 
 percent of city-based  people. 
 The poorness gap numbers presented in the first column of Table 3 show that the gap 
 between the incomes of the poor and the poorness line level of income for all people fell 
 (in a big way) below the poorness line. On average, this gap was 18.0 percent of the poorness line 
 for (away from cities) people, 10.7 percent for city-based  people and 14.6 percent overall. In Madagascar it was 
 30.4 percent overall and in Zambia 44.7 percent, and in the country with the lowest poorness 
 
 7 
 
 The price of bread includes returns to other inputs, and so may move less than (along with something else/related to something else) with wheat 
 prices. However, the prices of the types of bread ate/destroyed by poor people in poor countries tend to be more 
 closely linked to wheat prices. Further, including in something of bread seemed better than its (when something is kept out or not included). 
 
 8 
 
 gap, Pakistan, it was 4.0 percent. In all cases but Zambia, the poorness gap was larger in (away from cities) 
 than in city-based  areas. 
 
 4 Experiments 
 4.1 Hits/effects of 10 price increases 
 In the first experiment, we think about/believe two analyses in a small, open-(process of people making, selling, and buying things) setting. The first 
 examines the direct hit/effect of possible 10 percent increases in the prices of individual 
 products on both the poorness headcount and the poorness gap--the gap between the incomes 
 of the poor and their poorness-line income. The second thinks about/believes the hit/effect of the same 
 changes, taking into account their effects on wage rates for unskilled workers. 
 The (detailed description of exactly what is required) of 10 percent price increases in experiments one and two do not 
 suggest that food prices are expected to rise by 10 percent (or any other amount). Rather, we 
 examine the hit/effect of a uniform change in the prices of these products (that are bought and sold)  to get an indication of 
 the direction and relative (at least ten times as much/less than 1/10th as much) of effects for particular valuable things. Correctly 
 understood/explained, the results of these experiments provide extremely important information because 
 they summarize all the (connected/related) information in our household survey information file on the sources 
 of income and the patterns of expense for each household. If, for instance, a large number 
 of poor people in a particular country are net sellers of wheat, this experiment will tell us how 
 much a 10 percent increase in the price of wheat will raise their incomes, and whether the 
 gains to these families are large enough to offset losses to poor net-buying families so 
 that national (and (away from cities)/urban) poorness rates fall. 
 In these initial analyses, we can avoid the frustrated question of the extent to 
 which domestic and imported products (that are bought and sold)  are substitutes, at least for the direct hits/effects through 
 valuable thing prices. When we are examining the direct hit/effect of a 10 percent change in the 
 domestic price, it does not matter whether the domestic and imported products (that are bought and sold)  are perfect or 
 (not totally pure/not totally correct) substitutes. The results without wage hits/effects from these experiments may be more 
 9 
 
 relevant in the next few days since, as shown in Ravallion's (1990) study of Bangladesh rice 
 pricing policy, the short-run effect on wages of food price changes may be much 
 smaller than the long run hit/effect. 
 
 4.2 Hits/effects of higher food prices on poorness 
 In the second picture/situation, we think about/believe the hit/effect of the (not very long ago) watched/followed food price increases 
 on poorness. The picture/situation again includes the same set of farming-based valuable things as before 
 with the exception of beef and sugar, whose prices did not change much between 2005 and 
 2007. For the rest of the valuable things, we received/got the average once-a-year prices from the 
 FAO website and calculated rough percentage changes over this two-year period. The 
 sloppy and rounded guesses are the result of the existence of different varieties of the 
 same valuable thing and different prices at different points of sale. However, because the prices 
 of almost the same  valuable things changed at about a the same rate, our picture/situation broadly takes by force/takes control of the 
 overall development of the (connected/related) food valuable things in the reference period. The price 
 changes thought about/believed in this picture/situation are shown in Table 4. 
 
 5 Results 
 5.1 Hit/effect of a 10 percent increase in food prices 
 In this analysis, we first thought about/believed the direct hits/effects of changes in the prices of the 
 valuable things, and then the combined effect of changes in the prices of valuable thing prices and 
 caused changes in wages. 
 
 5.1.1 Valuable thing Price Hits/affects 
 The results presented in Table 2 show the hits/effects on poorness rates of raising the prices of 
 particular products (that are bought and sold)  by 10 percent from their initial levels. These results are shown first for the 
 individual valuable things and then for all valuable things among the products thought about/believed. 
 Corresponding results are presented in Table 3 for the poorness gap. 
 10 
 
 The results presented in Table 2 show that the hit/effect of changes in each product price 
 on poorness differs greatly between products and countries. In Bolivia, wheat and beef have 
 the largest hit/effect on poorness rates. For wheat, the increase in poorness is greater in (away from cities) than 
 in city-based  areas, a finding agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with its larger share in Figure 1. For all products except 
 maize, poorness would increase. For maize, the reduction in poorness is mainly located in (away from cities) 
 areas, and is very small relative to the increases in poorness connected with rising prices for 
 other valuable things. 
 In Cambodia, the valuable thing for which price changes have the greatest hit/effect on 
 poorness is rice, for which an increase of 10 percent raises national poorness rates by 0.5 
 percentage points--and increases poorness in both (away from cities) and city-based  areas. Beef price increases 
 lower (away from cities) and national poorness rates, a result agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the importance of beef sales for 
 people around the poorness line in Figure 1. 
 In Madagascar, the poorness rate is much more sensitive to the price of these staple 
 foods. Increases in the price of rice raise poorness (in a big way), a result agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the 
 importance of rice in the (instances of buying things for money) of the poor in city-based  and areas away from cities. Increases in the price 
 of beef raise poorness because many city-based  people near the poorness line are net buyers of beef. 
 The effect of a 10 percent increase in the prices of the imported products (that are bought and sold)  thought about/believed is to raise 
 poorness by 1.8 percentage points. 
 For Malawi and Zambia, the most important individual valuable thing is maize, for 
 which Figure 1 shows both city-based  and (away from cities) families are net buyers so that an increase in 
 its price raises poorness both in (away from cities) and in city-based  areas. Increasing the price of maize by ten 
 percent would raise poorness in Zambia and Malawi by 0.8 and 0.5 percent in areas away from cities, 0.2 
 and 0.3 percent in city-based  areas, and 0.5 percent nationwide in both cases. When the prices of 
 all staples increase by 10 percent, poorness rises by 0.6 and 1.1 percent in the areas away from cities, 0.4 
 
 11 
 
 and 0.6 percent in the areas away from cities for the total increase of 0.5 and 0.8 percent in Malawi and 
 Zambia, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 Nicaragua is like Madagascar in having much higher poorness hits/effects from increases 
 in the prices of these staple foods than other countries. If the prices of all products (that are bought and sold)  thought about/believed 
 rose by 10 percent, the poorness rate would rise by 2.1 percent. In contrast with Madagascar, 
 however, a large number of products add/give to this overall increase, with rice, dairy 
 products, (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) and wheat having larger hits/effects than other valuable things. The bad 
 hits/effects on poorness tend to be smaller in areas away from cities, and increases in the price of maize 
 reduce (away from cities) poorness, while raising it nationally. 
 In Pakistan, there are sharp contrasts between the hits/effects on (away from cities) and very poor cities. 
 Increases in the prices of rice, dairy products and wheat lower poorness in areas away from cities, while 
 raising it in city-based  areas, and have very small hits/effects on national poorness rates. Increases in 
 the prices of all products (that are bought and sold)  lower (away from cities) poorness (a) little, but the increase in very poor cities 
 outweighs this and creates an increase of 0.3 percentage points in the national poorness rate. 
 In Peru, the effects of most valuable thing price changes on poorness are smaller than in 
 most other countries. Beef, for which both city-based  and (away from cities) families are net sellers, has the 
 largest total hit/effect, with an increase in beef prices lowering the poorness rate in both 
 city-based  and areas away from cities by 0.1 percentage points. Since both city-based  and (away from cities) families are net 
 sellers of wheat, increases in its price raise poorness (a) little so the hit/effect of increases in all of 
 the valuable things thought about/believed is an very small reduction in poorness of 0.1 percentage 
 points. 
 In Vietnam, both in 1998 and in 2004, the largest single valuable thing hit/effect was 
 through the price of rice, for which a 10 percent price increase cut (away from cities) poorness by 0.8 
 percentage points in 1998 and 1.0 percent in 2004. Very poor cities rises by 0.2 percentage 
 points in each case, but the overall effect was a decline of 0.5 percentage points in the 
 12 
 
 national poorness rate using 1998 data and 0.7 percent using 2004 data. These results support 
 the finding of Edmonds and Pavcnik (2005) that increases in rice prices would reduce 
 poorness, and is more hopeful than the finding by Minot and Goletti (2000, pxiii and p64) 
 that an increase in rice prices would lower (away from cities) poorness rates, but raise national poorness rates 
 (a) little in Vietnam. A key influence on these findings appears to be the (compared to other things) equality-believing 
 distribution of land in Vietnam, and the (not being there; not being present) of a large class of poor landless laborers 
 (Ravallion and van der Walle 2008). In both years, increases in the price of (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) reduce 
 poorness, and the size of this good hit/effect doubled between 1998 and 2004, from 0.1 
 percent to 0.2 percent. 
 The overall average poorness hits/effects presented at the bottom of Table 2 show that, on 
 average, increases in the prices of all of the valuable things thought about/believed would increase poorness. 
 The increases in very poor cities are usually larger than those in areas away from cities--of course, 
 since it is much less likely that city-based  families will be net sellers of these products (that are bought and sold). For all 
 valuable things except beef, price increases raise both (away from cities) and very poor cities. 
 The results for changes in the poorness gap in Table 3 complement the guesses for 
 the poorness rate by taking into account the depth of poorness. As for the poorness headcount, 
 there are big differences in the effects by valuable thing and between (away from cities) and city-based 
 areas. However, the poorness gap numbers tend to be less dangerous than the poorness rate 
 hits/effects and, especially, less affected by the first poorness rate. In terms of the overall 
 average, the picture is almost the same as that discussed above for the poorness rate. Increases in 
 the prices of all of these staple foods increase the poorness gap more in city-based  than in (away from cities) 
 areas, but increase the poorness gap in both, and raise the national poorness rate. The one 
 exception at the valuable thing level is beef, for which price rises reduce the poorness gap both in 
 areas away from cities and nationally, although by a small amount. 
 
 13 
 
 In Bolivia, the hits/effects on the poorness gap arise from some valuable things, 
 including wheat, rice and sugar although the hits/effects through the price of wheat are by far the 
 largest. Very differently, in Cambodia and in Madagascar, the overall effects are ruled by 
 rice, as would be suggested by Figure 1. Ten percent increases in the price of rice in these 
 two countries raise the poorness gap by 0.6 and 0.7, adding/giving more than the total increase 
 in the poorness gap. In Nicaragua, as in Bolivia, a wide range of valuable things add/give to the 
 increase in the poorness gap, with rice and dairy products having the largest hit/effect. An 
 increase in the price of wheat has the most marked bad hit/effect on the poorness gap in 
 Pakistan, with a 10 percent increase in the price of wheat increasing the poorness gap by 0.1. 
 Peru is quite different in that the poorness gap falls when the prices of these 
 valuable things rise, with most of the reduction of 0.1 percentage points coming from beef. In 
 Vietnam the poorness gap falls when prices of all valuable things thought about/believed rise, an effect 
 ruled--as was the case with the poorness rate--by rice. In Malawi, increases in almost 
 all valuable thing prices raise the poorness gap, with the most important case being maize, which 
 adds/gives 0.2 out of the overall national increase in the poorness gap of 0.2 percent. 
 
 5.1.2 Valuable thing Price and Wage Hits/effects 
 In Tables 2 and 3 we also think about/believe the hit/effect of changes in valuable thing prices went with 
 by changes in unskilled wage rates. The results in Table 2 show that labor market effects can 
 be important in deciding/figuring out the hit/effect of price changes on poorness rates. When the prices of 
 all products (that are bought and sold)  rise by 10 percent, the resulting average increase in (away from cities) poorness falls from 0.5 
 percent, when wage hits/effects are ignored, to 0.3 percent with wage hits/effects included. For 
 some countries, such as Nicaragua, including wage hits/effects has very little hit/effect. 
 For others, such as Pakistan, the effect on the poorness rate is sharply reduced when all 
 valuable things are carefully thought about/believed. However, in no case is the sign of the overall effect changed. 
 
 14 
 
 At the individual valuable thing level, there is somewhat more (many different kinds of people or things) in the effect of 
 including wage rate hits/effects. In a few cases wage rate hits/effects are (good) enough to change the 
 direction of the effect on national poorness rates. This is the case for beef in Madagascar, 
 where the poorness hit/effect changes from 0.4 to -0.1 percentage points. But these effects are 
 very small and increases in the prices of all of these staple products (that are bought and sold)  continue to raise national 
 poorness rates. 
 The results in Table 3 show/tell about a very almost the same  picture for the poorness gap. In most cases, 
 increases in prices increase the poorness gap. A 10 percent increase in the prices of all products (that are bought and sold) 
 would reduce the poorness gap under our ideas (you think are true) only in Peru and in Vietnam. For the 
 sample of countries as a whole, the effect of increasing the prices of all carefully thought about/believed products (that are bought and sold)  by 
 10 percent with including wage hits/effects would raise the poorness gap by an average of 
 0.3 percentage points in areas away from cities, by 0.2 in city-based  areas, and by 0.2 percentage points 
 overall. 
 
 5.2 Hit/effect of the 2005-7 worldwide  food price increases on poorness 
 In the second experiment, we think about/believe the developments in worldwide  food prices in 2005-2007 
 and apply these changes to our sample of families in order to guess the hit/effect on 
 poorness without policy responses. Based on the FAO data on price developments, 
 we put into use the picture/situation shown in Table 4. Following Mundlak and Larson (1992), we 
 assume that price transmission between world and domestic markets is about 
 complete under (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) market facts or conditions (that surround someone) and specify a unitary ability to stretch of price 
 transmission. 
 We first think about/believe a picture/situation with wage hits/effects ignored. The main poorness rate 
 change results of this picture/situation are shown in Table 5. As the table suggests, the average 
 hit/effect of the past worldwide  food price increase results in a rise in poorness of 3.0 percentage 
 
 15 
 
 points. The increase among the city-based  families is greater, at 3.6 percentage points, while 
 (away from cities) poorness rises by 2.5 percentage points. 
 The table also hints that even though the average hit/effect of recent food price 
 developments is bad, two countries--Vietnam and Peru--would likely have benefited 
 from reductions in (away from cities) poorness. In the case of Vietnam 2004, the reductions in (away from cities) poorness 
 are large enough to reduce overall poorness, even though very poor cities rates rise (a) little. 
 Looking at the poorness hits/effects of individual valuable things, we can see that in the case of Peru 
 (away from cities) families benefit from the rising price of almost all valuable things with the exception of 
 wheat. In the different case of Vietnam, mostly all of the poorness reduction comes from 
 the rise in the price of rice. 
 The country whose poorness would have the most negatively/badly (changed by/affected by) the rise in 
 food prices appears to be Nicaragua, especially its city-based  families. The overall poorness rate 
 in Nicaragua would have risen by 7.8 percent under this picture/situation, while the very poor cities 
 rate would have risen by 10.7 percentage points. The by-valuable thing rotting of this 
 poorness result shows that city-based  families tend to spend a large share of their income on 
 (instances of buying things for money) of the food products we think about/believe, as Figure 1 also suggests. 
 Table 6 presents the similar changes in poorness gaps following our (testing out). 
 Its results are broadly agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the poorness rate results in Table 5. The poorness gap 
 rises in all countries but Peru and Vietnam. In Peru, the major source of the reduction in the 
 poorness gap is the increase in prices of maize. Very differently, in Vietnam, the most important 
 (thing that decides something) of the result is wheat. In all other country-periods, the poorness gap rises. 
 When wage hits/effects are also thought about/believed in our calculations, the results become less 
 bad for poorness results, as unskilled wages rise in response to the increase in 
 valuable thing prices, but the signs of the effects are usually not reversed. By including wage 
 hits/effects, the average increase in the poorness rate drops from 3.0 percentage points to 2.7. 
 16 
 
 Similarly, the very poor cities change drops from 3.6 to 3.2 and (away from cities) poorness from 2.5 to 2.2 
 percentage points. The hit/effect on the poorness gap follows the same pattern of helping 
 the results without changing their ends/end results. 
 Table 5 is also allows us to think about  the importance of each valuable thing price change 
 on the overall changes in poorness. The prices of maize and wheat appear to have played the 
 most well-known/obvious role in poorness increase, adding/giving 0.9 percent. The price increases of rice 
 and dairy added/gave added/more 0.3 and 0.5 percentage points. The overall hit/effect of the 
 price of chicken is zero because it as often increases poorness as it decreases it. Turning to the 
 poorness gap numbers in Table 6, we see that the valuable things with the greatest power on 
 the results are maize, wheat and rice, which raise the poorness gap by 0.7 percent, 0.4 percent 
 and 0.3 percent (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 6 Strength Checks 
 The results of our strength checks are presented and discussed in detail in Add on B and 
 only briefly summarized here. The first strength check was to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) possible 
 (not going in a straight line)ities in the relationship between the size of the price change and the poorness 
 result, to see whether the results received/got could be scaled up or down to gain a broad 
 indication of the effects of other price changes. The results of this analysis suggest that the 
 results can be scaled up or down to give a (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) reliable indication of the effects of 
 (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) small price changes. 
 Our second strength check examined different possible settings of the poorness rate. 
 Given the wide range of possible different poorness lines we needed to be sure that our results 
 were not strongly sensitive to the choice of poorness line. As expected, the level of the poorness 
 line affected the importance of the percentage point changes in poorness rates for changes in 
 staple food products. However, only in one case, Pakistan, was there a change in the sign of 
 
 17 
 
 the effect, and only when raising the poorness line from its initial 17 percent to over 65 percent 
 of people/of the group. 
 Our final strength check thought about/believed the hit/effect of moving from a labor market in 
 which unskilled labor is (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) mobile between (away from cities) and city-based  employment, and a 
 strongly (broken into parts) labor market (detailed description of exactly what is required) based on limits/guidelines guessed for China, 
 where there are formal (blocking things) to ability to move around such as the residence permit system. Under the 
 strongly (broken into parts) labor market idea (you think is true), (away from cities) unskilled wages rose much more than 
 city-based  wages in response to increases in farming-based prices, and (away from cities) poorness rates rose less 
 with a single labor market. However, very poor cities rose by more, and the hit/effect on national 
 poorness rates was mostly the same. 
 
 7 Ending/deciding Statements 
 Our study has tried to shed some light on the important linkages between higher worldwide 
 food prices and poorness. By applying a simple approach of calculating the first-order welfare 
 changes of families covered in ten described/explained surveys, it was able to provide a very described/explained 
 test of the hit/effect of higher food prices on national welfare and poorness in the sample 
 of the countries. Even though the way(s) of doing things employed in the study is simple, it is powerful 
 enough to give us a good understanding of the hidden (under) (machines/methods/ways) and the expected 
 importance and direction of change of the poorness rate of the developing countries resulting 
 from the changes in the worldwide  food prices. 
 The findings of the study suggest that the overall hit/effect of higher food prices on 
 poorness is generally bad. (even though there is the existence of) certain difference/different version by valuable thing and by country, the fact 
 is that most poor are net people of food and as such tend to be hurt by higher food prices. 
 This end/end result is much more obvious for city-based  families where farming is much less 
 most in control/most common. Even though many (away from cities) families gain from higher food prices, the overall 
 hit/effect on poorness remains negative. 
 18 
 
 These findings are reinforced by the results of the second (testing out) begun/tried in 
 this study, where we calculated the hit/effect of the watched/followed increases in the worldwide  food prices 
 over the period of 2005 to 2007. Again, we discovered that the average hit/effect of this 
 development was to increase poorness for a majority of the countries covered in our sample, 
 mainly due to the bad effect of higher wheat prices, followed by the prices of rice, dairy 
 and maize. There was large amounts of difference/different version among countries and the types of families in 
 both the hits/effects of a given valuable thing price change, and in the effect of the particular 
 group of price changes thought about/believed over the 2005-7 period. While there were a few 
 cases where higher valuable thing prices lowered (away from cities) poorness, in most cases poorness--even 
 (away from cities) poorness--increased, and the overall sample average poorness hit/effect was clearly bad. 
 Some strength checks are reported in Add on B. The first of these examines the 
 effect of changing the size of the shock. A second thinks about/believes the sensitivity of the results to 
 changes in the poorness line. A third examines the effects/results/suggestions of a (broken into parts) labor market, 
 with strong resistance to movement of unskilled labor between farming-based and nonagricultural employment. These strength checks lead to some changes in clearly stated/particular results, 
 but leave unchanged the broad end/end result that increases in prices of most of the staple foods 
 thought about/believed will much more often increase, rather than reduce, poorness in poor 
 countries. 
 Our analysis includes some families who are net buyers and some which are net 
 sellers of the staple foods thought about/believed. While it is possible that higher prices of staple foods 
 could lower poorness by raising the incomes of some poor farmers, this effect was, in most 
 cases we thought about/believed, offset by bad hits/effects on poor families that were net buyers of 
 food. 
 A key current policy question is the hit/effect of the current valuable thing price rush on 
 worldwide  poorness. While described/explained information on a large group of countries is not available, we 
 19 
 
 can use the analysis developed in this paper to guide some quick calculations. 
 First, the change in prices--prices have continued to rise since end-2007 through the first 
 quarter of 2008, to produce even larger price "shocks" then those shown in Table 5. Second, 
 these price changes were (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) to allow for the decline in the dollar relative to the 
 types of money of our sample countries, and for inflationary effects. Third, we reduced the price 
 changes to (change to make better/change to fit new conditions) for (blocking things) to transmission of changes between domestic and international 
 prices, using 66 percent as a "(guessed number that's probably close to correct)" of the average value of this limit/guideline 8 for lowincome countries. 
 With these ideas (you think are true), we can test the hits/effects on poorness in each sample country 
 taking into account both increases in valuable thing prices and guessed hits/effects on unskilled 
 wage rates relative to other prices. The simple average of the guessed effects on national 
 poorness rates (US$1/day) in this nine-country sample is an increase of 4.5 percentage points. 
 Applying this average result to all poor countries translates into an increase in the 
 poorness headcount of 105 million people (out of the poor population of 2.3 billion). 
 Or, as the rate of poorness reduction has averaged 0.68 percent every year since 1984, 
 a 4.5 percent increase in the poorness headcount goes along with a loss of almost seven years of 
 poorness reduction. 
 While any such back-of-the envelope calculation must be treated with great caution, 
 there seem to be good reasons to be worried about the possibly bad hits/effects of large 
 changes in world food prices for poorness in poor countries. The high shares of staple foods in 
 the expenses of poor people increase their weakness to food price rises, while the 
 limited share of output sold by small, survival/income farmers reduces their benefits. There 
 
 8 
 
 While the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the value of this limit/guideline is limited, Dawe (2008) found an average 
 of 51 percent transmission from world to domestic prices between 2003(Q4) and 2007(Q4) 
 for a sample of Asian countries, including countries such as India and the Philippines, where 
 policies have usually tried to insulate domestic prices from world market price shocks. 
 20 
 
 are many possibilities for lessening of these poorness impacts--many of which are now 
 being explored by governments and the development community--but there are also risks 
 that the full costs could be even greater, especially if the rush in food and energy prices is 
 transmitted into higher overall inflation rates. 
 
 21 
 
 7.1 References 
 Aksoy, M.A. and Izik-Dikmelik, A. 2007. Are low food prices pro-poor? net food buyers and 
 sellers in poor countries. Mimeo, World Bank. 
 Atkinson, A. 1987. "On the measurement of poorness" Econometrica. 55(4):749-64. 
 Bertrand, Trent and Squire, L. 1980. The Relevance of the Dual (process of people making, selling, and buying things) Model: A Case 
 Study of Thailand, Oxford Money-based Papers, New Series, Vol. 32, No. 3. (Nov., 
 1980), pp. 480-511. 
 Chen, S. and Ravallion, M. 2004. "Welfare Hits/affects of China's Rising up to the World Trade 
 Organization." in Bhattasali, D., Li, S. and Martin, W. eds. China and the WTO: 
 Rising up, Policy Reform, and Poorness Reduction Plans., Oxford and 
 Washington DC: Oxford University Press and the World Bank. 
 Dawe, D. 2008. Have recent increases in world cereal prices been transmitted to domestic 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things)? Experience in seven large Asian countries, Powerpoint Presentation, 
 FAO, Rome, 14 March. 
 Denning, G. and Sachs, J. 2007. How the rich world can help Africa help itself. (money-related) 
 Times May 29. 
 Deaton, A. 1989. "Rice prices and income distribution in Thailand: a non-parametric 
 analysis." Money-based Journal. 99(Conference):1-37. 
 Deaton, A. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. A Microeconometric Approach to 
 Development Policy. Baltimore and Washington DC: The World Bank and Johns 
 Hopkins University Press. 
 Deaton, A.S. and Laroque, G., 1992. On the behavior of valuable thing prices. Review of 
 Money-based Studies 89. 1-23. 
 Easterly, W. and Fischer, S. 2001. "Inflation and the poor." Journal of Money, Credit and 
 Banking 33(2, Part 1): 160-78. 
 22 
 
 Edmonds, E. and N. Pavcnik 2005. "The effect of trade (easing government rules) on child labor." Journal 
 of International Money flow. 65:401-19. 
 Evenson, R. 2001. "Money-based hits/affects of farming-based research and extension" Ch 11 in 
 Evenson, R. and Pingali, P. eds. Handbook of Farming-based Money flow, 1(1):573-626, 
 North Holland, Amsterdam . 
 Friedman, J. and Levinsohn, J. 2002. "The distributional hits/effects of Indonesia's (money-related) 
 problem on household welfare: a "Fast Response" way(s) of doing things," World Bank 
 Money-based Review 16(3):397-423. 
 Hertel, T. and Winters, L. A. eds. 2006. Poorness and the WTO: Hits/affects of the Doha 
 Development (list of things to deal with/desire to reach a goal). Basingstoke and Washington DC: Palgrave-Macmillan and the 
 World Bank. 
 Hertel, T., Ivanic, M., Preckel, P. and Cranfield, J. 2004. "The earnings effects of many-sided 
 trade (easing government rules): effects/results/suggestions for poorness." World Bank Money-based Review 
 18(2):205-36. 
 Ianchovichina, E. and Martin, W. 2004. "Money-based hits/affects of China's Rising up to the 
 World Trade Organization" World Bank Money-based Review 18(1):3-28. 
 Klytchnikova and Diop 2006. "Trade Changes, Farm Working well, and Poorness in 
 Bangladesh." Policy Research Working Paper 3980, World Bank. 
 Malawi, Malawi Government (related to studying numbers) Office. 2004. Second (Combined different things together so they worked as one unit) Household Survey 
 2004 
 Martin, W. and Mitra, D. 2001. Working well growth and coming together in farming against/compared to/or 
 manufacturing. Money-based Development and Cultural Change, 49(2):403-22. 
 Minot, N. and Goletti, F. 2000. Rice Market (easing government rules) and Poorness in Viet Nam. 
 Research Report 114, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington DC. 
 
 23 
 
 Mundlak, Y. and Larson, D. 1992. On the transmission of world farming-based prices. World 
 Bank Money-based Review. 6(3):399-422. 
 Nicaragua, Instituto Nacional De Estadsticas Y Censos. 2001. Encuesta Nacional De Hogares 
 Sobre Medicin De Nivel De Vida. Managua: Instituto Nacional De Estadsticas Y 
 Censos. 
 Pakistan, Government of, Federal Bureau of Statistics.1999. Pakistan (Combined different things together so they worked as one unit) Household 
 Survey, Round 3 (1998-99). Islamabad: Government of Pakistan, Federal Bureau of 
 Statistics. 
 Rashid, S. 2002. Patterns of Farming-based Wage and Rice Price in Bangladesh: a Reexamination. MSSD Discussion Paper No. 44, Washington DC: International Food 
 Policy Research Institute. 
 Ravallion, M. 1990. "Welfare changes of food price changes under caused wage responses: 
 explanation and (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) for Bangladesh." Oxford Money-based Papers, 42, 574-85. 
 Ravallion, M. 1992. Poorness Comparisons: A Guide to Ideas and Methods. LSMS 
 Working Paper No. 88, Washington DC: World Bank. 
 Ravallion, M. and Datt, G. 2002. Why has money-based growth been more pro-poor in some 
 states of India than others? Journal of Development Money flow 68:381-400. 
 Ravallion, M. and Lokshin, M. 2005. "Winners and Losers from Trade Reform in Morocco" 
 Mimeo, World Bank. 
 Ravallion, M. and van der Walle, D. 1991. "The hit/effect on poorness of food pricing changes: a 
 welfare analysis for Indonesia." Journal of Policy Modeling 13(2):281-99. 
 Ravallion, M. and van der Walle, D. 2008. Land in Change: Reform and Poorness 
 Reduction in (away from cities) Vietnam. New York and Washington DC: Palgrave Macmillan and 
 the World Bank. 
 
 24 
 
 Singh, I., Squire, L. and Strauss, J. 1986. Farming-based Household Models: Extensions and 
 Applications. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Tyers, R. and Anderson, K. 1992. Confusion in World Food Markets: A (numbers-based) 
 Test. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
 Vietnam, General Statistics Office, 1998. Household Living Standards Survey Vietnam. 
 Hanoi: General Statistics Office. 
 Vietnam, General Statistics Office, 2004. Household Living Standards Survey Vietnam. 
 Hanoi: General Statistics Office. 
 World Bank 2006. Making the New Indonesia Work for the Poor. World Bank, Washington 
 DC. 
 World Bank 2008a. High food prices: a harsh new reality. 
 http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/0,,contentMDK:2166588 
 3&#126;pagePK:64165401&#126;piPK:64165026&#126;theSitePK:469372,0<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
