 Farming-based Money flow, 4 ( 1990) 27-43 
 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam- Printed in The Netherlands 
 
 27 
 
 Adoption of New Technologies in Ethiopian 
 Farming: 
 The Case of Tegulet-Bulga District, 
 Shoa Area of control/area of land 
 Yohannes Kebede, Kisan Gunjal and Garth Coffin 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow, McGill University, Ste. Anne de Bellevue, Que., H9X 1CO 
 (Canada) 
 
 (Accepted 31 March 1989) 
 
 Abstract 
 Kebede, Y., Gunjal, K. and Coffin, G., 1990. Adoption of new technologies in Ethiopian farming: the case ofTegulet-Bulga District, Shoa Area of control/area of land. Agric. Econ., 4: 27-43. 
 Adoption of farming-based production technologies in developing countries is influenced by a wide 
 range of money-based and social factors as well as physical and technical parts of farming and the 
 risk (point of view/way of behaving) of farmers. It is important to understand the role of these factors to secure/make sure of the 
 development of appropriate technologies and the design of successful development projects. This 
 study examines the hit/effect of such factors on the adoption of single-ox, (material that makes plants grow better) and bug-killer 
 technologies as part of a after-drought recovery project in Tegulet-Bulga district in Ethiopia. 
 Models to test the chance of adoption are specified for the (pertaining to each person or thing) technologies and 
 are guessed using a logit maximum chance procedure. results point to/show that the most significant (number or thing that changes) affecting the chance of adoption of all three technologies is farm size; the hit/effect 
 is negative for single-ox technology and positive for (material that makes plants grow better) and bug-killer use. Money-based factors 
 such as income, wealth and (money owed)  generally show (meaningful numbers) influence on the adoption of single-ox and bug-killer technologies as do family size, access to outside information, education and experience. 
 The effect of (related to how much money and power people have) factors on adoption of (material that makes plants grow better) and bug-killer technologies is greater 
 in the area which has more access to outside information and off-farm activities (Ankober) than 
 in more 'self-contained' area (Seladengay). The hit/effect of the degree of risk disgust of farmers 
 is found to be significant and negative for single-ox technology in both areas, and for (material that makes plants grow better) and 
 bug-killer technologies in only one area. The (described the future) chances of technology adoption by an 
 average farmer are found to increase very much with the level of education and access or exposure to outside information. 
 
 Introduction 
 Food production problems of African countries, especially of Ethiopia, have 
 been widely (known to many people) over the last few years. Although much attention has been fo0169-5150/90/$03.50 
 
 © 1990 Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 
 
 28 
 
 cused on emergency relief, the important element of after-drought recovery, 
 and the long-term food supply, is the provision and adoption of appropriate 
 production technologies. 
 Development programs in Ethiopia over the past twenty years, have included 
 a few new technologies. Among the latestly introduced are single-ox, 
 bug-killers and (material that makes plants grow better) usage. However, there has not been a wide-spread provision and adoption of these technologies in the central highlands of Ethiopia. 
 Different (related to how much money and power people have) factors and the degree of risk disgust may be the causes 
 oflow adoption rates (Teele, 1975; Jamison and Lau, 1982; O'Mara, 1983; Roe, 
 1983; Shakya and Flinn, 1985). 
 The main goal of this paper, therefore, is to (show or prove) how the different money-based, social, and physical (numbers that change/things that change) and degree of risk disgust affect 
 the adoption of three selected technologies in Ethiopian farming. Also, this study will also focus on how (one after the other) (recursive) decisions are 
 used. 
 Study places/locations 
 
 The study places/locations of Ankober and Seladengay sub-districts of Tegulet-Bulga 
 district of Shoa (related to managing and running a company or organization) area are in central Ethiopian highlands. Because of (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) (blocking things) (lack of roads and other means of communication) the study areas had never been accessed by any development project until1984. The main (features/ qualities/ traits) of the farmers in these areas are given 
 in Table 1. Seladengay area has a longer tradition of farming with (a) little 
 TABLE! 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of the sample farmers from the study areas in Ethiopia 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 
 Ankober 
 
 Seladengay 
 
 Height (m above sea level) 
 Average farm size (ha) 
 Average family size 
 Gross farm incomea 
 1985/86 (US$_$)b 
 1986/87 (US$_$) 
 Average oxen per household 
 Farming experience (years) 
 Off-farm income (US$_$) 
 Cereal Yield (q) 
 
 1700 
 1.03 
 4 
 
 2200 
 1.25 
 5 
 
 203 
 249 
 1.11 
 25 
 127 
 6 
 
 313 
 323 
 1.34 
 26 
 9 
 
 aSince the yield per hectare is higher for Seladengay than for Ankober area, the use of almost the same 
 average market price to value output results in higher gross farm income for Seladengay area. 
 bValues in local currency (Ethiopian birr) were converted to US$_$ using an exchange rate of 2.07 
 birr= US$1.00. 
 q, metric quintal= 100 kg. 
 
 29 
 
 larger farm size, higher farm income and (a) little larger family size than 
 Ankober. 
 These areas were among the areas affected by the major drought of 1984/ 
 85. The farmers were helped by a recovery project financed by Oxfam America, Oxfam UK, Medios of Belgium, CFAF of France and other donor (services businesses/government units). 
 Technical help was given by the International Animals Center for 
 Africa (ILCA). Data were collected the year following the drought when crop 
 production was (compared to other things) good. 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of the technologies: single-ox, (material that makes plants grow better)s and 
 bug-killers 
 
 Usually/(in the past), Ethiopian farmers have used a pair of oxen for traction. However, studies of the Ethiopian highland reclamation have found that most 
 farmers do not groups of armed men  a pair of oxen (Police officer, 1983). The fast increase in 
 population has increased competition for plantable land and has resulted in (lowering in number/getting worse) grazing areas and animal population (Ministry of Farming, 1982). 
 At the same time, raising a large number of animals on limited land has exposed both plantable and non -plantable lands to soil wearing away. 
 To overcome the problem of a shortage of oxen, Ethiopian farmers have been 
 using traditional useful thing/valuable supply-exchange arrangements (McCann, 1986). The 
 practice of exchanging grain for oxen became expensive for many small 
 farmers after the drought. In order to reduce soil wearing away and avoid farm (state of owing money) from traditional exchange arrangements, ILCA developed a changed form of traction put into use to be pulled by a single-ox rather than the 
 ordinarily used pair ( Gryseels et al., 1984). So, single-ox technology 
 was one aspect of the after-drought recovery project. 
 The second technology gave/given to farmers is bug-killers. Insects such as 
 grasshoppers and American ball worms present/cause a serious problem in both study 
 places/locations. Therefore, under this project, farmers were given a small amount 
 of bug-killers at a (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) market price on an interest-free loan to be repaid in 
 3 years. 
 The third production technology thought about/believed is the provision of (not living) 
 (material that makes plants grow better)s. In order to reduce the loss of life-creating ability of their farm lands, some 
 farmers have tried to use farm yard poop/fertilizer (FYM). But the FYM practice 
 needs/demands more animals to produce enough poop/fertilizer. It also needs/demands more labour 
 than that gave by 4 to 5 family members to distribute the poop/fertilizer on the 
 field. Therefore, the practice is mostly restricted to gardens. Where (not living) 
 (material that makes plants grow better) has been used produces /gives up are generally much higher. (not living) (material that makes plants grow better) is 
 gave/given through the Ministry of Farming at a price set by the government. 
 Not all farmers used or meant to use the above three production technologies. The thrust of this study is, therefore, to identify the factors that moti- 
 
 30 
 
 vated farmers to use or not to use single-ox, bug-killers and (material that makes plants grow better), and the 
 extent to which these factors were important in farmers' decisions. 
 
 Models of adoption behaviour 
 Some studies have (examined closely) the influence of different (related to how much money and power people have) factors on the desire of decision makers to use new technologies 
 (Nerlove and Press, 1973; Roe, 1983; Shakya and Flinn, 1985). In most studies 
 of adoption behaviour the (thing that changes (like a test score) because of something else that you control (like study time)) is held back to lie between 0 
 and 1 and the models used are huge functions. Univariate and multivariate logit and probit models and their changed forms have been used a lot to study the adoption behaviour offarmers and people (Nerlove and 
 Press, 1973; Schmidt and Strauss, 1975; Garcia et al., 1983; Shakya and Flinn, 
 1985). 
 Maddala ( 1983) and Shakya and Flinn ( 1985) have recommended probit 
 models for functional forms with limited (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)) that are continuous between 0 and 1, and logit models for separate (things that change (like test scores) because of other things that you control (like study times)). In this 
 study the responses recorded are separate ((to both people or groups equally) exclusive and thorough) 
 and therefore a univariate logit model will be developed. 
 For analysis of the adoption of technology packages, some studies have proposed (happening together) decision models (Feder et al., 1985). Watched/followed behaviour 
 in some areas, however, has showed that there is a recursive decision-making 
 process where those inputs thought about/believed very important to farm survival are adopted 
 first, followed by inputs which are believed to increase yield. For instance, the 
 plan/purpose to use (material that makes plants grow better) depends on the decision made (related to/looking at/thinking about) how to prevent crop losses from insects and sicknesses if the last thing just mentioned is a priority problem. 
 In making decisions about the adoption of a given technology, farmers are 
 assumed to weigh the results of adoption of an invention of new things against its 
 money-based, social, and technical (ability to be done). If we assume that social values or 
 technical (challenging things accomplished or completed) are a reflection of the level of money-based (challenging things accomplished or completed), 
 then a farmer tests the new technology in terms of its (in small steps up) benefit. 
 Naturally, if the money-based benefit from a technology is higher, the preference 
 or utility ( U) for that technology (assuming a monotonic relationship between 
 benefits and utility) will be higher. 
 Suppose an individual household's preference (utility) of adopting a new 
 technology, for a given vector of money-based, social and physical factors (X) is 
 represented by UN(X) and the preference (utility) of adopting the usual 
 technology by UT (X). Then, the preference for adopting the new and old technologies can be defined as a linear relationship: 
 UN(X)=XBN+EN 
 
 (1) 
 
 UT(X)=XBT+ET 
 
 (2) 
 
 31 
 
 where BN, BT and EN, ET are response coefficients and random disturbances 
 connected with the adoption of new and traditional technologies, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 If the index of adoption is represented by Y, it will take a value of one if the farmer 
 is willing to adopt the new technology and zero otherwise. 
 The chance that a given farmer will adopt the new technology can be 
 expressed as a function of X as follows: 
 P(Y=1) =P(UN &amp;gt; UT) 
 
 (3) 
 
 =P(XBN +EN&amp;gt; XBT + ET) 
 =P[X(BN -BT) &amp;gt;ET -EN] 
 =P(XB&amp;gt;E) 
 =F(XB) 
 
 (3a) 
 
 where Pis the chance function, B = (BN- BT) a vector of unknown limits/guidelines which can be understood/explained as the net influence ofthe vector of independent 
 (numbers that change/things that change) on adoption of the new technology, E = (ET- EN) a random disturbance term and F(XB) is total distribution function F tested at XB 
 (for details see Rahm and Huffman, 1984). 
 According to the logit model, the chance of an individual household 
 adopting a technology, given money-based, social and physical (features/ qualities/ traits) (X), 
 is P (NIX) and can be specified as: 
 P(NIX) =exp(XB+E)/1+exp{(XB+ E)} 
 where 
 
 (4) 
 
 -oo&amp;lt;XB&amp;lt;oo 
 
 The chance of adoption of the usual technology, P ( T IX), is therefore, 
 P(TIX)=1-P(NIX) 
 =1- [exp(XB+E)/1+exp{(XB+E)}] 
 =1/1+exp{(XB+E)} 
 
 (5) 
 
 The relative odds of adopting against/compared to/or not adopting a new technology are given 
 by: 
 P(NIX)/P(TIX) = [exp(XB+E)]_) [1+exp(XB+E) ]/[1+exp(XB+E)]_) 
 =exp(XB+E) 
 
 (6) 
 
 taking the logarithms of both sides, 
 ln[P(NIX)/P(TIX)]_) =XB+E 
 
 (7) 
 
 The final decision of farmers is a reflection of different factors including their 
 
 32 
 
 risk preference and (related to how much money and power people have) (surrounding conditions). The risk preference of a decision maker is, itself, a function of money-based and social factors. Some studies 
 have included risk preference along with other factors in adoption models (Roe, 
 1983). If both sets of (numbers that change/things that change) are included in the models of adoption studies, 
 however, there will be high degree multicollinearity. In this study, therefore, 
 some of the (related to how much money and power people have) (numbers that change/things that change) are thrown out in order to reduce the problem of multicollinearity (Moock, 1981) and avoid problems of lack of coming together (Harrel, 1985 ). 
 Scientific model (detailed description of exactly what is required) 
 The chance of adoption of single-ox technology, PA ( S), was specified as 
 a function of money-based, social and physical factors as follows: 
 PA(ST =f(XIJ ... , X12) 
 
 (8) 
 
 where the money-based factors include: 
 X 1 After-tax farm income (100 birr) 
 X 2 off-farm (out side own farm) income ( 100 birr) 
 X 3 value of animals and farm equipment (100 birr) 
 x4 (money owed) ( 100 birr) and 
 X 5 farm size ( ha), 
 the social factors include: 
 x6 family size, 
 X 7 education (recorded as 0 or 1), 
 X 8 index of knowledge (e.g., exposure to outside information) 
 X 9 number of relatives, and 
 xlO years of farming experience 
 and the physical factors include: 
 X 11 degree of difficulty in plowing arising from plot (features/ qualities/ traits), (e.g., soil 
 type, stone coverage and slope), and 
 x12 difficulty in plowing due to shortcoming of traction power given by a 
 single ox. 
 A model of adoption of bug-killers, PA(PT), was specified as a function of 
 (numbers that change/things that change) xl to xlO. Adoption offertilizer, PA(FT), was specified as a function 
 of (numbers that change/things that change) xl to Xn plus adoption of bug-killers, PA(PT) 1. Off-farm income 
 (X2 ) does not appear in adoption models for Seladengay because of the (not being there; not being present) of measurable income outside families' own farm in this area. 
 2.07 Ethiopian birr is equal to US $1.00. 
 relationship of plot (features/ qualities/ traits) (X11 ) to adoption of bug-killers is not critical as far as 
 effectiveness of this input is concerned. So, it does not appear in bug-killer model. Also, difficulty 
 in traction power (X12 ) does not directly influence adoption of bug-killers and (material that makes plants grow better) because 
 these are inputs used after completing field preparation. 
 1 The 
 
 33 
 
 All (numbers that change/things that change) were used as put into numbers by people who responded except the index of 
 knowledge (X8 ) and plot (features/ qualities/ traits) (X11 ). These (numbers that change/things that change) were came close to as follows. 
 
 (9) 
 The changeable C1 is the relative number of city visits measured as the number of 
 visits a farmer makes to the nearby towns and market places per year divided 
 by the highest number of visits in the sample. This way the ratio ( C1 ) is held back to lie between 0 and 1. Owning a radio ( C2 ) was given a value of 1 and 
 0 otherwise. A farmer who owns a radio is assumed to listen to news from 
 outside and so expected to have a 100% exposure to outside information 
 compared to farmers who do not own radio. Although C1 is continuous (between 0 and 1) and C2 is separate, the need to take by force/take control of the influence from both 
 factors and at the same time to reduce the number of (numbers that change/things that change) has required/resulted in 
 the construction of this index. 2 
 In the case of plot (typical and expected): 
 (10) 
 where each of the (numbers that change/things that change) takes 0, 1 values as defined below: 
 8 1 = 1 if more than 50% of the plots are in hilly areas, 0 otherwise; 
 8 2 = 1 if the soil type presents/causes problems for plowing, especially with single ox, as 
 judged by the farmer (e.g., heavy clay soils), and 0 otherwise; 
 8 3 = 1 if more than 50% of the plot is covered with stones, and 0 otherwise. 
 It would be more correct to have a measurable (number or thing that changes) for draft power of 
 an ox (X12 ) (e.g., in horsepower). However, this was not possible. Instead, 
 farmers were asked to give an test of their (pertaining to each person or thing) ox with respect to 
 its ability (to hold or do something) when used to plow alone. Those who have seen or expected difficulty were given a value of one and zero otherwise. This points to/shows the technical (ability to be done) of single-ox technology as judged by the farmers. 
 In order to see the influence of risk disgust and (numbers that change/things that change) less related 
 with risk on adoption of the three production technologies, the following logit 
 (moving backwards) were specified: 
 PA(ST) =f[R(X), X 11 , X12] 
 
 (11) 
 
 PA(PT) =f[R(X)]_). 
 
 (12) 
 
 PA(FT) =f[R(X), PA(PT)]_) 
 
 (13) 
 
 where R (X) is the measure of relative risk disgust. This (number or thing that changes) was meaIn fact, group discussion with farmers has showed/told about that farmers who do not own radio have less 
 knowledge about the effect of technologies on farming-based production. So, the index, although 
 involving group bias, is believed to provide some measure about the influence of outside information which would not otherwise have been studied. 
 
 2 
 
 34 
 
 sured as follows. Risk attitudes were brought out by the Ramsey method using distribution of wealth. First, the total risk disgust coefficients were guessed using the negative huge function (Buccola et al., 1978) given by: 
 U=K-{ (d) exp( -bM)} 
 
 K,M, b&amp;gt;O 
 
 (14) 
 
 where U is the utility index built by chaining lotteries, K is an (serving to add something) 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) factor, this  an unknown scale limit/guideline, exp is an exponent, b is 
 the total risk disgust coefficient, and M is a money-based pay-off. Then, the 
 relative risk disgust coefficient values were received/made from by multiplying b by the 
 value of the wealth of each farmer. 
 Sample 
 For the technology adoption model, a sample of 100 farmers from Ankober 
 and 80 farmers from Seladengay was randomly chosen. However, due to time, 
 money and personnel restrictions the (pertaining to each person or thing) sample size for adoption models 
 involving the risk disgust coefficient were limited to 25 and 22. Farmers who 
 had used the technology and/ or who had planned to use it next season were 
 labeled as adopters ( PA = 1) and those who were not willing to use it as 
 non -adopters (PA = 0). Farmers did not use the technologies during the period 
 of this study but who were planning to use them the next season were asked to 
 guess the benefits and identify restrictions from using these technologies. 
 This was good through the farmers own expectations, based on the 
 hit/effect of these technologies on the field of others. Finally, any over- or underestimation of benefits from using these technologies especially from farmers 
 who were planning to use them the following season were corrected on the basis 
 of a second and third-round interviews. 
 Scientific results 
 Assuming a (usually/ in a common and regular way) distributed error term (E) in equation (3a), the logit 
 maximum chance (LML) guess procedure was used to get consistent, (producing a lot with very little waste) and asymptotically (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) estimators (Amemiya, 1981; Maddala, 1983; Rahm and Huffman, 1984; Capps and Kramer, 1985). The guesses are summarized in Table 2 for Ankober and Seladengay areas and the 
 results are discussed below. 
 Money-based factors 
 
 As expected, after-tax farm and off-farm incomes have positive effects on 
 adoption of the three production technologies. The only exception is (material that makes plants grow better) 
 technology (FT) in Ankober where a negative but nonsignificant effect was 
 
 35 
 TABLE2 
 Guesses of the hit/effect of money-based, social and physical factors on technology adoption in Ethiopia 
 Independent 
 (numbers that change/things that change) 
 
 Single-ox 
 A 
 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 Farm income 
 (Xt) 
 
 Off-farm income 
 (X2) 
 
 Wealth 
 (Xa) 
 
 (money owed) 
 (X4) 
 
 Farm size 
 (Xs) 
 
 Family size 
 (Xs) 
 
 Education 
 (X7) 
 
 Knowledge 
 (Xs) 
 
 Relatives 
 (Xa) 
 
 Experience 
 (XlO) 
 
 Plot (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 (Xu) 
 
 Traction power 
 (X12) 
 
 2.535 
 (3.1 )** 
 0.06 
 (0.3) 
 0.29 
 (4.3 )** 
 -0.13 
 (1.7) 
 0.23 
 (0.6) 
 -2.1 
 (5.4)** 
 0.27 
 (2.74) 
 1.002 
 (2.1) 
 1.401 
 (1.3) 
 0.11 
 (1.9) 
 -0.066 
 (8.2)** 
 -0.352 
 (0.1) 
 -1.077 
 (3.4)** 
 
 Bug-killers 
 
 s 
 2.873 
 (2.1) 
 0.1 
 (0.3) 
 
 0.5 
 (6.3)** 
 2.5 
 (7.7)** 
 -0.4 
 (0.3) 
 -0.229 
 (0.7) 
 2.274 
 (5.5 )** 
 8.141 
 (4.5 )** 
 0.008 
 (0.01) 
 -0.113 
 (5.3 )** 
 -0.157 
 (0.02) 
 -3.019 
 (6.5 )** 
 
 (material that makes plants grow better) 
 
 A 
 
 s 
 
 A 
 
 s 
 
 -9.946 
 (20.8)** 
 0.8 
 (7.1 )** 
 0.3 
 (2.3) 
 0.09 
 (0.8) 
 -0.05 
 (0.02) 
 6.0 
 (9.0)** 
 -0.411 
 (2.9)
 0.781 
 (0.8) 
 -1.096 
 (0.4) 
 -0.189 
 (2.0) 
 0.091 
 (9.1 )** 
 
 -11.875 
 (15.3)** 
 0.32 
 (1.4) 
 
 -2.612 
 (2.5) 
 0.3 
 (2.3) 
 
 0.3 
 (2.3) 
 -1.8 
 (6.6)** 
 3.0 
 (9.0)** 
 0.472 
 (2.7)
 2.114 
 (3.7)
 3.687 
 
 -4.98 
 (7.6)** 
 -0.3 
 (2.3) 
 0.7 
 (0.1) 
 0.08 
 (0.5) 
 -0.48 
 (1.4) 
 5.0 
 (9.8)** 
 0.163 
 (0.53) 
 -0.554 
 (0.4) 
 1.941 
 
 (1.1) 
 
 (1.1) 
 
 0.057 
 (0.4) 
 0.064 
 (3.8)
 
 0.064 
 (0.3) 
 -0.035 
 (1.6) 
 
 -0.05 
 (0.3) 
 -0.5 
 (0.7) 
 2.2 
 (6.0)** 
 0.023 
 (0.01) 
 0.993 
 (1.6) 
 -0.793 
 (0.1) 
 -0.006 
 (0.01) 
 -0.043 
 (2.1) 
 
 0.63 
 0.37 
 59.7** 
 
 3.364 
 (10.8)** 
 0.63 
 0.37 
 73.6** 
 
 1.058 
 (1.6) 
 0.43 
 0.44 
 38.4** 
 
 Bug-killer 
 [PA(PT)]_) 
 
 R2 
 
 0.40 
 0.48 
 46.4** 
 
 PseudoR 2 
 Chi-square 
 
 0.57 
 0.37 
 54:4** 
 
 0.63 
 0.39 
 74.3** 
 
 A, Ankober area; and S, Seladengay area. 
 For the calculation of R 2and pseudo R 2 , see Harrell ( 1985, p.271) and Aldrich and Nelson ( 1984, 
 57), (match up each pair of items in order). Also,** and* suggest significe at 5% and 10% level of chance, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 Chi-square values are shown in parentheses. 
 
 watched/followed. The positive effect of one extra Ethiopian birr of income is smallest 
 on the chance of adoption of single-ox technology ( ST) and largest on the 
 chance of adoption of bug-killer technology (PT) for Ankober. 3 The effects 
 though the math of chance i&#126; logit models is not the same as in linear chance 
 models, the importance of the chance is highly influenced by the value of guessed coefficients. 
 So, it is possible to suggest the direction of the effect on the basis of the coefficients (Aldrich 
 3 Even 
 
 smrl NPlnn{. 
 
 Hl&#126;4) 
 
 36 
 
 of after-tax farm income on PT and off-farm income on ST were significant 
 only for Ankober. It is also obvious that the money-based benefit (measured by 
 the size of the coefficient of farm income) of single-ox and (material that makes plants grow better) technologies has a much larger hit/effect in Seladengay than in Ankober. 
 The more wealth a farmer has, the more likely he is to adopt a new technology. More wealth also hints the ability to buy another ox or availability of 
 cow(s) to be used for draft purposes, because of this (using/putting into action) a negative influence on 
 adoption of ST. The effect of wealth is found to be positive but nonsignificant 
 on adoption of bug-killers. The negative effect of wealth on adoption of ST in 
 Ankober is as expected. The positive and significant effect ofwealth on adoption of ST as watched/followed in Seladengay needs/demands added/more explanation. The practice of using a cow with an ox for traction is more common in Seladengay than 
 in Ankober. So, the more animals (hence cows) families have the more 
 willing they may be to use a single-ox. 
 The larger the (money owed)  a farmer has to pay ( X 4 ), the less willing he is to use new 
 technologies from which the benefit is uncertain. However, owing a lot 
 farmers may be willing to try ST and save on oxen useful thing/valuable supply more than the less 
 (owing money or favors) farmers. 
 The (money owed)  level has the expected effect of stopping ability to adopt as seen 
 from its negative effect on adoption of PT and F T in both areas. (in almost the same way), as 
 expected, its effect on adoption of ST is positive. The significant effect of 
 (money owed)  on adoption of F T for Seladengay might suggest that farmers in this area 
 are more risk disliking than the farmers in Ankober. 
 As farm size (X5 ) increases farmers need more traction power. If a farmer 
 judges the traction power given by a single-ox to be not enough to complete 
 critical field operations on time, then the larger the farm size, the lower is the 
 chance of adopting ST. Generally, an increase in farm size is likely to increase the chance of adoption of PT and FT (see reviews by Feder et al., 
 1985). 
 As seen from Table 2, farm size has a negative effect on adoption of ST and 
 a positive effect on adoption of PT and F T as expected. This (number or thing that changes) has the 
 most significant effect on adoption of all production technologies except on 
 the ST for Seladengay. The negative but non-significant effect of farm size on 
 adoption of ST for Seladengay may be because of limited range for expanding 
 farm size compared to Ankober. 
 With the use of bug-killers, if a farmer can prevent crop loss and get a 
 good harvest, then he may want to increase his farm income by using (material that makes plants grow better). 
 Therefore, the decision to use bug-killers can have a positive effect on the decision to use (material that makes plants grow better). 
 As expected, the argument of the (when two things work together equally well) between bug-killers and 
 (material that makes plants grow better) and the recursive decision-making of farmers with respect to portion of money to these inputs is supported by a positive effect of PT on the 
 adoption ofFT· 
 
 37 
 Social factors 
 
 Household decision-making with respect to the farming operation is influenced not only by the ecol).omic good qualities of actions but also by social factors 
 important to the household and those operating at community level. The influence of few of these factors on adoption of technologies is discussed below. 
 A large family often has a large number of working members. If this is the 
 case, then there will be more labour to exchange for an added ox or to 
 perform additional/helping farming operations such as furrow-making and other 
 manual (producing crops/helping something grow)s. The larger the family (X6 ), other things being constant, 
 the higher will be the chance of adoption of single-ox, bug-killers and (material that makes plants grow better) technologies. 
 As expected, family size has a positive effect on F T for both areas but a 
 mixed effect on adoption of PT and ST. The mixed effect may be because of 
 some unknown influences which were not (taken/took by force)/(taken/took control of) by (numbers that change/things that change) included in 
 the model. 
 In this part of Ethiopia, education (X 7 ) consists mainly of pre-school teaching through churches and the government reading and writing ability (series of actions to reach goals). In the same way/in that way, 
 education is expected to have a positive effect on adoption of all three production technologies. 
 The results show that education has a positive effect in most cases. However, 
 the level of importance is fairly low. This may, in part, be due to the large 
 number of (numbers that change/things that change), given a sample size of 100 or less and the (divided into two) 
 measurement ( 0, 1) of this (number or thing that changes) as argued/against other ways of measuring 
 education. 
 As with education, the index of exposure to outside information (X8 ) is found 
 to have a positive effect on the chance of adoption in most cases. However, 
 in he (related to studying numbers) sense this guess is supported in only two out of the six 
 cases tested. 
 If relatives (X 9 ) are seen as a source of added/more help in case of need, then 
 a farmer may try new practices. If they are seen as dependents, then he may 
 not be willing to adopt new technology. A previous study by Gunjal (1987) 
 found that in Seladengay the 'number of relatives' (used/put into action) a significant positive effect on the degree of risk disgust. In this study, the number of relatives 
 (X9 ) is found to have positive but non-significant effect in most cases. 
 Farming experience (X10 ), which is assumed to be monotonic with age, has 
 shown that, given the short rainy season, it is necessary to complete field operations on time. So, the more experience farmers have the less likely that 
 they will use a single-ox. On the other hand, the more experience a farmer has 
 in recognizing the importance of pests and the decline in life-creating ability status of his 
 farm lands, the higher is the chance of adopting PT and F T· 
 The finding that experience (age) (uses/puts into action) a negative effect on adoption of 
 single-ox and (material that makes plants grow better) technologies and a positive effect on adoption of pes- 
 
 38 
 
 ticides is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the general (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) among the central highland 
 Ethiopian farmers. Bug-killers are seen as the only means (input) to control 
 pests, so even older farmers are willing to make use of them. The single-ox and 
 (material that makes plants grow better) represent, (match up each pair of items in order), changes in traditional cultural practices and 
 uncertain benefits because of rainfall (quality of changing over time or at different places). So, older farmers are less 
 likely to use these technologies. 
 Physical factors 
 
 Farming-based technologies are developed to help farmers overcome some of 
 the physical or technical restrictions to production. Two of these physical or 
 technical factors are carefully thought about/believed below. 
 The higher the value of the index of plot (features/ qualities/ traits), X 11 , the harder it is to work the soil with single-ox. It also makes any investment in 
 inputs such as (material that makes plants grow better) used on those plots less attractiv.e suggesting a negative 
 effect of X 11 on the adoption ofPT and FT. 
 The result show that X 11 has the expected negative effect on adoption of 
 ST, but the result is found (related to numbers) non -significant. This could be partly 
 due to measurement problems with respect to (taking by force)/(taking control of) the (quality of changing over time or at different places) of factors such as moisture content, physical and chemical properties of the soil, 
 exact slopes etc. The plot (features/ qualities/ traits) (number or thing that changes) was found highly related 
 with the adoption of bug-killer in the (material that makes plants grow better) model and coming together could 
 not be reached. Therefore, this (number or thing that changes) was dropped from the final model for 
 (material that makes plants grow better) adoption. 
 Traction power given by the Zebu breed is very low compared to the little bulls used in Asia (Reddy, 1982). In the same way/in that way, the need to secure survival/income 
 for the family might force decision makers to use more dependable sources of 
 traction power such as a pair of oxen instead of a single-ox. 
 As expected, the difficulty in traction power results in a negative and significant effect on adoption of ST in both areas. This hints that, given the 
 present state of animal traction technology, the use of a single-ox may not be 
 viewed by farmers as being very practical, ignoring the plot (features/ qualities/ traits). 
 Finally, combined testing of social, money-based and physical factors has shown that 
 money-based factors (use/put into action) (meaningful numbers) influence on divisible technologies (such as P T and F T) and that in areas where the family structure and the 
 degree of social ties among extended families is much stronger, social factors 
 (use/put into action) a big influence on adoption. 
 Risk and adoption of technologies 
 
 The purpose of this section is to see how the degree of risk disgust, R (X), 
 affects the adoption of the three production technologies. At first, the models 
 in equations (11), (12) and (13) were guessed. Some of the (related to how much money and power people have) 
 
 39 
 
 (numbers that change/things that change) that are not highly related to R (X) (i.e., relationship-related coefficient 
 less than 0.6) are later added to the final guessed equations. The results of 
 these models are presented in Table 3. 
 In general, the more risk disliking a farmer is, the less willing he is to change 
 the usual practices and try new technologies. The (understanding/ explanation) and the 
 influence of the different (related to how much money and power people have) factors on adoption of the three production technologies is the same as in the adoption models discussed earlier. 
 The chi -square values for testing the effects of all (numbers that change/things that change) except the (stopping or interfering with something) 
 on adoption are very different from zero for both areas. 
 In a separate study, most farmers in both study places/locations were found to be moderately to very risk disliking in relative terms ( Gunjal, 1987) suggesting that 
 they are less willing to adopt new inputs. The· results of this study point to/show 
 almost the same  effects for adoption of ST in both areas and for adoption of PT and F T 
 TABLE3 
 Summary of guesses of money-based, social and physical factors and risk disgust on technology 
 adoption 
 Independent 
 (numbers that change/things that change) 
 (stopping or interfering with something) 
 Farm size 
 (Xs) 
 Education 
 (X7) 
 Relatives 
 (X9) 
 Traction 
 (X12) 
 Bug-killer 
 (PA(PT)) 
 Risk disgust 
 (R(X)) 
 
 R2 
 PseudoR 2 
 Chi-squared 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 Single-ox 
 
 Bug-killers 
 
 (material that makes plants grow better) 
 
 A 
 
 s 
 
 A 
 
 s 
 
 A 
 
 s 
 
 2.702 
 (2.7)
 -0.2 
 (0.02) 
 
 8.402 
 (3.2)
 -2.0 
 (1.00) 
 
 -2.439 
 (1.88) 
 3.0 
 (3.3)
 
 -1.597 
 (0.17) 
 3.0 
 (4.0)** 
 
 -4.994 
 (3.6)
 5.0 
 (5.0)** 
 -0.846 
 (0.37) 
 
 -5.489 
 (1.48) 
 1.0 
 (0.25) 
 0.059 
 (0.25) 
 
 -0.114 
 (0.86) 
 
 0.02 
 (0.01) 
 
 10.394 
 (0.24) 
 -0.217 
 (0.09) 
 0.63 
 0.32 
 19.8** 
 22 
 
 -0.492 
 (0.23) 
 
 -2.989 
 (3.3 )
 
 -1.604 
 (5.)** 
 
 -1.403 
 (0.69) 
 
 0.469 
 (0.84) 
 
 -2.358 
 (2.8)
 
 1.227 
 (1.03) 
 0.433 
 (0.36) 
 
 0.34 
 0.49 
 10.0** 
 25 
 
 0.46 
 0.40 
 11.5** 
 22 
 
 0.57 
 0.51 
 7.1** 
 25 
 
 0.56 
 0.39 
 14.9** 
 22 
 
 0.36 
 0.42 
 14.8** 
 25 
 
 A, Ankober area; and S, Seladengay area. 
 For the calculation of R 2and pseudo R 2, see Harrell's Changed Manual (1985, p. 271) and Aldrich 
 and Nelson (1984, p. 57), (match up each pair of items in order). 
 Also,** and* suggest significe at 5% and 10% level of chance, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 
 40 
 
 for Seladengay. The positive but non-significant effect of risk disgust on 
 adoption ofPTandFT for Ankober may be due to rainfall suspicious things/mistakes or other 
 unexplained factors. 
 (described the future) chances 
 The guessed models (shown in Table 2) were used to (describe the future) chances 
 of adoption of the three technologies at the mean level of explanatory (numbers that change/things that change). 
 As shown in Table 4, farmers in Ankober regularly show higher chance of adoption of all three production technologies than farmers in Seladengay. 
 The largest total difference in the chance of adoption happens with respect to adoption of the single-ox technology. This can be attributed mainly to 
 the fact that farmers in Seladengay show a greater habit/desire towards maintaining traditional cultural practices and have less outside contact to influence 
 their decision making than farmers in Ankober. On the other hand, test 
 of the influence of education on the chance of adoption, holding other factors at the mean level, shows a larger increase in the chance of adoption of 
 the three technologies in Seladengay than in Ankober. 4 This hints that improved education may really affect the adoption of new 
 technologies. 
 The percentages of farmers who were willing to use single-ox, bug-killer and 
 (material that makes plants grow better) for Ankober were (match up each pair of items in order) 54, 56 and 62%, while for Seladengay 
 the (pertaining to each person or thing) values were 33, 63 and 66%. From reviews of adoption studies 
 in developing countries (e.g., Feder et al., 1985) this rate of adoption seems 
 high. It is possible that these rates are over-guessed due to interest-free credit 
 and other perceived fringe benefits from the project. 62%, 
 TABLE4 
 (described the future) chances of technology adoption among farmers of Ankober and Seladengay and 
 areasa 
 Area 
 
 Ankober 
 Seladengay 
 
 Single-ox 
 
 Bug-killers 
 
 (material that makes plants grow better) 
 
 ed=1 
 
 ed=O 
 
 Mean 
 
 ed=1 
 
 ed=O 
 
 Mean 
 
 ed=1 
 
 ed=O 
 
 Mean 
 
 0.81 
 0.47 
 
 0.56 
 0.08 
 
 0.61 
 0.14 
 
 0.85 
 0.91 
 
 0.73 
 0.56 
 
 0.76 
 0.68 
 
 0.68 
 0.72 
 
 0.79 
 0.51 
 
 0.76 
 0.55 
 
 aDerived from guessed equations tested when education takes 0 (no education) or 1 (mainly 
 adult and first (or most important) education) and at mean levels. 
 education was measured by way of years of education or understanding ability, the effects may 
 have been much larger. 
 
 4 If 
 
 41 
 
 Ends/end results 
 The guessed models of adoption behaviour of farmers in Ethiopia point to/show 
 that money-based and technical (ability to be done) alone are not a (promise that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) for the adoption of technology. Social factors and the degree of risk disgust are equally 
 important. 
 The most significant money-based factor affecting adoption of single-ox, bug-killers and (material that makes plants grow better) technologies is farm size and the most significant social 
 factor is farming experience. The hit/effect of a change in farm size (i.e., (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 reform) is likely to improves/increases production increasing technologies (bug-killers and (material that makes plants grow better)) but a negative effect on useful thing/valuable supply saving technology (single-ox). More exactly, a one percent change in farm size (at the 
 mean level of this and other (numbers that change/things that change)) is expected to change the chance of 
 adoption of ST, PT and F T by -9, + 1 and + 2 percent for Seladengay and by 
 -3, + 0.6 and + 1 percent for Ankober, (match up each pair of items in order). 
 It has also been shown that farming experience (uses/puts into action) a negative influence 
 on adoption of more risky technologies (e.g. single-ox and (material that makes plants grow better)) and a 
 positive influence on the adoption of less risky technology (e.g. bug-killers). 
 This is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the general (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) that most Ethiopian highland 
 farmers think about/believe bug-killer as the number one priority input. The high level of 
 importance of traction power also leads to a end/end result that improvement in 
 health and physical condition of oxen would make the single-ox technology 
 more practical and acceptable. (in almost the same way), other desirable changes in 
 plowing tools may also make this technology more acceptable to farmers. 
 The degree of risk disgust (uses/puts into action) a negative influence on the adoption of 
 production technologies in most cases. Given that adoption of technologies is 
 a necessary step towards increasing food production, it is very important to reduce 
 the level of risk disgust through better education, outside contact and other 
 appropriate measures. The results show that the hit/effect of education on the 
 chance of adoption of each of the three technologies is big. 
 So, policies designed to improve the money-based, social and physical factors 
 affecting farming systems, almost the same as  Ankober and Seladengay areas, are likely 
 to help increase the participation of farmers in development projects involving 
 new farming-based technologies and increase food production in Ethiopia. 
 Response 
 The money-based help of the International Animals Center for Africa 
 (ILCA) for field work in Ethiopia and of the Farming-based Foundation of the 
 Rotary Club of Montreal for analysis in Canada is highly appreciated. The 
 research was managed and did/done while the first author was completing his M.Sc. research in Ethiopia. The authors thankfully admit/recognize/respond to the review comments 
 by Randy Westgren. 
 
 42 
 
 References 
 Aldrich, J.H. and Nelson, F.D., 1984. Linear Chance, Logit, and Probit Models. Smart, Beverly 
 Hills, CA, 95 pp. 
 Amemiya, T., 1981. (not numbers-based) response models: a survey. J. Econ. Lit., 29: 483-1536. 
 Anderson, J ., 1983. Looking at (again) farming-based technologies when farmers degrees of risk disgust are 
 unknown. In: R.D. Norton and L. Solis (Editors), The Book of Chac: Programming Studies 
 for Mexican Farming. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, pp. 290-314. 
 Buccola, S.T. a:n-j French, B.C., 1978. Guessing huge utility functions. Agric. Econ. Res., 
 30:37-43. 
 Byerlee, D. and De Pollanco, E.H., 1986. Farmers step wise adoption of (related to computers and science) package: 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the Mexican Altiplano. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 68: 519-527. 
 Capps, 0., Jr. and Kramer, R.A., 1985. Analysis of food stamp participation using (not numbers-based) 
 choice models. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 67:49-59. 
 Police officer, M., 1983. Ethiopian highland reclamation study: summary. Ministry of Agriculture/ 
 FAO, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 
 Feder, G., Just, R.E. and Zilberman, D., 1985. Adoption of farming-based invention of new things in developing 
 countries: a survey. Econ. Develop. Cultural Change, 33: 255-298. 
 Garcia, P., Sonka, S.T. and Mazzacco, M.A., 1983. A multivariate logit analysis of farmers use of 
 (money-related) information. Am. J. Agric. Econ., 65: 131-141. 
 Gryseels, G., Astatke, A., Anderson, F.M. and Asaminew, G., 1984. The use of single-ox for crop 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) in Ethiopia. ILCA Bull. 18, International Animals Center for Africa, Addis Ababa, 
 Ethiopia, pp. 20-25. 
 Gunjal, K., 1987. Measurement of risk attitudes: Delphi experiments with survival/income farmers in 
 Ethiopia. Paper presented at the Joint Meetings of the American Farming-based Money-flow experts 
 Association, and the Canadian Farming-based Money flow and Farm Management (community of people/all good people in the world), Michigan State University. 
 Harrel, F.E., 1985. The logit procedure. In: SAS (SUGI) Additional/helping Library User's Guide, 
 Version 5 Edition. SAS Inst., Cary, NC, pp. 269-293. 
 Jamison, D.T. and Lau, L.J., 1982. Farmers Education and Farmers (wasting very little while working or producing something). Johns Hopkins 
 University Press, Baltimore, MD, 292 pp. 
 Maddala, G.S., 1983. Limited-Dependent and (not numbers-based) (numbers that change/things that change) in Econometrics. Cambridge 
 University Press, New York, 401 pp. 
 McCann, J., 1986. Oxfam Ox/Seed Project Test. Boston University, MA, 23 pp. 
 Ministry of Farming, 1982. Data Book on Land Use and Farming in Ethiopia. I, II. Addis 
 Ababa, Ethiopia. 
 Moock, P., 1981. Education and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). Econ. Dev. (group of people with very strong beliefs). Change, 29: 723-739. 
 Nerlove, M. and Press, S.J., 1973. Univariate and multivariate log linear and logistic models. 
 Rand-1306-EA/NIH, Santa Monica, pp. 15-42. 
 O'Mara, G., 1983. The micro-money flow/money-based studies of ways of doing things adoption by small holding Mexican farmers. 
 In: R.D. Norton and L. Solis (Editors), The Book of Chac: Programming Studies for Mexican 
 Farming. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, pp. 250-289. 
 Rahm, M.R. and Huffman, W.E., 1984. Adoption of reduced land: the role of workers and 
 other (numbers that change/things that change). Am. J. Agric. Econ., 66:405-413. 
 Reddy, T., 1982. On the appropriate use of animal energy in Africa and Asia. Report ofFAO Expert 
 Discussion, November, Rome, 19 pp. 
 Roe, T., 1983. Risks and information: farm level obstacles to changing traditional farming. In: J .J. Molnar and A.A. Clonts (Editors), Moving (from one place to another) Food Production Technologies to Developing Nations. Westview, Big rock, CO, pp. 85-105. 
 
 43 
 Schmidt, P. and Strauss, R.P., 1975. The (statement about the future) of occupation using multiple logit models. 
 Int. Econ. Rev., 16: 471-486. 
 Shakya, P.B. and Flinn, J.C., 1985. Adoption of modern varieties and (material that makes plants grow better) use on rice in the 
 eastern terrai of Nepal. J. Agric. Econ., 36: 409-419. 
 Teele, T., 1975. Application ofprobit analysis to adoption of new farming-based practices. Ethiopian 
 J. Dev. Res., 2: 501-522. 
 
 <div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
