AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 Farming-based development with rainforest (protecting something from harm): 
 methods for looking (for) best bet other choices to slash-and-burn, 
 with applications to Brazil and Indonesia 
 Thomas P. Tomicha,*, Meine van Noordwijka, Stephen A. Vostib, Julie Witcoverb 
 "International Centre for Research in Agroforestry, Southeast Asian (related to a large area) Research Programme (ICRAF SE Asia), 
 P.O. Box 161, Bogor 16001, Indonesia 
 binternational Food Policy Research Institute, /200 Seventeenth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 Forests continue to fall for farming-based purposes throughout the humid tropics, with immediate and possibly large 
 results for climate change and (lots of different living things all existing together) loss-issues of important interest to the international community. Some of the 
 actors directly responsible for forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) fell trees to meet food security needs and reduce poorness-issues of important 
 inte&#126;est to them and also to national policymakers. This variety of groups with different (often disagreeing) interests in the 
 many-sided products (that are bought and sold)  and services produced by (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forests complicates the search for other choice farming-based activities for 
 forest margins since these other choices must make happy such (different/branching out into different) goals. This paper sets out a idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for 
 comparing the hits/effects of different land use systems and farming-based practices at the margins of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rainforests in terms of 
 the concerns and goals of two key interest groups: small-scale farmers looking (for) jobs at the forest margins and the 
 'international' interests in the worldwide  public products (that are bought and sold)  and services supplied by (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rainforests. This (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) should be 
 useful to a third key group, the national and (related to a large area) policymakers who must think about/believe these and other policy goals and 
 then decide on courses of action. The paper identifies data needs and (related to careful studying or deep thinking) methods capable of supplying an scientific 
 base for this idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), based on countable indicators. It then presents early/incomplete results of the use of 
 this idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) in Indonesia and Brazil in association with a worldwide, group/(working well together), (using different kinds of expert knowledge) research 
 program. Even using early/incomplete order-of-importance guesses (to be replaced by more exact measurements as they become 
 available), this idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) presents results in ways that allow (people who work to find information) and policymakers to select clear 'best 
 bets' for development, when they exist, and to test tradeoffs and options for (completing/matching) policy action and research 
 efforts, when they do not. © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Rainforests; Upland farming systems; Farming-based development; (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going); Climate change; (lots of different living things all existing together); 
 Amazon; Brazil; Sumatra; Indonesia 
 
 1. Introduction-many interest groups, many 
 forest products, and many policy goals 
 
 *Corresponding author. E-mail: t.tomich@cgnet.com 
 0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII S0169-5150(98)00032-2 
 
 It seems that everybody wants something from 
 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rainforests, and these desires change/differ  think about/believe- 
 
 160 
 
 T.P. Tomich et al.!Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 very well by interest group. The 'international community' 
 (concentrated in high-income countries, but including some members of the city-based  elite of 
 developing countries) puts priority on public 
 products (that are bought and sold)  given by the forest: preserving forest-based 
 (lots of different living things all existing together), and maintaining its very important role in 
 worldwide  climate regulation (by maintaining or increasing the carbon stored in these forests, plus 
 reducing (things sent out or given off) of pollution (that heats up the Earth)). At the 
 other end of the spectrum, local users of these 
 forests see them via a filter of private interest: as 
 the means to earn a living either directly by (pulling out or taking from something else) 
 forest products, or indirectly by clearing forests for 
 farming then burning forest energy to create an 
 initial (usually the only) injection of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) 
 into soils that often are delicate and lacking in key 
 (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.). 
 As forests move back or the values of (pulled out or taken from something else) products 
 decline, the 'direct' method of earning a living from 
 the forest via extraction becomes less reasonable; some 
 forest-house/living groups earlier dependent on (related to pumping or digging things from the ground) activities for their jobs find themselves 
 turning towards farming for survival. But among 
 the local users, it is the small-scale farmers at the 
 margins of these forests, now getting their jobs from converting forest to agriculture and with 
 the fewest options for doing otherwise, who stand out 
 as important for not only those interested in saving the 
 forests, but also those concerned with helping 
 poorness. 1 Any idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) (and later 
 scientific work linked to it) that does not give their 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) a central role will miss the mark, since 
 small-scale farmers base their decisions-including 
 
 10f course, it is incorrect to equate all forms of 'slash-andburn' with permanent forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) and impossible to do/impossible to keep going land use. 
 Traditional shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) of foodcrops, as practiced for 
 generations by local people in the tropics, was (able to last/helping the planet) as long 
 as population densities were low enough to allow long unplanted 
 rotations. Although traditional shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) is disappearing 
 as (away from cities) population densities increase, slash-and-bum as a 
 way of doing things of land clearing is used by almost all actors (public 
 and private, large and small-scale) adding/giving to forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), sometimes in systems that are impossible to do/impossible to keep going. Nearly all 
 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees) uses 'slash-and-bum' ways of doing things for land 
 clearing. There is large amounts of confusion in the books, however, 
 on how much of this is part of a long-unplanted rotational system 
 ('shifting (producing crops/helping something grow)') and how much is meant forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another). 
 
 the decision to deforest-on the private costs and 
 benefits of their other choices, especially over the 
 short term (Reardon and Vosti, 1995; Vosti and 
 Witcover, 1996). For example, even if different groups 
 in the international community could successfully 
 pressure (through trade (government-ordered stoppages of trade, etc.) and arm twisting) 
 national policymakers to force (on people) a ban meant to 
 silence chainsaws immediately in (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forests, 
 the results (if any) would be short-lived; in 
 the (not being there; not being present) of other choices, small-scale farmers will 
 continue to look (for)  forest to clear to plant crops in 
 order to survive. This paper focuses on these 
 small-scale farmers and thinks about/believes the two-headed problems connected with their use of slash-and-bum from two 
 viewpoints: the (away from cities) household and the international 
 community. 
 The idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) presented in this analysis tries to (put next to) the concerns of these two groups 
 ((away from cities) household and international community) in the 
 test of clearly stated/particular land use other choices in order to 
 identify important tradeoffs between local private 
 interest and worldwide  public interest in the supply of 
 forest products (that are bought and sold)  and services. The (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) could 
 change something (to help someone)/take care of someone other groups getting/taking jobs from 
 cut-down/destroyed forest-those involved mostly in logging, 
 treecrop huge houses, and other large-scale activities involving forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another)-but such computer programs lie 
 beyond the extent of/the range of this paper. The paper aims to 
 show how use of the idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) can inform 
 another key group--(related to a large area) and national policymakers. 
 (related to a large area) and national policymakers are important 
 possible users of this idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) and its 
 outputs, not only because they are subject to pressures 
 from both international and local user groups, but also 
 because they are ready to act on information about best bet land uses. These policymakers 
 more and more are obliged to think about  three (sometimes 
 competing, sometimes (completing/matching)) sets of policy 
 goals: (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), money-based 
 growth, and poorness help. What's more, they 
 must think about/believe these goals (at the same time) when making policy choices (including decisions about farming-based research and development (things that are important)), even 
 though the links or tradeoffs among the goals 
 are often not well understood (Vosti and Reardon, 
 1997). The output from the idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 presented here will shed light on how to move towards 
 
 T.P. Tomich et al. I Farming-based Money flow 19 ( 1998) 159-174 
 
 (accomplishing or gaining) (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and poorness 
 help. 2 
 Is there hope of slowing (chopping down trees) while helping poorness among small-scale farmers? To date 
 no (having different things working together as one unit) idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) exists to aid in the 
 search for best bet land uses and farming-based activities 
 that either meet the needs and goals of the (many different kinds of people or things) 
 interest groups under study here, or (make small) tradeoffs in substituting for rainforests' functions as suppliers of private and public products (that are bought and sold)  and services. Nor 
 has similar evidence on biophysical and 
 (how money affects people's lives) indicators of these goals been 
 collected for these other choices. 
 Research to measure and carefully study these things 
 is happening at seven places/locations in the humid tropics under 
 the control of the worldwide  Other choices to Slash-andBurn (ASB) Programme. ASB is designed to begin/try a worldwide  search for new ways to address natural 
 useful thing/valuable supply management policy issues involving large 
 worldwide  externalities coming from/caused by (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) (chopping down trees). As one basic step in that search process, this 
 paper presents a idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for testing 
 some of the key private and social costs and benefits of 
 current and different farming-based activities at the 
 margins of (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rainforests. Section 2 lays out the 
 idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), including the judging requirements important for judging best bets within this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), and 
 describes some 'generic' best bets for (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forest 
 margins. Section 3 discusses the measurement issues 
 connected with this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). Section 4 presents 
 interesting examples of the use of this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) 
 based on early/incomplete (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from (happening now) research 
 at two different places/locations. This (event(s) or object(s) that prove something), which has not 
 yet reached the point of the exact measurements 
 suggested in Section 3, anyway (shows or proves) that 
 even tests based on rough (many, many times more/much, much less) 
 and directions of change can shed light on other choices. 
 The Indonesian example focuses on certain land use 
 other choices that already rule in the (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land), 
 including some developed by smallholders. The smallholder systems are especially promising points of 
 departure, in terms of both their money-based and ecoZrhe (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) does not deal in a planned way with money-based 
 growth, or any other things beyond the household, but below 
 the worldwide  (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) level. These issues do, however, enter the 
 discussion of how to apply the idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) and understand/explain 
 its outputs. 
 
 161 
 
 logical (features/ qualities/ traits). In the example from the western Amazon of Brazil, farmer and 'international' 
 goals seem less compatible. As occupation of 
 the forest margin there is more recent, current land use 
 patterns are less stable and other choices are still being 
 searched for/tried to get on farmer's fields and by farming-based research. 
 Section 5 raises some added/more warnings, highlights 
 the messages of this work for (related to a large area) and national 
 policymakers, and charts (things that are important) for future research. 
 (in the end), best bets probably will not refer to a 
 single land use system or technology, since the most 
 attractive way to (accomplish or gain with effort) the different goals is 
 likely to come from combinations of (completing/matching) 
 land use practices in a given (related to space or existing in space) big picture. This 
 whole farm and (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land)-level analysis is not (able to be done) now. The activity clearly stated/particular analysis presented in 
 this paper is a necessary predictor to that work. 
 
 2. A idea-based (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for identifying 
 best bet other choices-in whose eyes, using 
 what judging requirements? 
 The two groups identified above as foci of this paper 
 (small-scale farmers among local forest users, and the 
 international community) have goals (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 forests that diverge very much (though the best 
 end use of the forest as seen from these different 
 opinions need not); they can be seen as 'polar' 
 cases along a spectrum of groups of users of natural 
 forest products (that are bought and sold)  and services. 
 On the one hand, small-scale farmers focus on the 
 private products (that are bought and sold)  and services of rainforest use (which 
 often involves (chopping down trees)). On the other hand, the 
 international community focuses on worldwide  public 
 products (that are bought and sold)  and services from forests-more (lots of different living things all existing together) 
 conservation and less worldwide  climate change. This does 
 not mean that local users do not have an interest in 
 worldwide  public products (that are bought and sold)  and services of forests, but their 
 concentrated private interest usually swamps their 
 more thinly spread stake in worldwide  public benefits. What's more, with existing policy legal documents and institutional arrangements, it is hard (if not impossible) to 
 pay them for supplying these worldwide  (things that are good for the planet). It also does not mean that some parts 
 of the international community do not express a strong 
 interest in local users' welfare, only that their 
 first (or most important) interests lie in other places. The approach taken 
 
 162 
 
 T.P. Tomich et aUAgricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 here is to lay out the differences built into these two 
 polar cases to clear up what best bet might mean to each 
 group, and translate these (features/ qualities/ traits) into descriptions of 'generic' best bets candidates based on land 
 uses present in the humid (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forest margins. In 
 later sections, we move to description and 
 early/incomplete test of candidate best bet systems 
 identified for the two case study countries, and get 
 effects/results/suggestions for the policymakers 'in between'. 
 What do we mean by best bet? Overall, a best bet is 
 a way to manage (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rainforests or a forestderived land use that, when supported by necessary 
 (related to computers and science) and institutional invention of new things and policy 
 reform, somehow takes into the process of carefully thinking about something the local 
 private and worldwide  public products (that are bought and sold)  and services that 
 (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) rainforests supply. This hints a significant 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) to the goals of both polar groups: 
 smallholders and the international community. A first 
 step in beginning and building on a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for testing this 
 'balance' between private and public costs and benefits is a clearer idea of what a best bet might mean to 
 each of these groups. 
 For each user group, a list of clearly stated/particular concerns is 
 identified. The reader should note that the following 
 are lists, and not rankings, of concerns. Beginning and building on 
 rankings lies outside the extent of/the range of this paper, and 
 would require more described/explained talks with members of each group, and a way for identifying 
 and making use of different views. In way of thinking/basic truth/rule, such a 
 advice-giving process could (in the end) produce guesses of the relative weights each group applies to 
 their own concerns. Another set of weights, and 
 maybe other advice-giving processes (also outside this 
 paper's scope) might (in the end) be necessary to rank 
 concerns across these groups. (For a review of scoring 
 (machines/methods/ways) for rating of technologies by farmers, 
 extension agents, and (people who work to find information), see Jaenicke et al., 
 1995). 
 
 2.1. Local private concerns of the small-scale farmer 
 Since many of the small-scale farmers practicing 
 slash-and-bum appear to do so because they don't have 
 (able to be done) job options that do not involve forest 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another), understanding farmer goals and the 
 social, money-based, and biophysical restrictions they 
 face is critical. Which land use systems (and inventionss needed to raise up them to best bet 
 
 candidate status) have the best chance of reaching 
 farmers' multiple money-based, (related to scientific farming) and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) goals? What are the tradeoffs from farmers' opinions? 
 Basically, for a land use or (related to computers and science) 
 other choice to be a best bet candidate, it must be 
 (able to be done) for small-scale farmers to adopt, maybe 
 on only a part of/amount of their land. A minimum set of 
 four issues, agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the books on smallholder decisionmaking and with ASB field research to 
 date, spans the selection judging requirements for best bets at the 
 farm level: a technology that does not 'score' positively 
 across all four cannot be expected to be desirable or 
 (able to be done) for the smallholder. For each of the four, the 
 useful thing/valuable supply situation of the household (human capital, 
 (money-related) and other valuable things, and valuable thing from nature base) 
 will condition the 'weight' that household places on 
 that issue as well as the (connected/related) time frame. 
 First, best bets must be money-making, and more money-making than other choice activities on or off farm. The time 
 frame within which best bets would need to tum a 
 (money made/good thing received) depends on the (money-related) situation of the household. Among small-scale farmers with few (money-related) 
 valuable things and little or no access to credit, this time frame 
 could be quite short. Second, best bets must improve 
 the food security situation of the farm household (not 
 always sounding the same as/equal to improved prospects for 
 future a money-making state), the more so the closer the household lies to, or risks falling below, the dividing line for 
 minimum daily needed things. Third, these different 
 activities must be compatible with labor restrictions at 
 the farm level, limited either by the (related to workers in general) 
 gift of the farm household itself or by the (away from cities) 
 labor market. (In its strictest form, this would require 
 that the cash needed to hire necessary labor is created by the best bets). Finally, since farmers are not 
 narrow-minded/(far things look blurry), best bets need to be (related to scientific farming)ally (able to last/helping the planet); that is to say, different production systems 
 must not insult the hidden (under) valuable thing from nature base 
 in ways that interfere with working well and, as a result, 
 destroy the money-making ability of these systems over time. 
 Some factors affecting attractiveness of investments 
 in productive valuable things and for (able to last/helping the planet) useful thing/valuable supply 
 management also operate beyond the household level. 
 These include security of rights of access to and use of 
 the valuable thing from nature base. For example, formal and 
 informal land and tree (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) institutions, often operating at the community level, appear to be key deter- 
 
 T.P. Tomich et al./Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 163 
 
 Table 1 
 Matrix of best bet judging requirements: indicators of private and public concerns/objectives 
 Land use systems 
 
 Private (farmers') concerns/objectives 
 A money-making state 
 Food security 
 Labor use 
 (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 
 Current practice 1 
 
 Current practice 2 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 Best bet I 
 
 Best bet 2 
 ? 
 
 Public (international community) concerns/objectives 
 Climate change 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) 
 
 minants of (rewards or reasons for doing something) (and bad things) for investment in productive valuable things and for (able to last/helping the planet) useful thing/valuable supply 
 management, at least in Indonesia. These issues affect 
 best bet adoption even if the four first (or most important) concerns 
 listed above are successfully talked to/looked at. These judging requirements, 
 then, must be taken into the process of carefully thinking about something in the search for 
 specific best bets. Although it is beyond the extent of/the range of 
 this paper, later analyses will include (not numbers-based) test of institutional gifts such as 
 how well markets function for land, labor, capital, 
 inputs and outputs as well as availability of information on production technology (see Vosti et al., 1997). 
 2.2. Worldwide  public concerns of the international 
 community 
 The issue of first (or most important) interest to the international 
 community, on the other hand, is taken to be the 
 supply of worldwide  public forest products (that are bought and sold)  and services, 
 more specifically preserving (lots of different living things all existing together) and limiting 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 ? 
 ? 
 
 climate change. Although natural forests rule all 
 different land uses (related to/looking at/thinking about) these worldwide  goals, 
 other choices at the forest margins do differ significantly 
 in their ability to substitute for these worldwide  (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) services of forests. So, although the international community seems mostly concerned with 
 preserving natural forest, it should also care about the 
 resulting land uses if forest is cut-down/destroyed. 
 A connected combination of judging requirements for testing land use other choices (Table 1) comes out from (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of the 
 opinions of the two polar interest groups. The 
 current land use options and the best bet other choices 
 are its columns, and biophysical and (how money affects people's lives) 
 indicators for each concern/objective of both user 
 groups make up/be equal to its rows. The question marks point to/show matrix 'cells' to be filled with (numbers-based) data so 
 that each land use system can be judged (related to/looking at/thinking about) 
 each judging requirement. 
 But where should the search for best bet candidates 
 begin? Table 2 provides some reasonable points of 
 
 Table 2 
 Plain and common thing/not a brand-name drug best bet candidates 
 Land uses 
 
 Descriptions 
 
 Invention of new things to create best bet 
 
 Production forests 
 Agroforests 
 Treecrops 
 Foodcrops 
 Grasslands 
 
 Extraction of timber and non-timber products 
 Complex, multistrata agroforestry systems- 
 (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea) or simple multistrata agroforestry systems 
 (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea) or multiple cropping 
 Animals-based systems 
 
 Emichment planting 
 Improved germplasm 
 Improved germplasm 
 Integrated soil life-creating ability managementb 
 Improved (areas of grassy land) 
 
 a Agroforests 
 
 in Indonesia begin with intercropping of upland foodcrops, but the first (or most important) goal is establishment of treecrops like rubber and 
 different fruit and timber species. Although created by local people, the management system changes something (to helps someone)/takes care of someone natural regeneration. As a result, 
 agroforests copy certain elements of forest structure and ecology (for example, see Michon and de Foresta, 1995). 
 bThis includes improved crop management practices involving (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of organic inputs (for example, improved unplanteds) and (not living) 
 inputs ((material that makes plants grow better)s) along with measures to control weeds, pests and sicknesses. 
 
 164 
 
 T.P. Tomich et al.!Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 departure based on descriptions of land use systems 
 now present in the (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) forest margins, and 
 some types of inventions of new things needed to move these land 
 uses closer to being best bets (here focusing clearly 
 on how to increase a money-making state via improved working well). These are reasonable points of departure 
 because, in most cases, some versions of these systems 
 are already in use by at least some farmers in the study 
 areas-pointing to/showing that different things than/different versions of these best bet 
 candidates have a reasonable hope of/future of passing 
 the most basic 'test', adoption by small-scale 
 farmers. So, wherever possible, existing systems are 
 the starting point for the process of identifying best 
 bets for development. This is an easier job, however, 
 on Sumatra in Indonesia-where smallholders have 
 centuries of experience in cleaning/making better their land use 
 systems-than it is in new settlements in Brazil's 
 western Amazon. 
 
 2.3. Test of best bets 
 And what are the standards for judging best bets? 
 Obviously, to be classed a best bet, an other choice 
 would have to go past-in almost every respectunsustainable shifting (producing crops/helping something grow), which is one possible point of comparison. (related to scientific farming)ally insulted/got worse 
 systems-such as grasslands and insulted/got worse (areas of grassy land)provide another set of minimum standards to beat. But 
 because (chopping down trees) is among the first (or most important) concerns 
 of this research, natural forests are the main point of 
 reference for identifying (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions)al and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) (features/ qualities/ traits) of best bet other choices. In the 
 analysis in Section 4, measurements for each other choice are expressed as a difference from the natural 
 forest (a measure of what occurs naturally/sports boundary line). 3 Systems that make better use of, and 
 enrich, forests should be thought about/believed candidates for 
 best bets. Also, agroforestry and treecrop systems 
 that improve working well while conserving some 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) and isolating carbon also would be 
 good candidates. Finally, improvements to existing 
 foodcrop and animals production systems that boost 
 working well and extend the productive life of soils 
 should also be thought about/believed since they may reduce 
 3 Note 
 
 that the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) can handle test of any land use 
 system; since Section 4 presents (many, many times more/much, much less) guesses 
 rather than exact measurements, an clear test result is 
 needed/demanded. 
 
 demand for added/more forest (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) under certain 
 conditions (but see the ending/deciding warnings). 
 Since changes in land uses will usually affect the 
 supplies of both private and public products (that are bought and sold)  and services, 
 all best bet other choices must be measured against both 
 sets of judging requirements: household goals and worldwide  (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) goals. And, if a land use system cannot 
 better the test result for household concerns or provide a reasonable substitute for the test result on 
 (worries about the health of the Earth), it probably does not belong 
 among best bet candidates. 
 From the previous, two points stand out: (a) the 
 process of identifying best bet candidates for a specific 
 setting is a complex one; and (b) the test of best 
 bet land use systems cannot be (taken/took control of) in a single, 
 summary measure. Even the cheap approach 
 organized and listed above took as its starting point for candidates 
 a restricted list of land use other choices (proposing 
 a few others as interesting points of comparison), 
 and six concerns to be carefully thought about/believed. 
 The (problems, delays, etc.) with coming up with summary 
 measures for given land uses across concerns have 
 already been touched upon. While money-based (putting a value on something) 
 can provide a good weighting big plan/layout/dishonest plan for some of 
 the goals and concerns, it is filled with problems for 
 others (for example, (lots of different living things all existing together)). A useful point of 
 departure for testing-related tradeoffs among private costs 
 and benefits is the useful thing/valuable supply portion method used by 
 small-scale farmers, who deal with such tradeoffs on a 
 daily basis. No almost the same  (related to careful studying or deep thinking) point of departure, 
 however, exists for testing-related tradeoffs among the 
 different worldwide  public products (that are bought and sold)  and services gave/given 
 by forests (although, as will be noted later, some 
 methods for (thinking about/when one thinks about) pollution (that heats up the Earth) (things sent out or given off) 
 in a common measuring (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) do exist), or for 
 testing wholesale or component-clearly stated/particular tradeoffs 
 among public and private products (that are bought and sold)  and services. But even 
 in this more limited (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), where measurements 
 show/tell about many tradeoffs, either a multidimensional decision big plan/layout/dishonest plan or some system of weighing competing 
 goals must then be used to test a best bet 
 candidate (or combinations of candidates). 
 
 3. Measurement issues 
 Once the test judging requirements for best bet candidates 
 are clear, it is necessary to deal with the/to speak to the  hard  tasks of 
 
 T.P. Tomich et aUAgricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 finding specific measurable indicators that cover those 
 judging requirements well (an repeating/repetitive process that may involve 
 cleaning/making better the judging requirements), and then collecting and carefully studying data needed to test the different land use other choices. 
 Definitions for the general judging requirements identified 
 above are common, and each definition carries with it 
 measurement and sample selection issues that stand near and threaten 
 large in and change/differ  (in a big way) across each of the 
 'cells' of the best bet test matrix. In the 
 face of this complex difficulty, (related to careful studying or deep thinking) methods selected 
 must yield indicators that are: clear, measurable 
 and, above all, allow for comparisons across other choices. 
 This section lays out clearly stated/particular indicators for each of 
 the farmers' (private) and international community 
 (public) concerns, in tum. In no case does a single 
 indicator be enough for test; rather, all indicators, 
 plus a minimum set of qualifying information, are 
 necessary for test. 
 
 3.1. Measuring smallholder (private) concerns 
 For the smallholder concerns, the indicators are 
 came/coming from the books on household decisionmaking processes. The suitability of this list of indicators, 
 like the concerns themselves, should be validated with 
 farmers. For a more in-depth account of research 
 rules for each private concern, see Vosti et al. 
 (1997). The following list summarizes indicators 
 selected. 
 - Private a money-making state: the appropriate measure of 
 private a money-making state is the expected net present 
 value (NPV) of money/money income less costs of (bought) 
 inputs and of domestic factors of production, all 
 valued at market prices. Also, the time to 
 reach positive cash flow (at a level (good) enough to 
 make a big (thing that's given/work that's done) to sustaining a farm 
 household), is critical, as is the existence of any 
 later period of negative cash flow. A common time (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  must be applied to all NPV 
 calculations, and selected to be compatible 
 with the longest production cycle among candidates. For example, since many of the best bet 
 candidates involve plants (that bloom every year) or animals, the time 
 (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  must be about twenty years to be 
 appropriate to these systems. Each land use system 
 
 165 
 
 will have an clear, although not necessarily 
 common, (land-area-based/location) scale for test. To be 
 similar, results will be reported on a per hectare basis. Market prices will be (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) for longterm (popular things/general ways things are going) and seasonal ups and downs. Social a money-making state, calculated at money-based (shadow) prices, 
 will be used to test the hit/effect of policy distortions on (rewards or reasons for doing something) for adoption and investment 
 (Monke and Pearson, 1989). 
 - Household food security: the appropriate food 
 security indicator must incorporate both direct 
 consumption of home-produced food as well as 
 trade for food. This is especially important for land 
 use systems that do not involve foodcrops, but 
 applies to food-producing systems also. The 
 measure used will be based on the idea  of risk 
 of food entitlement failure by Sen (1982), which 
 includes trade-based and production-based 
 (government money) to food as well as security of property 
 rights over productive valuable things ((something valuable you get when older relatives die) and move (from one place to another) (government money)). 
 - Household labor use: a measure of labor needed things (person-days per year) of particular systems 
 will be averaged over the land use cycle. This will 
 be helped by a measure of cash flow to meet 
 hired labor needs should family labor be not enough, adjusted to (take control of) separate periods of 
 peak labor demand in the system itself (taking into 
 (serious thought/something to think about/respect) labor demand in other household 
 activities). It also is necessary to measure division 
 of labor by (male/female status) and age for operations where 
 those honors/statements of differences matter. 
 - (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): this term as used here 
 refers to the long-term production ability (to hold or do something) of a land use system; like the 'indicators' above, it is 
 itself multidimensional. Soil scientists and farm experts working in ASB have identified a minimum 
 set of seven parts/pieces of (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), including (good) enough soil organic matter and 
 nutrient balances. For the purposes of testing 
 best bet candidates, the overall indicator of (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) follows the law of the lowest value: it will take a value of 1 (pointing to/showing the system 
 is (related to scientific farming)ally (able to last/helping the planet)) if all parts/pieces are 
 above the minimum dividing line for (able to last/helping the planet) production, but 0 (impossible to do/impossible to keep going) if any part is 
 below its dividing line value at any time (note that, in 
 this case, a scientist's test of (related to scientific farming) 
 
 166 
 
 T.P. Tomich eta!./Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) indicators and dividing lines 
 move away from that of the farmer). 
 
 may 
 
 3.2. Measuring international community (worldwide 
 public) concerns 
 Three indicators of the worldwide  (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) results of (chopping down trees) are available. Two of these 
 indicators are linked to worldwide  climate change: net 
 (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid)/emission of pollution (that heats up the Earth) (carbon 
 dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide) and carbon 
 stocks. These indicators change/differ  with land use systems 
 and other factors, and have aboveground and belowground parts/pieces: growing plants (that bloom every year) use carbon 
 dioxide and in that way ((for a short time)) (period of being separated) a portion 
 of this carbon as energy; soils under forest cover and 
 also under certain other land uses appear to soak up and 
 oxidize big amounts of methane (van Noordwijk et al., 1995a); on the other hand, nitrogen (material that makes plants grow better) applied in some land use systems adds/gives to 
 nitrous oxide (things sent out or given off). 
 Rules for the measurements briefly described 
 below can be found in Murdiyarso et al. (1995). 
 Carbon stocks are measured as tons of carbon per 
 hectare, averaged over the life cycle of a land use 
 system. There are net carbon dioxide fluxes from land 
 use changes, but not for land use types (by itself/in and of itself). For 
 methane and nitrous oxide, each land use will have a 
 net flux. Fluxes of methane and nitrous oxide are 
 measured directly. Guesses of once-a-year flux per hectare 
 of the pollution (that heats up the Earth) are grouped on the basis of 
 net radiative forcing (IPCC, 1990), with their 'greenhouse effect' in the atmosphere expressed in carbon 
 dioxide equals. 
 Measurement of (lots of different living things all existing together) richness of the different land use systems for major groups of organisms 
 above and belowground is a especially complex 
 challenge (Giller et al., 1997). In this research program, aboveground measurements are done for plant 
 functional groups as well as using the more ordinary (related to classifying living things) approach (Gillison and (person who works with and builds with wood), 
 1997). Gillison's 'plant functional attributes' (PFA) 
 approach provides an overall indicator of (lots of different living things all existing together) 
 richness that is good for cross-continent comparisons. Belowground tests focus on organisms 
 that influence (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going). Two of the 
 guesses to be tested in the (happening now) (lots of different living things all existing together) 
 
 part of this research are: (a) that PFAs are 
 highly related to plant species richness as 
 well as other aboveground taxa; and (b) that aboveground (lots of different living things all existing together) is highly related to belowground (lots of different living things all existing together). At this stage, the first guess rests on a firmer body of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) than the 
 second. 
 Still, this research overcomes only some of the 
 methodological (problems, delays, etc.) connected with (lots of different living things all existing together) test, and cannot alone answer the question 
 of how much (lots of different living things all existing together) will be lost for each hectare 
 of forest converted to another land use. The main 
 methodological gaps concern scaling over space and 
 over time. As one samples (lots of different living things all existing together) over larger and 
 larger areas of a particular community, the number of 
 added/more species watched/followed will increase, but at· a 
 decreasing rate. This (when two things work together equally well) across space 
 means that one cannot simply 'add' indicators of 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) richness across plots. Nor can the number 
 of species seen on a small study area tell us how much 
 land is needed to (protect from harm) those species. These species' long-term survival prospects depend on the 
 extent of their home, but this is influenced by the 
 pattern of land cover in the (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land). For example, 
 although the plots of Sumatran rubber agroforests 
 studied so far may contain half to two-thirds of the 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) of an equal area of natural forest 
 (Michon and de Foresta, 1995), it is not known 
 whether the same is true if one were to compare a 
 million hectares of rubber agroforests to an equal 
 amount of natural forest. Even less is known about 
 what happens if these million hectares happen in a 
 (decoration made of many colored pieces of glass, stone, etc.) with undisturbed forest patches. 
 
 3.3. Toward improved lists of indicators 
 This list of indicators for testing land use other choices across these farmer (private) and international 
 community (public) goals is not definite. In the 
 (not being there; not being present) of any prior effort at complete comparison of clearly stated/particular land use other choices across these 
 concerns, quality of this problem-that is, 
 the lowest number of indicators necessary for 
 complete test-is still an open question. 
 But an exercise now happening-to copy measurements to fill out best bet test matrices for 
 particular study areas-should shed light on the 
 
 T.P. Tomich eta!. I Farming-based Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 quality question. Section 4 presents and discusses guesses based on measurements taken this way 
 far for study places/locations in the Sumatran peneplains and 
 Brazil's western Amazon. 
 
 4. Early/incomplete results from Indonesia and 
 Brazil-information for selecting best bets 
 Selection judging requirements discussed in Section 2 were used 
 to get locally (connected/related) best bet candidates for the 
 Sumatran and Brazilian places/locations going along with/matching up to (but 
 more specifically defined than) the plain and common thing/not a brand-name drug land use 
 systems described in Table 2. Data available from 
 (happening now) field research fall short of filling in exact 
 (numbers-based) measurements for the indicators 
 described in Section 3, but do allow some early/incomplete 
 test (related to/looking at/thinking about) directions of change and their 
 (many, many times more/much, much less) face-with the natural forest test result. This exercise has already proven useful in 
 comparing site-specific best bet candidates, and providing ideas as to promising best bet technologies at 
 each site. A comparison of the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built)'s application across the two places/locations provides clues to its flexibility 
 in dealing with (many different kinds of people or things) contexts. A look at (things that are almost the same as other things) 
 and differences in the cells of the matrix points to 
 areas where (serving to compare two or more things) cross-site analysis may produce 
 broadly generalizable findings. 
 Table 3 presents early/incomplete best bet matrices for 
 Sumatra in Indonesia (Part 1 of the table) and Brazil's 
 western Amazon (Part 2). The column headings for 
 each matrix reflect major land uses and certain other choices for each site. The measurements in each 
 column of both matrices are based on the authors' 
 guesses of (many, many times more/much, much less)s of differences, 
 compared with natural forests. It is the cross-row 
 comparisons of land use other choices, however, that 
 will show/tell about the most about which of the systems are 
 best (and worst) bets-with respect to smallholders' 
 goals and supply of worldwide  public products (that are bought and sold). The 
 ability to make cross-row comparisons with confidence will grow as (many, many times more/much, much less) guesses 
 are replaced by more exact measurements in each 
 matrix. 
 The Indonesian case is treated in detail; the discussion of the Brazilian case follows, highlighting the 
 flexibility of the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), and pointing out differences and (things that are almost the same as other things) across places/locations. 
 
 167 
 
 4.1. Balancing a money-making state and (lots of different living things all existing together) in 
 Indonesia 
 
 While (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) of natural forest has a major 
 effect on the supply of forest functions, the later 
 land uses also matter a great deal for (related to scientific farming) 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and the supply of worldwide  (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 benefits. Part 1 of Table 3 presents very early/incomplete 
 guesses of the (many, many times more/much, much less) of these differences for seven systems that represent the major land 
 uses in Sumatra's peneplains, the low-elevation, moving areas of poor soils that contain the island's 
 largest agroecological zone (see van Noordwijk et al., 
 1995a for details). 
 All the tree-based systems in Part 1 of Table 3 
 (smallholder agroforests and (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea), as well 
 as large-scale (large farm with crops) (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea)) are (related to scientific farming)ally (able to last/helping the planet). On the other hand, shortening of 
 unplanted rotations (from 10-20 years or more to less than 
 five years) with rising land (not enough of something) is interfering with 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of shifting (producing crops/helping something grow), which has been 
 disappearing anyway as population pressure increases 
 in Sumatra (van Noordwijk et al., 1995a). Continuous 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) of cassava does not appear (able to last/helping the planet) on 
 this land because of (everything is gone) of (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) and of soil 
 organic matter. (On these soils, not important money/money income 
 from (material that makes plants grow better) applications to cassava do not cover 
 (material that makes plants grow better) costs at current prices, which are near the 
 world market price for most (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) except nitrogen, 
 which is paid-for in Indonesia). There also do not 
 appear to be big differences among forest extraction 
 and the other tree-based systems (related to/looking at/thinking about) carbon 
 stocks and pollution (that heats up the Earth). So, as far as (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) and climate change issues are 
 concerned, tree-based systems rule among the 
 other choices. 
 There are a big differences among the treebased systems and between these systems and the 
 natural forest (a measure of what occurs naturally/sports boundary line) (related to/looking at/thinking about) aboveground (lots of different living things all existing together).4 Agroforests are much richer in species than 
 the other tree-based systems, but it must be given special attention that agroforests are not perfect substitutes for 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) (protecting something from harm) in natural forests. In fact, 
 (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) of natural forests to agroforests involves a 
 4 Work on belowground (lots of different living things all existing together) measurements is (happening now) at 
 both places/locations, but has not went forward (good or well enough) for including in something in these 
 early/incomplete tests. 
 
 ..... 
 
 0\ 
 
 Table 3 
 Early/incomplete guesses of the hits/effects of selected land use systems 
 Part I - Application to Sumatra, Indonesia - peneplains 
 Private and worldwide 
 concerns/objectives 
 Private (Farmers') concerns 
 A money-making state 
 Food security 
 Labor use 
 (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 
 00 
 
 Land use system 
 large-scale forest 
 extraction 
 
 Rubber 
 agroforest 
 
 Rubber 
 (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea) 
 
 Large-scale oil 
 palm or industrial 
 timber (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea) 
 
 Shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 of upland rice 
 and otber foodcrops 
 
 Continuous 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 of cassava 
 
 ++ (+++?i 
 
 ++ 
 ++ 
 + 
 1 
 
 ++ (+++?) 
 ++ 
 + 
 1 
 
 ++(+++?)! 
 
 + 
 + 
 + 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 0/1 
 
 0 
 
 c(-?) 
 N/A 
 
 Public (Global) (worries about the health of the Earth) 
 Carbon stocks 
 Pollution (that heats up the Earth) (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid) 
 c 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) (aboveground) 
 
 + 
 
 Imperata 
 cy1inderical 
 grasslands 
 
 +(++?) 
 
 N/A 
 &#126; 
 
 :-tl 
 
 --/- 
 
 C;l 
 ;,; 
 
 c 
 
 §: 
 
 --/- 
 
 &#126; 
 
 Part 2 - Application to western Amazon of Brazi!'2 
 Private and worldwide 
 publicconcerns 
 
 :;;: 
 
 Land use system 
 -&#126;-an--a-g-ed&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash; 
 
 forests 
 Private (Farmers') concerns 
 A money-making state 
 + 
 Food security 
 + 
 Labor use 
 + 
 (related to scientific farming) sustainbility 
 1 
 Public (Worldwide  (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth)) concerns 3 
 Carbon stocks 
 c 
 Pollution (that heats up the Earth) (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid) 
 c(?) 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) (aboveground) 
 c 
 1Profitability 
 
 &#126; 
 ,..... 
 
 Agrotorestry 
 systems 
 
 Treecrops 
 
 +(++?) 
 +(?) 
 +(++)? 
 1(?) 
 
 ++(+++?) 
 +(?) 
 + 
 1 
 
 Managed 
 unplanteds 
 
 Once-a-year crops 
 witb (peas, beans, lentils, etc.) 
 
 Improved (areas of grassy land) 
 
 c(?) 
 c(?) 
 +(?) 
 1 
 
 + 
 ++ 
 + 
 1(?) 
 
 ++(+++?) 
 ++ 
 -(--?) 
 1(?) 
 
 -(--?) 
 
 --(-?) 
 -(--?) 
 
 &#126;- 
 
 "'fl 
 
 &#126; 
 
 guesses are from the point of view of the operator, which for this land use system is a large-scale company instead of a smallholder household. 
 candidates for measurement and test have a much narrower definitions than these column headings: for example, improved unplanteds are once-a-year crop witb 
 plant or once-a-year/tree crop rotation witb nitrogen-fixing tree; and simple agroforestry systems such as coffeelbandarra, coffee/rubber, and/or coffee/peach palm. Current practices are 
 also to be measured: including insulted/got worse (area of grassy land), repeating stands, and unimproved unplanted areas. Still, the "scores" presented here for wider land use system categories illustrate 
 the uncertainties surrounding measurement of the (many different kinds of people or things) of land uses and management practices in the Brazil places/locations. 
 3Field data to support this analysis in Brazil are still quite early/incomplete. Early access to, and a careful (understanding/ explanation) of, tbese data were given by Divonzil Gon&#126;ves Cordeiro. 
 (N.B. Guessed changes are all site-specific and expressed in terms of (at least ten times as much/less than 1/10th as much) face-with the natural forest.) 
 2 (many, many times more/much, much less) less: - 0-1 (at least ten times as much/less than 1/10th as much) less: no a big difference: c 
 0-1 (at least ten times as much/less than 1/10th as much) greater: + 
 2 (many, many times more/much, much less) greater: ++ 
 3 (many, many times more/much, much less) greater: +++ 
 (related to scientific farming) (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): O=unsustainable, !=sustainable. 
 2 Best-bet 
 
 OQ 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126;- 
 
 ..... 
 \Q 
 ..... 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126;..... 
 
 f 
 &#126; 
 
 T.P. Tomich et al./Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 big reduction in species richness. For tests of higher plants made along 100 m line transects 
 in Sumatra, over 350 species were found in first (or most important) 
 forests while the number dropped to about 250 species 
 for rubber agroforests. However, the richness remaining in agroforests still is much higher than the five or 
 so species of higher plants found in rubber (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea) (Michon and de Foresta, 1995). 
 Raising working well of rubber agroforests, which 
 span millions of hectares, offers a promising pathway 
 in Sumatra. There is (possibility of/possible happening of)  raising a money-making state 
 of these systems through helpful change of existing higheryielding germplasm within existing smallholder systems (Barlow and Jayasuriya, 1984; Tomich, 1991), 
 which also could add/give to national policy goals such as improving food security and increasing 
 labor (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid). These potential money-based benefits 
 may be combined with significant aboveground (lots of different living things all existing together) conservation-although less than natural forest-because the mix of planted species is increased 
 by natural regeneration of forest species (Michon and 
 de Foresta, 1995; van Noordwijk et al., 1995b). 
 In fact, these agroforests may come close to a number 
 of forest functions, by that/in that way providing the technical 
 foundation for some institutional arrangements such 
 as (able to last/helping the planet) community-based forest and watershed 
 management. 
 A key unresolved question is whether the potential 
 for development of smallholder rubber agroforests 
 (with most operating units of 1-10 ha) can compete 
 with the private and social a money-making state of large-scale 
 other choices (10,000-300,000 ha), including logging 
 givebacks, oil palm (large farms with crops) and industrial timber 
 huge houses. The last thing just mentioned big plans/layouts/dishonest plans are viewed as best bets for 
 money-based development by many policymakers and 
 (people who give money or other things), in large part because of thinking 
 of (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) in (large farm with crops) development. If it 
 turns out that large-scale development other choices are 
 more money-making-as pointed to/showed in the parentheses of 
 Part 1 of Table 3-three important policy tradeoffs 
 will have to be faced: (a) tradeoffs with food security, 
 since such projects often involve displacement oflocal 
 smallholders with little or no payment; (b) in 
 the case of large-scale logging, a tradeoff with 
 labor (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid); and (c) for large-scale (large farm with crops) 
 (growing only one crop / believing in only one idea)s (for example, oil palm and industrial 
 timber), an important tradeoff with (lots of different living things all existing together) 
 conservation. 
 
 169 
 
 (even though there is the existence of) what people believe now, the winning/most common 
 faith in (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) in production of socalled 'plantation' valuable things receives no support 
 from the farming-based money flow/money-based studies books (Hayami 
 and Kawagoe, 1993; Tomich et al., 1995). This is, 
 anyway, an scientific question that will be 
 talked about in the next part of research. Unlike 
 production, though, marketing and processing of 
 first (or most important) products often are seen as increasing returns to scale. This is the case for three 
 of the most important land use other choices-rubber, 
 pulp and oil palm-in Sumatra. The natural rubber 
 industry in Southeast Asia provides an excellent 
 example of the (wasting very little while working or producing something) with which markets can 
 integrate low-cost production by smallholders with 
 processing in factories that (accomplish or gain with effort) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 scale; almost the same  marketing arrangements should work 
 for pulp. Oil palm ordinarily has been viewed 
 as an estate crop in Southeast Asia (but not in 
 Africa) because of its (likelihood to go bad in a short time). Even in this 
 case, however, oil palm production on independent 
 plots as small as one hectare began to come out  in 
 Sumatra in the 1980s. Outgrower big plans/layouts/dishonest plans, contract 
 farming and other institutional arrangements all can 
 help reduce transactions costs in linking (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 smallholder producers with (producing a lot with very little waste) large-scale processors. 
 Even if analysis shows that the large-scale big plans/layouts/dishonest plans 
 hold no advantages in terms of private and social 
 a money-making state compared to smallholder big plans/layouts/dishonest plans, a 
 possible tradeoff between a money-making state and (lots of different living things all existing together) (protecting something from harm) remains to be talked to/looked at concerning 
 smallholder systems (van Noordwijk et al., 1995b). 
 Farmer management aimed at increasing working well 
 of systems often decreases (lots of different living things all existing together). Whether or 
 not this seen/obvious tradeoff between working well and 
 (lots of different living things all existing together) is unavoidable is the subject of debateand further research. Even modest working well gains 
 can cause great loss of (lots of different living things all existing together) sometimes. For 
 other systems and using different production ways of doing things, (lots of different living things all existing together) loss may be (compared to other things) slow for 
 initial increases in working well. In the last thing just mentioned case, 
 raising working well to an (between beginner and expert) level may 
 involve a modest tradeoff with (lots of different living things all existing together). So, 
 two of the most important research questions (related to/looking at/thinking about) the selection of best bets in Sumatra are: what is 
 the shape of this tradeoff function, and what factors 
 influence the (lots of different living things all existing together) of these complex, multi- 
 
 170 
 
 T.P. Tomich et al.!Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 159-174 
 
 layers  systems as working well of their parts/pieces 
 increases? 
 4.2. Looking (for) a different balance in Brazil 
 
 The patterns and pace of occupation of forest 
 margins areas in the Brazilian Amazon have differed 
 (in a big way) from those in Indonesia, resulting in part 
 from different gifts of land, labor, natural 
 useful things/valuable supplies and capital between the two countries, their 
 differences in access to major commercial centers, and 
 also because of the clear/separate policy (surrounding conditions) that 
 served to attract traveling workers and guide their land use 
 decisions upon (the act of reaching a destination) (for Brazil, see Mahar, 1989). 
 Brazil's western Amazon still is a new edge of something/unexplored area for 
 farming; most farmers are (compared to other things) recent settlers 
 (bringing with them knowledge of other, non-rainforest communities), and markets still are developing. 
 'Small-scale' operational holding here refers to an 
 area of about 80 ha, very much larger than 
 the 5 ha holdings describing smallholders in 
 Sumatra. A range of management practices may be 
 found within any given land use, with fairly fast 
 moves/changes in way of doing things. Land use mixes also show great 
 variety, and soil types change/differ  in more (related to something made up of many different pieces) fashion 
 than in Sumatra. 
 The shifts and variety in Brazil probably reflect 
 changes in markets and (set of machines) that go with 
 the change from edge of something/unexplored area to a settled area. (happening now) 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) also means that issues of scale, (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) and 
 the possible role of public institutions are in a state of 
 flux, especially as new roads link what have been 
 separated local markets to national and international 
 markets for the first time. So, systems that rule in the (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land) now may disappear soon and 
 systems important in the future may not yet be obvious 
 (Vosti et al., honest/appearing soon). 
 As expected, then, land use systems found at the 
 forest margins of Brazil's western Amazon differ 
 (in a big way) from the many tree-based systems of 
 land use found at the forest margins of the Sumatran 
 peneplains. In the western Brazilian Amazon, a large 
 (and increasing) amount of land is dedicated to long/big animals production systems (Witcover et al., 
 1996), and some farmers are beginning to strengthen 
 animals production using the improved (areas of grassy land) 
 identified as a best bet candidate. Trends in land 
 use also were used to select best bet candidates: 
 
 farmers are only now making initial, uncertain/not definite trips/attacks 
 into agroforestry systems including timber as a part. Promising technologies (at least in (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) terms) identified by farming-based research and<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
