Chapter 8 
 
 THE AGRICULTURAL 
 
 TRANSFORMATION 
 
 C. PETER TIMMER* 
 
 Harvard University 
 
 Contents 
 
 1. 
 2. 
 
 3. 
 
 Introduction 
 The process of farming-based change 
 
 276 
 279 
 
 2.1. Changing stages 
 
 280 
 
 2.2. Farming and money-based development 
 
 283 
 
 2.3. The role of the farming-based part/area 
 
 288 
 
 Why farming is different 
 
 3.3. The farm household as both producer and person 
 
 291 
 292 
 294 
 299 
 
 3.4. What difference does the difference make? 
 
 300 
 
 Changing farming 
 
 302 
 302 
 313 
 321 
 321 
 323 
 327 
 328 
 
 3.1. Decision-making in farming 
 3.2. (features/ qualities/ traits) of farming-based production functions 
 
 4. 
 
 5. 
 
 4.1. 
 
 The sources and patterns of technical change 
 
 4.2. 
 
 Unresolved issues 
 
 Farming-based development plan 
 5.1. Policies for "getting farming moving" 
 5.2. Different plans for maintaining the change process 
 5.3. Farming-based policy and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change 
 
 References 
 
 *I would like to thank the people (who were part of a study, etc.) at the authors' workshop for helpful reactions to my (at the beginning) 
 ideas for this chapter. Particular thanks go to Larry Westphal, Pranab K. Bardhan, David Dapice, 
 and Scott Pearson for serious and critical readings of the first draft. As always, my deepest (money owed)  is to 
 my wife and editor, Carol, for her patience and toughness in helping me make my books 
 readable and for her mastery of the wonderful new technology that allows me to lose half the 
 book with the push of a button and for her to get it back after a lot of work and stress. 
 
 Handbook of Development Money flow, Book I, Edited by H. Cheneo' and T.N. Srinivasan 
 © Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., 1988 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 
 276 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 The farming-based change has been a (in a surprising and interesting way) uniform process when 
 viewed from outside the farming-based part/area itself. As recorded/supported by Clark 
 (1940), Kuznets (1966), Chenery and Syrquin (1975), and the patterns reported in 
 the introductory chapter to Part II of the Handbook, the share of farming in a 
 country's labor force and total output declines in both thin slice and timeseries samples as incomes per person increase. The (lowering in number/getting worse) importance of 
 farming is uniform and widespread, a habit/desire obviously driven by powerful 
 forces built into the development process, whether in socialist or (person who uses money to make more money) 
 countries, Asian, Latin American, or African, now developed or still poor. 
 It is at least (a) little confusing, then, that a second uniform and widespread aspect 
 of the development process also involves agriculture- the seen/obvious needed thing 
 that fast farming-based growth go with or happen before general money-based growth. 
 The logic of the classical model of money-based growth needs/demands it: 
 Now if the (person who uses money to make more money) part/area produces no food, its (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) increases the 
 demand for food, raises the price of food in terms of (person who uses money to make more money) products, and so 
 reduces (money made/good things received). This is one of the senses in which (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) is dependent 
 upon farming-based improvement; it is not money-making to produce a growing 
 volume of manufactures unless farming-based production is growing (at the same time). This is also why industrial and land-related revolutions always go 
 together, and why (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) in which farming is spoiled do not show 
 industrial development [Lewis (1954, p. 433, focus added)]_). 
 The historical record to which Lewis hints supports the strong link between 
 farming-based and industrial growth, at least in market-oriented (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). The 
 English model is often held up as the case in point: 
 Think about/believe what happened in the original home of industrial development, in 
 England in the eighteenth century. Everyone knows that the amazing 
 industrial revolution would not have been possible without the farming-based 
 revolution that happened before it. And what was this farming-based revolution? It was 
 based on the introduction of the turnip. The lowly turnip made possible a 
 change in crop rotation which did not require much capital, but which brought 
 about a huge/extreme rise in farming-based working well. As a result, more food 
 could be grown with much less manpower. Manpower was released for capital 
 construction. The growth of industry would not have been possible without the 
 turnip and other improvements in farming [Nurkse (1953, pp. 52-53)]_). 
 (even though there is the existence of) a very different view in the current books about the hit/effect 
 of the English farming-based revolution on labor working well, the key importance 
 
 Ch. 8: The Farming-based Change 
 
 277 
 
 of the increase in farming-based output has not been challenged [Timmer (1969), 
 Hayami and Ruttan (1985)]_). Nor is this importance restricted to the lessons from 
 the now developed countries. In surveying the (related to studying numbers) link between 
 agric&#126;altural and overall money-based growth in now less-developed countries, 
 the World Bank reached the following ends/end results: 
 The continuing importance of farming in the (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of the developing 
 countries is reflected in the association between the growth of farming and 
 of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a whole. Among countries where the farming-based share of 
 GDP was greater than 20 percent in 1970, farming-based growth in the 1970s 
 went beyond 3 percent a year in 17 of the 23 countries whose GDP growth was 
 above 5 percent a year [see Table 8.1]. During the same period, 11 of the 17 
 countries with GDP growth below 3 percent a year managed farming-based 
 growth of only 1 percent or less. Farming-based and GDP growth differed by less 
 than two percentage points in 11 of 15 countries experiencing medium-level 
 growth. There have been exceptions, of course, but they prove the rule: fast 
 GDP growth and slow farming was a feature of some of the oil- or 
 mineral-based (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) such as Algeria, Ecuador, Morocco, and Nigeria. 
 The similar things between farming-based and GDP growth suggest that the factors 
 which affect farming-based performance may be linked to (process of people making, selling, and buying things)-wide social 
 and money-based policies . . . . Expanding farming-based production through (related to computers and science) change and trade creates important demands for the outputs of other 
 parts/areas, famously (material that makes plants grow better), transportation, commercial services, and construction. At the same time, farming-based families are often the basic market for a 
 wide range of (products normally found in stores) that are near and threatening in the early stages of industrial 
 development-fabrics and clothing, processed foods, (liquid you can burn for light and heat) and vegetable 
 oils, aluminum hoUoware, radios, bicycles, and construction materials for home 
 improvements [World Bank (1982, pp. 44-45)]_). 
 The need for fast farming-based growth and for the decline in the farming-based 
 part/area's share of output and the labor force are not disagreeing, of course, but 
 the seen/obvious weird statement gave rise to a (existing all over a large area) mistake in thinking that farming is 
 unimportant-that it does not require useful things/valuable supplies or a good policy (surrounding conditions) - because its relative share of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) declines. 
 So long as market forces provide the first (or most important) direction to the part/areaal portion of useful things/valuable supplies, how schoolwork perceive this process is not related to the process 
 itself. When government planners help, however, they do so within a 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of goals and restrictions, and this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) is (in the end) 
 conditioned by the winning/most common school-related understanding of how money-based growth 
 go aheads. The mainstream way of thinking of the 1950s suggested that farming could 
 and should be squeezed for the more energetic parts/areas of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 This plan could be successful if farming was already growing quickly (as in 
 
 278 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 Table 8.1 
 Growth of farming and G D P in the 1970s 
 Farming-based 
 growth 
 
 Above 5 percent 
 
 Above 3 percent Cameroon 
 China a 
 Colombia 
 Dominican Rep. 
 Guatemala 
 Indonesia 
 Ivory Coast 
 Kenya 
 Korea, Rep. of 
 1 - 3 percent 
 Costa Rica 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt 
 Lesotho 
 
 Below 1 percent 
 
 Morocco 
 Nigeria 
 
 G D P growth 
 3 - 5 percent 
 
 Malawi a 
 Malaysia 
 Paraguay 
 Philippines 
 Thailand 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Yemen Arab Rep. 
 
 Below 3 percent 
 
 Bolivia 
 Burma a 
 Mall a 
 Somalia a 
 Tanzania a 
 
 Liberia 
 Nicaragua 
 Senegal 
 
 Bangladesh&#126; 
 Central African Rep. &#126; 
 El Salvador 
 Haiti a 
 Honduras 
 India a 
 Pakistan a 
 Sri Skinnya a 
 Sudan a 
 Upper Volta a 
 Togoa 
 
 Burundi a 
 Sierra Leone a 
 Zaire a 
 
 Angola a 
 Chad a 
 Congo. Rep. 
 Ethiopia a 
 Ghana 
 Madagascar a 
 Mauritania a 
 Mozambique a 
 Nepal a 
 Niger a 
 Uganda a 
 
 a Low-income countries. 
 Source: World Bank (1982, p. 45). 
 
 Western Europe and Japan) or if it started with a large extra relative to the 
 survival/income needs of the (away from cities) population (as in the USSR). But if the farming-based 
 part/area started with traditional technology and produces and living standards near 
 survival/income, the "squeeze farming" way of thinking created money-based spoiling, not 
 growth. In those cases, major attention was needed to cause an farming-based 
 change if the industrial revolution was to have any real hope of success. 
 Upon closer examination, it is not surprising that farming-based growth leads to 
 farming-based decline. At least two (machines/methods/ways), now (compared to other things) well understood and 
 
 Ch. 8: The Farming-based Change 
 
 279 
 
 recorded/supported, account for this process of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change. 1 Engel's Law 
 alone, in a closed (process of people making, selling, and buying things) with constant prices, explains a (lowering in number/getting worse) share for 
 farming (and low farm incomes unless some farmers leave farming) no 
 matter how fast the part/area grows. Because growth is led by demand patterns in 
 (systems where supply and demand controls prices and production), a less-than-unitary income ability to stretch for the products of the 
 farming-based part/area (promises that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) that gross value of sales by farmers will grow less 
 quickly than gross domestic product. As Lewis hints in the previous quotation, 
 if farming-based output does not grow quickly enough, rising prices might actually 
 gather farmers a higher share of people' expenses. But this reflects lower 
 real incomes, not the result of money-based growth. 
 If the terms of trade are not to rise in favor of farm-related, farm working well 
 must r i s e - a n farming-based revolution is needed. The second factor that explains 
 the joint farming-based growth and relative decline is seen in the fast growth in 
 farming-based working well, measured by output per laborer or output per hectare, 
 in all the successfully developed countries. Technical change in farming in all 
 of the OECD countries went ahead at such a pace that the long-run terms of trade 
 declined for farm products. Lower prices this way worsened the slow demand 
 growth due to poor elasticities; the combination put pressure on farming-based useful things/valuable supplies to move out of farming and into the more quickly growing parts/areas 
 of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Such intersectoral movements of useful things/valuable supplies have been painful in 
 all (communities of people) that have gone through successful (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change, and all 
 (communities of people) have found (machines/methods/ways) to cushion the (change to make better/related to changing something) process. 
 The weird statement over the farming-based change happens at this point. Just as 
 countries learn how to (put into a hospital)/(make a behavior acceptable) the process of fast technical change in 
 farming, its product no longer has high social value. The resulting poors 
 for farmers create powerful political pressures to slow the process of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 change, and the (appearing to be) unavoidable result is huge distortion of the price 
 structure [Johnson (1973), Anderson and Hayami (1986), World Bank (1986)]_). 
 Nearly all rich countries protect their farming-based parts/areas from international 
 competition, and countries no farther along in the development process than 
 Malaysia, Indonesia, Zimbabwe, and Mexico protect key food-producing parts/areas 
 during periods of depressed world prices. 
 
 2. The process of farming-based change 
 From both historical and modern thin slice opinions, the farming-based change seems to change through at least four phases that are roughly 
 XFor a very useful summary of the books that documents the farming-based change 
 process itself and also tries to explain it in terms of the winning/most common models of money-based 
 development, see Johnston (1970). 
 
 280 
 
 CP. Timmer 
 
 (able to be named and explained). The process starts when farming-based working well per worker rises. This 
 increased working well creates a extra, which in the second phase can be tapped 
 directly, through taxation and factor flows, or indirectly, through government 
 helping action into the (away from cities)-city-based  terms of trade. This extra can be used to 
 develop the nonagricultural part/area, and this phase has been the focus of most 
 dual (process of people making, selling, and buying things) models of development. For useful things/valuable supplies to flow out of farming, 
 (away from cities) factor and product markets must become better (combined different things together so they worked as one unit) with those in the 
 rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). The progressive (combination of different things together that work as one unit) of the farming-based part/area into 
 the macro (process of people making, selling, and buying things), via improved (set of machines) and market-balance linkages, represents a third phase in farming-based development. When this phase is 
 successful, the fourth phase is barely (able to be seen/worthy of attention); the role of farming in 
 improved (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) is little.different from the rote of the steel, housing, or 
 insurance parts/areas. But when the (combination of different things together that work as one unit) is not successfully completed - and 
 most countries have found it very hard for political reasons- governments meeting serious problems of useful thing/valuable supply portion and even problems 
 beyond their borders because of widespread attempts by high-income countries to 
 protect their farmers from foreign competition. Managing farming-based protection 
 and its hit/effect on world valuable thing markets this way provides a continuing focus for 
 farming-based policy makers even when the farming-based change is "complete". 
 
 2.1. Euoloing stages 
 The four phases in the farming-based change call for different policy 
 approaches. In the earliest stage of development the concern must be for "getting 
 farming moving", to use Arthur Mosher's colorful phrase [Mosher (1966)]_). A 
 significant share of a country's investable useful things/valuable supplies may well be (pulled out or taken from something else) from 
 farming at this stage, but this is because the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) is so small. 
 Direct or indirect taxation of farming is the only significant source of 
 government money/money income. 
 Building a energetic farming needs/demands that some of these useful things/valuable supplies be 
 gave/reserved to the farming-based part/area itself. As the section on farming-based development policy at the end of this chapter explains, these useful things/valuable supplies need to be 
 gave out to public investment in research and (set of machines) as well as to 
 good price (rewards or reasons for doing something) to farmers to adopt new technology as it becomes 
 available. As these investments in farming begin to pay off, the second phase 
 comes out in which the farming-based part/area becomes a key contributor to the overall 
 growth process through a combination of factors organized and listed by Johnston and 
 Mellor (1961). 
 As the scientific books on (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) patterns of growth focuses on, there is 
 a big unbalance between farming and industry at this early stage 
 
 Ch. 8: The Farming-based Change 
 
 281 
 
 of the development process [Kuznets (1966), Chenery and Taylor (1968), Chenery 
 and Syrquin (1975)]_). In fact, differences in labor working well and measured 
 income (as against (mind-related/spirit-related) income) between the (away from cities) and city-based  parts/areas 
 continue to the present in rich countries, although the gap is narrowing and now 
 depends on farming-based prices for any given year. 2 
 The process of narrowing the gap gives rise to the third (surrounding conditions) for 
 farming, in which it is (having different things working together as one unit) into the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) through the 
 development of (producing more with less waste) labor and credit markets that link the city-based  and 
 (away from cities) (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). This (combination of different things together that work as one unit) is a part of the (thing that's given/work that's done) process; the 
 improved functioning of factor markets only speeds the process of (pulling out or taking from something else) 
 labor and capital from those uses in farming with low returns for those in 
 industry or services with higher working well. The improved markets have welfare 
 results also, because they lessen the load on people trapped in 
 poor occupations. The gain has costs, however. As farming is integrated 
 into the macro (process of people making, selling, and buying things), it becomes much more able to be hurt by ups and downs in 
 macro prices and level of group activity and trade [Schuh (1976)]_) and much 
 less (able to be harmed by) management by traditional (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) for the farming-based 
 part/area, such as extension activities and particular programs for valuable thing development and marketing. 
 This weakness and complex difficulty create the fourth phase in the farming-based 
 change, the treatment of farming in improved (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). As the 
 share of the labor force in farming falls below about 20 percent and the share 
 of food expenses in city-based  household budgets drops to about 30 percent, 
 low-cost food is not as important to the overall (process of people making, selling, and buying things) nor is it as expensive in 
 relative terms to increase in price [Anderson (1983)]_). Many  political problems 
 arise if low farm incomes, caused by fast technical change and low farm-gate 
 prices, are allowed to push useful things/valuable supplies out of farming. Farmers do not want to 
 leave, especially if they must sell their farms under threat at low prices; and 
 urban-based unions do not want to see them coming to the cities in search of 
 industrial jobs. A (loving the past) memory of farming as a " w a y of life" leads many 
 second- and third-generation farm traveling workers living in cities to lend political 
 support to higher incomes for farming, even at the expense of higher grocery 
 bills (which m a y be barely (able to be seen/worthy of attention)). By this stage of the process, the share of 
 the farm-gate price of the valuable thing in the consumer's market basket is small 
 because of processing and marketing costs. Valuable thing price supports become 
 2The (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) stiffities in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) that give rise to this big unbalance obviously 
 mean that neoclassical models based only on perfect markets and clear actors will not (describe the future) 
 correctly the hit/effect of government helping actions. However,purely (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) models that assume an 
 (not being there; not being present) of market response might be equally far from the mark. A messy mixture of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 stiffities, (not totally pure/not totally correct) markets, and decision-makersinterested in their own, but almost/unclearlydefined, welfare 
 seems to show the actual starting point from which government helping actions must be 
 tested. 
 
 282 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 
 / 
 
 &#126; 
 
 f 
 
 -" &#126; &#126; &#126;. 
 o 
 
 -- 
 
 6 
 E 
 &#126; ' 0; 
 g&#126; 
 &#126;-&#126; 
 
 --6 &#126; . - @ 
 
 g 
 
 o 
 
 o 
 
 "E 
 
 ,&#126; g,,-&#126; 
 
 / 
 / 
 
 &#126; 
 
 tO 
 
 &#126; 
 
 _&#126; 
 5 
 
 &#126; 
 
 . 
 
 9&#126;- = 
 
 / 
 
 / 
 
 . 
 
 . 
 
 . 
 
 . 
 
 V- 
 
 / 
 
 &#126; 
 
 0 3 
 
 _gE. 
 o 
 
 -=o 
 E..&#126; 
 
 / 
 
 / 
 . 
 
 &#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 /" 
 
 I 
 . 
 
 _ 
 
 ,'T 
 
 .&#126;a 
 
 LZ 
 
 E 
 
 / 
 
 i 
 / 
 
 / 
 
 / 
 
 0 
 
 / 
 
 i 
 
 / 
 
 .:..:&#126; .E &#126; E o 
 
 / 
 
 I 
 
 .1:: 
 
 .&#126;&amp;gt; 
 
 m'-&#126; 
 
 &#126;I.E 
 
 &#126; &#126;,.= &#126; 
 
 &#126; 
 
 ,.o 
 
 1 
 
 -L 
 
 6 
 \ 
 
 \ 
 \ 
 
 &#126;E 
 &#126;g 
 
 \ 
 \ 
 
 g&#126; 
 \ 
 
 il 
 
 ' 
 
 _ 
 
 _ 
 
 _ 
 
 J I- 
 
 . 
 
 . 
 
 . 
 
 . 
 
 J= 
 
 o 
 
 E 
 
 L&#126; 
 
 Ch. 8." The Farming-based Change 
 
 283 
 
 the first (or most important) vehicle for supporting farm incomes, and the payments have terrible effects on useful thing/valuable supply portion. Farmers invest heavily in land and machinery 
 when farm prices are high, only to produce (more than what's needed) that are impossible to sell 
 (in a money-making way) [Johnson (1985), Cochrane (1979)]_). Eventually, the biadgetary and 
 distortionary costs of this approach become so high that even the (related to Europe) 
 Community, Japan, or the United States must face choices over how to (give reasons for something) farming-based returns with their social a money-making state. 
 The money-based (surrounding conditions) for farming created by these four phases are 
 shown scientifically in Figure 8.1. The (money-related) and labor useful thing/valuable supply flows out of 
 farming over time (or as incomes increase in a thin slice sample) are 
 impressionistic. Whether the trough between the "Mosher (surrounding conditions)" and the 
 "Johnston-Mellor (surrounding conditions)" in Figure 8.1 drops into negative ground or 
 always remains positive probably depends on other choice sources of (money-related) 
 useful things/valuable supplies at this stage in development. City-based  or across the ocean payments, petroleum 
 money/money income, or foreign help might (for a short time) fill the gap left by a declining 
 relative (thing that's given/work that's done) from farming. 3 But as farming-based working well begins to 
 rise, labor and (money-related) flows to the rest of. the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) increase. The 
 "Schultz-Ruttan (surrounding conditions)" begins as the total population in farming 
 starts to (lower in number/get worse), and the "D.G. Johnson (surrounding conditions)" begins as the farming-based 
 labor force drops to a fairly small proportion of the overall labor force. Whether 
 money supplies continue to flow out of farming at this stage in the process 
 depends almost completely on government price policy and its resulting hit/effect on 
 farm investment. Policies to cushion the hit/effect on farmers of successful (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change need not unavoidably depend on price helping actions that stop the 
 (change to make better/related to changing something) process, but price supports have been the most popular in the United 
 States, Western Europe, and Japan for reasonable political reasons [Anderson and 
 Hayami (1986)]_). 
 
 2.2. Farming and money-based development 
 This summary of the farming-based change raises two basic issues to be 
 discussed in this chapter: the (thing that's given/work that's done) or role of farming in money-based 
 development, and the conditions or factors that lead to the modernization of the 
 farming-based part/area itself. Obviously, many other important topics are not treated 
 here. One is the changing control over useful things/valuable supplies in the (away from cities) part/area, which 
 decides/figures out who gains and loses during the farming-based change. Only the 
 3It is also important to distinguish subsectors within farming. An export crop subsector 
 producing rubber or coffee might continue to provide money supplies to the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things), 
 some of which could be returned to the foodcrop subsector in order to help develop its development. Much 
 of the discussion in this chapter is concerned with improving the foodcrop subsector while 
 recognizing the important role played by the other farming-based subsectors. 
 
 284 
 
 C.P. Timrner 
 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong)ist and (believing that extreme methods must be used now to create huge changes in society) political (process of people making, selling, and buying things) books deals directly with the 
 distribution of income and power in areas away from cities as an important part of 
 farming-based development. A major theme of "new-neoclassical analysis" since the 
 mid-1970s, however, has been including such issues into clear actor 
 models of (away from cities) household decision-making [see Bardhan, Chapter 3 in this 
 Handbook]. While much of the energetic and macroeconomic (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) of the 
 radical models is lost in the household models, much is gained in the form of 
 testable guesses about the hit/effect of new technology or pricing policies on the 
 structure of (away from cities) markets and distribution of output in the short run. 4 
 The historical record after the Second World War hints that many countries 
 saw an opportunity to chase after a "jump plan" and move directly from the early 
 stages of the Mosher (surrounding conditions) in Figure 8.1 to the later stages of the 
 Johnston-Mellor (surrounding conditions), this way going around the need to invest in farming-based development. 
 ... the most significant comparison.., is that between the levels of working well in the under-developed countries and the western countries at the period 
 when the last thing just mentioned began to improve . . . . IT]he present average level of 
 farming-based working well in African and Asian countries (between them representing four-fifths of the Third World population) is 45 percent below that 
 reached by the developed countries at the start of the industrial revolution. In 
 fact it is at the same level as that of the (related to Europe) countries before their 
 farming-based revolution. 
 Now, most under-developed countries wish, consciously or unconsciously, to 
 by-pass this stage just when other (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) conditions of development are 
 making a "take ofF' harder than it was when most (related to Europe) countries 
 and the United States were pretending to be England's example. What makes the 
 failure to admit or even to recognize this problem all the more serious is that 
 the problem itself is uncontrollable/uncurable. Leaving aside mental attitudes, landownership 
 and politics-based things to think about, it cannot be stressed too forcibly that an increase 
 in the area helped grow per farming-based worker is one of the very important conditions 
 of an increase in working well. But in view of people/of the group explosion it is 
 impossible to assume, even on most hopeful idea (you think is true), that the reduction in 
 (helped to grow) area per worker will be anything but small/short [Bairoch (1975, p. 42)]_). 
 A jump plan sees the extraction of useful things/valuable supplies from farming for money-based 
 development as being fighting with the investment of public and private 
 useful things/valuable supplies in its modernization. This has been especially true in countries with 
 systems of planned useful thing/valuable supply portions designed to force the pace of money-based 
 development. As more and more countries adopted the way of thinking of central 
 4See Hart (honest/appearing soon) for an well-said complaint that such micro models effectively "gut" the 
 Marxian analysis of its vision of class interactions providing the driving force to (away from cities) patterns. 
 
 Ch. 8: The Farming-based Change 
 
 285 
 
 planning to direct these useful thing/valuable supply portions, the separate issues of (thing that's given/work that's done) 
 and modernization became key (related to careful studying or deep thinking) issues also. Unfortunately, the 
 money-related job/line of work  was unprepared to address them because all previous 
 examples of farming-based modernization had happened within more or less 
 market-oriented settings (except in the Soviet Union, where farming-based modernization remains quite incomplete). The behavior of backward farming-based systems 
 under the new planning big picture  became a topic of much (coming up with explanations about the way things work) and debate, 
 but only in the 1960s and 1970s did the scientific record become both long and 
 varied enough to draw (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) firm ends/end results. 
 It is worth summarizing briefly what the scientific record showed by 1960 
 when the results of Kuznets' ten year study of the (numbers-based) parts of 
 modern money-based growth started to be widely available. The historical record 
 began as early as the late eighteenth century in the United Kingdom and 1839 in 
 the United States and as late as 1880 in Japan and 1925 in the USSR. For all 
 countries for all time periods watched/followed, the share of farming in the total labor 
 force (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse), sometimes sharply, as in Sweden, the United States, and Japan, 
 and sometimes more slowly, as in the United Kingdom, Belgium, Italy, and 
 Australia. The share of farming in national output showed (a) little more mixed 
 patterns than those of the labor force. The share was nearly stable or even rose 
 (a) little over some periods in the United Kingdom, France, the United States, 
 and Australia. The more general habit/desire of the share in output to decline is 
 clear, but the share of the labor force always (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) more quickly. The obvious 
 result was that labor working well in farming rose more quickly than in the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) as a whole when measured over the long periods of time needed/demanded for 
 sustained money-based growth to cause big changes in the structure of an 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things). Although farming-based working well per worker was nearly always less 
 than the level of national working well, its faster rise meant that the gap tended to 
 narrow. 
 Three clear exceptions to this (popular thing/general way things are going) in Kuznets' data are Italy, Japan, and the 
 USSR, all of which are latecomers to the process of (growth over time) and are 
 countries in which state helping action into the (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) process was much 
 more active than in the early developers. The failure of farming-based working well 
 per worker to rise as fast as national working well in these three countries might 
 this way be seen as an early signal that the patterns in the less-developed countries 
 trying to start down the path of modern money-based growth might be significantly 
 different from the historical path followed by the Western countries and recorded/supported by Kuznets. Table 8.2, drawn from a paper by Hayami (1986), shows that 
 the recent working well record for the quickly growing East Asian (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 confirms a strongly different pattern from that in North America and Western 
 Europe. Even the more slowly growing developing countries (Philippines and 
 India) have a mild reversal of the "traditional" pattern in which growth in labor 
 working well in farming goes beyond that of labor working well in manufacturing. 
 
 286 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 Table 8.2 
 International comparison in the growth rates of labor working well 
 in farming and manufacturing, 1960 (1958-62 averages) 
 to 1980 (1978-82 averages) 
 Labor working well 
 growth rate (%/year) a 
 
 Developed countries: 
 United States 
 United Kingdom 
 France 
 G e r m a n y (F.R.) 
 Japan 
 Developing countries: 
 Korea 
 Philippines 
 India 
 
 Farming 
 
 Manufacturing 
 
 (1)-(2) 
 
 (1) 
 
 (2) 
 
 = (3) 
 
 6.3 
 5.5 
 6.4 
 7,7 
 5,3 
 
 3.2 
 2.6 
 4.2 
 4.1 
 6.7 
 
 3.1 
 2.9 
 2.2 
 3.6 
 - 1.4 
 
 4,0 
 3.2 
 1.3 
 
 7.5 
 3.5 b 
 2.1 
 
 -- 3.5 
 - 0.3 
 - 0.9 
 
 a Calculated from the ratios of the real output index to the employment index. 
 bGrowth rate from 1960 to 1975. 
 Sources: FAO, Production Yearbook; U N , Yearbook of Industrial Statistics; ILO, Yearbook of Labor Statistics; OECD, Labor Force Statistics. Hayami (1986, p. 10). 
 
 This "(too) early or soon" growth in manufacturing working well (or, (using other choices), the 
 neglect of efforts needed to raise farming-based working well) is especially troubling 
 in historical (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important), as the quote from Bairoch (before that/before now) pointed to/showed. Table 
 8.3 reproduces Bairoch's historical comparisons of "net farming-based production 
 by male labor employed in farming expressed in 'direct' calories". Only Italy 
 in 1840 had a lower working well level than that of Africa and Asia in modern 
 times. The gap in farming-based working well on average between (related to Europe) countries beginning their industrial revolutions and Africa and Asia is, as Bairoch 
 already noted, about 45 percent. "A gap of about 45 percent is (good or well enough) wide 
 for us to be able to defend/express that farming-based conditions in the now developed 
 countries before the beginning of the industrial revolution must have been very 
 different from those of the under-developed countries of Asia and Africa today" 
 [Bairoch (1975, pp. 40-41)]_). 
 Based on data only up to the early 1970s, Bairoch's (negative thinking) reflects the 
 (existing all over a large area) neglect of farming in many development efforts in the 1950s and 
 1960s, as well as the shortfalls in food production that triggered the world food 
 problem in 1973-1974. A almost the same  (negative thinking) based on a quite different reading of the 
 historical record is given by smart people  working in the Marxian tradition and 
 following the ideas of Lenin on the changing class structure of farming as it 
 becomes more (related to a system where people own money and valuable things) under the pressures of modernization [Baran (1952), 
 
 Ch. 8." The Farming-based Change 
 
 287 
 
 Table 8.3 
 Comparisons between levels of farming-based working well 
 Country and "stage" of 
 development 
 
 Period 
 
 Index number of 
 farming-based working well 
 
 Developed countries: 
 Recent position 
 France 
 United States 
 Position before or during "take-off' 
 France 
 Great Britain 
 Sweden 
 Belgium 
 Germany 
 Italy 
 Russia 
 Switzerland 
 United States 
 Spain 
 
 1968/72 
 1968/72 
 
 100.0 
 330.0 
 
 1810 
 1810 
 1810 
 1840 
 1840 
 1840 
 1840 
 1840 
 1840 
 1860 
 
 7.0 
 14.0 
 6.5 
 10.0 
 7.5 
 4.0 
 7.0 
 8.0 
 21.5 
 11.0 
 
 Recent position 
 Africa 
 Latin America a 
 Asia 
 Middle East 
 
 1960/64-1968/72 
 1960/64-1968/72 
 1960/64-1968/72 
 1960/64-1968/72 
 
 4.7 
 9.8 
 4.8 
 8.6 
 
 Total for all lessdeveloped countries: 
 
 1960/64-1968/72 
 
 5.5 
 
 Less-developed countries: 
 
 a Leaving out/keeping out Argentina. 
 
 Source: Bairoch (1975, p. 40). 
 
 de Janvry (1981), Griffin (1979), Lenin (1899)]_). The failure of the Marxist-Leninist 
 (statement about the future) that poor (person) (family) farming disappears under the competitive 
 pressures of modern (related to big business) farming has led to a rethinking of the (a guarantee that something will definitely happen) of all countries following a path through (a system where people own money and valuable things) to socialism and 
 eventually to communism. To explain the failure, the dependency school focuses on relationships between the city-based (developed) center and the edge/edges 
 ((not well developed)) countries in the third world. A single process of worldwide  money-based growth happens in a zero-sum big picture, in which the growth of the center is 
 at the direct expense of the edge/edges. Class relationships in the urban-based 
 governments of the edge/edges explain the continuing of money-based policies that 
 favor only a small city-based  elite (and possibly (managers of apartment buildings)). In Latin America, 
 de Janvry (1981) and fellow workers have extended the analysis to explain farming-based policy and performance on the basis of a process of (making something unimportant). Their 
 model argues that farming-based laborers and independent poor people slowly lose 
 
 288 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 
 control of the useful things/valuable supplies needed to raise their living standards as large landowners 
 invest in capital-intensive farming ways of doing things and displace poor people from the 
 market. The (away from cities) masses are too broke up to (get ready for action) effectively, and they suffer 
 a process of gradual immiseration. 
 Hayami and Ruttan provide a useful summary of three explanations of development and their effects/results/suggestions for farming: 
 The effects/results/suggestions of dependency explanation for farming-based development stand in 
 sharp contrast to the growth-stage and dual-(process of people making, selling, and buying things) explanations. The growth-stage 
 explanations attempt to explain the process of change from a mostly 
 land-related to an industrial (process of people making, selling, and buying things). In the energetic dual-(process of people making, selling, and buying things) models 
 including of poor people into the market results in the disappearance of 
 (existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things). The dependency (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) tries to explain why the edge/edges 
 remains trapped in a backward land-related state. In the dependency view incorporation of areas away from cities into the market is the source of (making something unimportant)-it 
 causes to continue rather than wears away (existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things) [Hayami and Ruttan (1985, p. 37)]_). 
 Although Hayami and Ruttan do not find the dependency explanation very useful 
 for designing policies that help develop the process of farming-based development, one of 
 the main questions asked by smart people  of the dependency school remains unanswered: why has farming-based development played a strongly positive role in the 
 overall development process in so few countries? Why have so many opportunities identified by farming-based scientists and money-based planners been missed? Most 
 neoclassical smart people  will agree that they do not have answers to these questions. 
 
 2.3. The role of the farming-based part/area 
 The debate over the role of farming in the process of money-based development 
 extends at least as far back as the Physiocrats in the eighteenth century. The 
 (Bible-related) guidance to store during seven good years to be ready for seven lean years 
 certainly reflects a concern for farming-based planning. Clark (1940) and Kuznets 
 (1966) gave/given the general facts about the role of farming during the growth 
 process available to money-flow experts and planners at the beginning of the drive for 
 money-based growth in the less-developed countries. These facts formed the basis for 
 the winning/most common neoclassical view that farming was a (lowering in number/getting worse) part/area, a "black 
 box" in Little's phrase (1982), which added/gave labor, food, and maybe capital 
 to the very important modernization efforts in industry. No policy efforts for 
 agriculture's own modernization were needed because the part/area (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse) naturally. Most (understandings/ explanations) of the Lewis model (1954), especially the Fei-Ranis 
 versions (1964), which became the main teaching ways of thinking, ignored the factors 
 needed to improve traditional farming-based parts/areas so that they could play 
 
 Ch. 8: The Farming-based Change 
 
 289 
 
 positive contributory roles in the development of the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). The 
 (related to what holds something together and makes it strong)ist views of Prebisch (1950) about (lowering in number/getting worse) terms of trade for traditional products and the importance Hirschman (1958) attached to linkages to 
 " m o d e r n " money-based activities further reduced any seen/obvious reasons for 
 actively investing in the modernization of farming itself. As Hirschman wrote 
 in 1958, "farming certainly stands convicted on the count of its lack of direct 
 stimulus to the setting up of new activities through linkage effects - the (quality of being better than everything else) of manufacturing in this respect is crushing" [Hirschman (1958, pp. 109-110)]_). 
 A final reason for the neglect of farming has (not very long ago) been cleared up by Sah 
 and Stiglitz (1984). The Soviet debate in the early 1920s over (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) 
 policy revolved around whether turning the terms of trade against farming (the 
 " p r i c e scissors") would speed the rate of collection for investment by the 
 state. Preobrazhensky (1965) argued successfully that it could. Sah and Stiglitz 
 show the exact conditions under which he was right and the welfare results that flowed from putting into use such a policy. Although the conditions 
 that must hold for their analysis to be valid are very strict, a strong result is 
 that the farming-based terms of trade should be lowered only if the state has a low 
 rate of time discount, that is, it favors investment over current consumption. 
 Forced-pace (when a country builds factories and manufactures lots of things) (series of actions to reach goals) in such facts or conditions (that surround someone) then depend on the 
 state's ability to extract (more than what's needed) from farming even in the face of spoiled 
 or falling farming-based production. 
 It is easy to see why farming was neglected as a source of growth in early 
 plans of money-based development. The historical record shows that it always 
 declines in relative importance in growing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things). It is the home of traditional people, ways, and living standards- the opposite of what nation builders 
 in developing countries imagined for their (communities of people). More than that, farming was 
 thought to provide the only source of working well that could be tapped to fuel 
 the drive for modernization. Extra labor, extra savings, and extra expenses to buy the products of city-based  industry, and even extra foreign exchange to 
 buy the machines to make them, could be had from an positive-thinking farming-based part/area. Nothing more was needed to create these useful things/valuable supplies than the promise 
 of jobs in the cities and a shared country-loving pride in the growing power of the 
 state. (even though there is the existence of) how overly-simple these promises sound in the mid-1980s, the 
 success of the Soviet approach caused them to be very appealing when first 
 spoke by such interesting leaders of poor countries as Sukarno, 
 Nkrumah, Nasser, and Nehru. The (like nothing else) features of farming as a part/area were 
 simply not widely understood in the 1950s. Nor was it accepted that the 
 development of a modern farming was necessary as a (happening together) to development of the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things). 
 Some of these factors began to be recognized by the 1960s, and a more positive 
 focus was placed on "role" rather than the more forced idea  of "(thing that's given/work that's done)" of farming. The classic article by Johnston and Mellor (1961) listed five 
 
 290 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 
 roles for farming in money-based development: 
 (1) increase the supply of food for domestic consumption; 
 (2) release labor for industrial employment; 
 (3) enlarge the size of the market for industrial output; 
 (4) increase the supply of domestic savings; and 
 (5) earn foreign exchange. 
 Although the second, fourth, and fifth roles are certainly agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the 
 earlier "(related to pumping or digging things from the ground)" views of farming, Johnston and Mellor insisted that all five 
 roles are equally important. Farming in the process of development is to 
 provide increased food supplies and higher (away from cities) incomes to enlarge markets for 
 city-based  output, as well as to provide useful things/valuable supplies to expand that city-based  output. 
 It is our argument that "balanced growth" is needed in the sense of (happening together) efforts to (help increase/show in a good way) farming-based and industrial development. We recognize 
 that there are extreme limits on the ability (to hold or do something) of an (not well developed) country 
 to do everything at once. But it is exactly this (serious thought/something to think about/respect) which highlights the importance of developing farming in such a way as to both 
 (make small) its demand on useful things/valuable supplies most needed for industrial development and 
 (make as big as possible) its net (thing that's given/work that's done) needed/demanded for general growth [Johnston and 
 Mellor (1961, pp. 590-591)]_). 
 Others, especially Nichols (1963), Schultz (1953), and Jorgenson (1961), also 
 focused on this (dependent on each other) between a country's farming and its industry. Myint (1975) stressed a curious (unexpected difference, missing thing, or mistake) between the "closed (process of people making, selling, and buying things)" model understood in this domestic (dependent on each other) and the fifth role, earning 
 foreign exchange, which obviously hints the country is open to international 
 trade. This trade (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) returns in the 1970s and 1980s to rule thinking 
 about appropriate development plans, but it was mostly ignored in the 1960s, 
 maybe because of the control of the "Indian model" in development 
 thinking, in which huge size keeps the importance of foreign trade quite small, 
 even apart from the "inward looking" plan being chased after. 
 (even though there is the existence of) the early insistence by farming-based money-flow experts that the farming-based 
 part/area must be viewed as part of the overall (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and that the focus be 
 placed on the part/area's (dependent on each other) with the industrial and (businesses)s 
 rather than on its forced (things that are given/work that's done) to them, the idea of farming as a 
 useful thing/valuable supply holding tank has continued in general development models. Reynolds focused on an important but usually (ignored/didn't notice/looked at) difference between static and energetic views of the useful thing/valuable supply moves (from one place to another): 
 In most development models, modern industry is the cutting edge of money-based 
 growth, while farming plays the role of a useful thing/valuable supply holding tank which can be 
 drawn on for supplies of food, labor, and finance to fuel the growth of city-based 
 
 Ch. 8." The Farming-based Change 
 
 291 
 
 activities. It is argued that this is both a logical need and a matter of 
 historical experience, illustrated by the case of Japan. 
 In commenting on this view, I must focus on a honor/difference that is often not 
 clearly drawn: (1) It is one thing to defend/express that, in an (process of people making, selling, and buying things) where 
 farming-based output is not rising, the farming-based part/area contains potential 
 (more than what's needed) of labor time, food output, and saving ability (to hold or do something) needing/ordering only 
 appropriate public policies for their release. This we may term the static view 
 of useful thing/valuable supply move (from one place to another). (2) It is quite a different thing to defend/express that, in an 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) where farming-based output is being raised by a combination of 
 investment and technical progress, part of the small step forward/upward in farm output and 
 income is available for move (from one place to another) to non-agriculture. This we may term the 
 energetic view of useful thing/valuable supply move (from one place to another). The model-building effects/results/suggestions of this approach are different, and its policy effects/results/suggestions are very different 
 [Reynolds (1975, pp. 14-15)]_). 
 The welfare results of the two views are also sharply different. Forced 
 extraction of useful things/valuable supplies from a spoiled farming-based part/area almost always creates 
 (existing all over a large area) (away from cities) poorness, sometimes hunger. Market linkages that connect a 
 energetic farming-based part/area to quickly growingindustrial and (businesses)s offer 
 an opportunity for (away from cities) residents to choose in which part/area they wish to 
 participate. There are certainly losers in this process: high-cost producers in 
 bad/unhelpful (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) settings who cannot fight against low-cost producers in 
 favorite places who have access to new technology; or newly landless laborers 
 who have lost their (living somewhere) access to land when commercial relationships replace 
 customer/financial supporter-client relationships. But new technology and market linkages create more 
 opportunities than they destroy if both the farming-based and nonagricultural 
 parts/areas are growing together. A focus on finding the policy (surrounding conditions) that 
 creates such back and forth/equal between people growth is needed. For agriculture, that (surrounding conditions) must 
 call forward  fast technical change. Experience since the mid-1960s has (showed/shown or proved) how to do that, but the key has been to understand why the farming-based 
 part/area is different from the industrial and (businesses)s [Hayami and Ruttan 
 (1985), Timmer et al. (1983)]_). 
 
 3. Why farming is different 
 The early planned-out neglect of farming can be partly attributed to development money-flow experts who were remote from any real understanding of what makes 
 the farming-based part/area quite different from either manufacturing or services [Little 
 (1982)]_). In developing countries, the farming-based part/area is different from other 
 productive parts/areas of an (process of people making, selling, and buying things), especially in its large (thing that's given/work that's done) to 
 
 292 
 
 C P . Tirnrner 
 
 national income and the large numbers of people (who were part of a study, etc.) in the part/area. Both the 
 farming-based change itself and the (thing that's given/work that's done) of farming to the rest of 
 the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) depend on three important features discussed here: the weird qualities 
 of the farming-based production function, the importance of home consumption of 
 output for the part/area, and the role of the farming-based part/area as a useful thing/valuable supply 
 holding tank. These features are more obvious in traditional (communities of people), and their 
 clearness wears away during the process of money-based modernization. The design 
 of farming-based policy, in both poor and rich countries, is complicated by these 
 features, but a recognition of them is very important to a full understanding of the 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) farming might realistically be asked to make to a country's 
 development effort. 5 
 
 3.1. Decision-making in farming 
 The huge size of farming in most poor countries' (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), with over 50 
 percent of national output and up to 80 percent of the labor force in farming-based 
 activities, tells apart the part/area from all others in the early stages of development. When directly related input and output businesses and marketing activities 
 are included, "farming" almost never (lowers in number/gets worse) to less than 20 percent of any 
 country's (process of people making, selling, and buying things). So the part/area remains the largest single "industry" in 
 total size even in rich countries. 
 In most countries, if the available plantable land were divided equally among the 
 farm population, the resulting average farm size would be "small" by comparison 
 with United States or (related to Europe) standards. Farms of less than a hectare describe China, Bangladesh, and Java; even in Japan average farm size is still only 
 (a) little greater than one hectare. The average in India is only about 1 to 2 
 hectares, and in Africa and Latin America farms tend to be less than 10 to 20 
 hectares in size. Average farm size in the United States is well over 100 hectares 
 and over 50 hectares in the United Kingdom. 
 The available farmland, of course, is usually not equally divided among all the 
 possible farmers. The conditions of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) and the size distribution of 
 farms are important (features/ qualities/ traits) of a country's farming-based decision-making 
 (surrounding conditions). A country with a unimodal distribution of f a r m s i z e s - a large 
 number of small, family-operated farms capable of supporting the family members above an income level, with only a fringe of smaller and larger farms 
 around this modal n o r m - h a s the possible ability to  use farming-based development 
 plan as a means of reducing (away from cities) poorness at the same time that it increases 
 farming-based production. Cotmtries with bimodal distributions of farm sizes - many 
 SAn effort to (agree to--and promise to follow--certain rules, procedures, etc.) the hit/effect of agriculture's clear/separate features, especially the behavioral and 
 material (things that decide other things) of production relations, is in Binswangerand Rosenzweig(1986). 
 
 Ch. 8: The Farming-based Change 
 
 293 
 
 very small farms on a minority of the land with a few very large, estate-like farms 
 that occupy most of the plantable land and produce most of the food extra 
 available for city-based  m a r k e t s - f a c e much harder two-headed problems over how to 
 reduce the hit/effect of (away from cities) poorness while using traditional output-increasing 
 plans of farming-based development [Johnston and Kilby (1975)]_). 
 In both private and total agricultures, decision-making is conditioned 
 mostly by the nature of (rewards or reasons for doing something) to work rather than by the pace and design 
 of the work itself, and these (rewards or reasons for doing something) are hard to structure in an (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 manner unless the grower owns the land. As it wasations where ownership and 
 operation are separate, many  complicated (based on a written agreement) arrangements that 
 work hard for second-best (wasting very little while working or producing something) results have changed in different settings 
 [Bardhan, Chapter 3 in this Handbook, Binswanger and Rosenzweig (1981, 1986), 
 Stiglitz, Chapter 5 in this Handbook]. 
 Farming is an difficult project that involves many decisions. What crops to plant, 
 what inputs to use, when to plow, to seed, to help grow, to irrigate, to harvest, how 
 much to keep for home consumption, how much to sell and how much to store 
 for later sale are the farming decisions that occupy the daily common action of most 
 farming-based producers. What is (like nothing else) about farming is that literally millions 
 of people and families are making these decisions themselves. Changing 
 farming-based production decisions to increase food output is a wholely different 
 process from changing decisions about how much steel or cement to produce. In 
 most countries twelve or so people could take direct action which would 
 lead to a 10 percent increase in steel output in a year or so, and their decisions 
 would be clear. 
 Nowhere, not even in socialist countries, can a almost the same  small group of people decide to raise food production by 10 percent. A small group of planners, or 
 the president and the cabinet, can decide they w a n t food production to rise by 10 
 percent. They can tell the food planning (service business/government unit/power/functioning), the ministry of farming, the 
 newspapers, and farm-related extension agents that they want food production to 
 rise by 10 percent. But they cannot increase food production 10 percent by 
 themselves. They must also convince the millions of farmers in their country to 
 want to increase food production by 10 percent and make it in their self-interest 
 to do so. 
 The huge number of farming-based decision-makers hints that there are simply 
 too many to reach directly with either pleas for cooperation or police power. 
 Farmers must see the benefits of higher output for themselves because there are 
 too many opportunities to let high yields slip beneath the hoe or in a late 
 (material that makes plants grow better) use, even under the watchful eyes of a (person who protects another from harm). Farming is a 
 hard to notice/skillful combination of skilled craft and huge force. The huge force alone will not 
 (accomplish or gain with effort) high yields. 
 In traditional farming with static technology, farmers learn these skills by 
 repeated trying things. The lessons of parents and grandparents remain rele- 
 
 294 
 
 C.P. Timmer 
 
 vant. But when new technology becomes available, farmers do not automatically 
 get/gain the necessary skills to deal with unbalance [Schultz (1964, 1975)]_).<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
