 Money flow of Biofortification 
 Early morning  Qaim a*, Alexander J. Stein a, J.V. Meenakshi b 
 a 
 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow and Social Sciences in the Tropics and Subtropics, University of 
 Hohenheim (490b), 70593 Stuttgart, Germany. b HarvestPlus, International Food Policy Research Institute, 2033 
 K Street NW, Washington, DC 2006, USA. * Corresponding author: qaim@uni-hohenheim.de 
 
 Full/complete paper prepared for the 26th International Association of Farming-based Money-flow experts 
 (IAAE) Conference, Gold Coast, Australia, August 12-18, 2006 
 
 Abstract: Micronutrient (bad food quality) affects billions of people world-wide, causing serious 
 health problems. Different micronutrient helping actions are now being used, but their 
 overall coverage is (compared to other things) limited. Biofortification - that is, breeding staple food crops for 
 higher micronutrient contents - has been proposed as a new agriculture-based approach. Yet, 
 as biofortified crops are still being worked on now, (compared to other things) little is known about their 
 money-based effects and wider results/consequences. In this article, the main factors that will influence 
 their future success are discussed, and a way(s) of doing things for money-based effect test is 
 presented, combining farming-based, nutrition, and health aspects. Ex ante studies from India 
 and other developing countries suggest that biofortified crops can reduce the problem of 
 micronutrient (bad food quality) in a (producing a lot for a given amount of money) way, when they are targeted to specific 
 situations. Projected social returns on research investments are high and competitive with 
 working well-improving farming-based technologies. These promising results not prevented by/not part of the issue, 
 biofortification should be seen as a complement rather than a substitute for existing 
 micronutrient helping actions, since the importance and complex difficulty of the problem require/result in a 
 variety of approaches. Further research is needed to back up (with proof) these findings and to 
 face/deal with certain issues still unresolved at this stage. 
 JEL classifications: I1, I3, O1, O3, Q1. 
 Keywords: 
 
 micronutrient 
 
 (bad food quality), 
 
 public 
 
 health, 
 
 biofortification, 
 
 farming-based 
 
 technology, impact analysis, developing countries. 
 
 Copyright Â© 2006 by M. Qaim, A.J. Stein, and J.V. Meenakshi. All rights reserved. Readers may make word for word 
 copies of this document for non-commercial purposes by any means, gave/given that this copyright (see/hear/become aware of) appears 
 on all such copies. 
 
 1 
 
 Introduction 
 
 Micronutrient (bad food quality) is a (existing all over a large area) problem in many developing countries. An 
 guessed four billion people are iron lacking, 2.7 billion are at risk of zinc shortage, and 
 hundreds of millions lack one or more very important vitamins (WHO, 2002; Hotz and Brown, 
 2004; UN-SCN, 2004). The number is especially high among the poor, whose diets are 
 usually ruled by (compared to other things) cheap staple foods, with not enough amounts of highervalue nutritious foods. Micronutrient shortages are often the cause for increased death 
 and deadliness, so that the resulting health load can be huge. This health load also 
 involves significant money-based costs in poor countries (Horton and Ross, 2003; FAO, 
 2004). In the same way/in that way, controlling micronutrient (bad food quality) has been ranked as a top 
 development priority by respected international money-flow experts (Lomborg, 2004). Money-based 
 growth and poorness reduction will help reduce the problem in the long run. Yet there are also 
 more 
 
 targeted 
 
 micronutrient 
 
 helping actions 
 
 being 
 
 put into use, 
 
 including 
 
 food 
 
 addition (to something else), industrial strengthening, and nutrition education programs (Allen, 2003; 
 World Bank, 1994). (not very long ago), an agriculture-based approach has been proposed as a 
 additional/helping plan, namely breeding staple food crops for higher micronutrient contents. 
 This breeding approach has been termed 'biofortification' (Nestel et al., 2006). The potential 
 positive effects of biofortification are obvious: if micronutrient-dense staple crops are widely 
 grown and ate/destroyed by the poor, their (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) status would improve, which could lead to 
 significant health advantages and money-based benefits. However, although plant people (who help animals have babies) are 
 working on the development of biofortified crop varieties, hardly any of these varieties has 
 yet been released, so that the actual hits/effects are still uncertain. 
 In this article, we carefully study the effects/results/suggestions of biofortification from an money-based 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). In the next section, we provide some more background about the problem of 
 micronutrient (bad food quality), before describing the biofortification approach in greater detail 
 and discussing important factors that will influence its future success. A methodological 
 1 
 
 framework for testing the hits/effects of biofortification is set out in section 4. This 
 way(s) of doing things has been used for different scientific studies, results of which are presented in 
 section 5. The last section ends/decides and discusses research and policy effects/results/suggestions. 
 
 2 
 
 Micronutrient (bad food quality) 
 
 For a long time, the food security debate had mostly focused on undernutrition in terms of 
 calories. Calorie undernutrition is usually the result of an not enough intake of macronutrients 
 (carbohydrates, protein, and fat) and is related to a feeling of hunger. Hunger is still a 
 serious problem in large parts of poor countries. According to the FAO, 852 million 
 people worldwide were undersupplied with calories in 2002 (FAO, 2004). Micronutrient 
 (bad food quality) is often less obvious for the people affected, which is also why the term 'hidden 
 hunger' is sometimes used. For certain micronutrients, shortages are even more (existing all over a large area) 
 than calorie undernutrition (Figure 1). The major reason for the high number of 
 not enough micronutrient intakes is the lack of dietary (many different kinds of people or things) among the poor. Typical diets 
 in poor families are ruled by staple foods, which are a cheap source of calories 
 but only provide little amounts of vitamins and minerals. In addition to income restrictions, 
 lack of knowledge and cultural factors also often limit the consumption of more nutritious 
 foods, even where these are available and (easy to get to, use, or understand). Women and children are the most 
 (able to be hurt) groups: pregnancies, breast-feeding, and menstruation as well as fast body 
 growth in children increase micronutrient needed things and make it even harder to 
 (accomplish or gain with effort) (good) enough intakes (WHO, 2002). 
 Here should appear Figure 1. 
 Even though lacking people are often not aware of their not enough (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) status, 
 micronutrient (bad food quality) can have extreme health results, including increased 
 (chance of being harmed by) disease (that can spread from person to person)s, physical and mental disabilities, and increased death 
 
 2 
 
 rates (Micronutrient Effort, 2004). Apart from seriously affecting the well-being of the 
 people directly concerned, micronutrient (bad food quality) worsens/decreases on group 
 working well and money-based development (World Bank, 1994; Horton and Ross, 2003). Because of this, 
 efforts to control the problem are (done for good reason) on people-helping as well as (wasting very little while working or producing something) grounds. 
 A few helping actions are available to control micronutrient (bad food quality). Common 
 helping actions include food addition (to something else), such as distributing vitamin capsules at regular 
 periods of time (or space), and industrial strengthening, that is, adding micronutrients to foodstuffs during 
 processing. While existing micronutrient helping actions have their particular strengths, they 
 also have their weaknesses (Allen, 2003). For instance, large-scale distribution programs are 
 useful thing/valuable supply-intensive, as they require continuous money/giving money (to), (set of machines), trained personnel, 
 reliable supplies, and watching. More than that, information, education, and communication 
 programs are necessary to secure/make sure of participation by the target groups. For industrial 
 strengthening, the main problem is reaching those in need, because the poor and (not given enough food) 
 often consume home-produced foods and only little amounts of processed products. 
 What's more, strengthened foods are often somewhat more expensive than their non-strengthened 
 partners, unless strengthening is required, which then, however, needs/demands watching 
 efforts to secure/make sure of obedience by food processors. While dietary (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) is carefully thought about/believed 
 the most (able to last/helping the planet) approach to control micronutrient (bad food quality), necessary behavior 
 changes and income restrictions are limiting factors in the short and medium run. In this 
 big picture, the new approach of biofortification may be a useful helping action to complement the 
 existing set of plans. 
 
 3 
 3.1 
 
 The biofortification approach 
 (happening now) research programs 
 
 For a long time, no particular role was seen for farming-based technology in the fight against 
 
 3 
 
 micronutrient (bad food quality); grain micronutrient content was simply not an important selection 
 judging requirement for plant people (who help animals have babies). This has changed more (not very long ago), when (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) quality started 
 to receive higher priority and people (who help animals have babies) (understood/made real/achieved) that increased micronutrient densities are not 
 only compatible with superior (related to scientific farming) qualities, but may, sometimes, even improve yields. 
 Plant varieties that are (producing more with less waste) in the uptake of trace minerals like iron and zinc can be 
 higher cooperating with/producing/giving up in low-quality soils, because these trace minerals are also needed/demanded for plant 
 energy and growth (Welch, 2002; Graham et al., 1999). 
 Some research and development (R&amp;D) programs with the goal to increase 
 micronutrient densities in staple food crops through breeding have been launched in recent 
 years. The term 'biofortification' has been created by the HarvestPlus Challenge Program of 
 the Advice-giving Group on International Farming-based Research (CGIAR). This program 
 concentrates on increasing iron, zinc, and beta-carotene (provitamin A) contents in six staple 
 crop species, namely rice, wheat, maize, cassava, sweetpotato, and beans, and supports 
 exploratory research in an added ten crops. At this stage, research under HarvestPlus 
 builds mostly on ordinary breeding ways of doing things, using (for selfish reasons) (quality of changing over time or at different places) of 
 micronutrient contents found in available germplasm. 
 However, ordinary ways of doing things cannot be used when the micronutrient of interest is 
 (not there; not present) from a particular crop. A case in point is rice, which produces beta-carotene in leaves 
 and in tiny amounts also in rice husks, but not in the endosperm. Because of this, in the Golden Rice 
 project, transgenic ways of doing things have been used to introduce the beta-carotene biosynthetic 
 pathway into the endosperm of grain (You  et al., 2000; Paine et al., 2005). The Golden Rice 
 project involves (related to Europe) research organizations, the International Rice Research Institute 
 (IRRI), and local partners in developing countries. Another crop-clearly stated/particular project (gave money (to) as 
 part of the Worldwide  Grand Challenges in Health Effort) is the Africa Biofortified (grass grown for food) 
 (ABS) Project, which tries to develop a more nutritious and easily digestible (grass grown for food) that 
 contains increased levels of beta-carotene, vitamin E, iron, zinc, and a few amino acids. 
 4 
 
 Furthermore, research has been managed and did/done to (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) engineer iron-rich rice (Goto et al., 
 1999; Lucca et al., 2001; Murray-Kolb et al., 2002), rice that is rich both in iron and zinc 
 (Vasconcelos et al., 2003), iron-rich maize (Drakakaki et al., 2005), and beta-carotene-rich 
 potato (Ducreux et al., 2005). While this is not a complete list of all related research 
 efforts, the (mix of stocks, bonds, etc./document collection) is a strong sign of the attention that biofortification is likely to receive in 
 the future food and nutrition security debate. 
 
 3.2 
 
 Potential advantages 
 
 The major expected and meant hit/effect of biofortification is to increase micronutrient 
 intakes among the poor, this way improving their nutrition and health status. By focusing breeding 
 efforts on staple crops, which are ate/destroyed by the poor in larger amounts, the approach is 
 self-targeting. Tying micronutrients to staple crops also reduces people's (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) 
 weakness, because, when money-based shocks happen, the poor tend to reduce their 
 consumption of higher-value food valuable things that are naturally rich in micronutrients. 
 What's more, biofortification could be more (able to last/helping the planet) than other choice micronutrient 
 helping actions. With a one-time R&amp;D investment, biofortified germplasm can be shared 
 (in other countries), and the varieties could spread through existing seed distribution systems. 
 Since biofortified seeds can easily be reproduced, poor farmers in remote areas away from cities, with 
 limited access to formal seed markets, could also be reached. So, unlike other micronutrient 
 helping actions, which require large money on a once-a-year basis, biofortification could produce a 
 continuous stream of benefits with (almost nothing/very little) repeating costs. 
 Biofortification promises to be a pro-poor and pro-(away from cities) approach, which could 
 complement existing helping actions. However, biofortified crops are still at the stage of R&amp;D, 
 so that these possible advantages have not yet appeared. The only exception are betacarotene-rich, orange-fleshed sweetpotatoes, which have been (helped increase/showed in a good way) in different countries 
 (e.g., Low et al., 1997). 
 5 
 
 3.3 
 
 Factors influencing future hits/effects 
 
 Whether biofortified crops will really add/give to an improved nutrition and health situation 
 in developing countries will mostly depend on their effectiveness and coverage in particular 
 situations (Figure 2). Effectiveness will be figured out by/decided by the amount of the micronutrient in the 
 crop, micronutrient keeping/holding onto/remembering after processing, and its bioavailability. Coverage, in turn, is 
 mainly a function of farmer adoption and personal acceptance of biofortified varieties. 
 Here should appear Figure 2. 
 Micronutrient content. Many varieties of staple food crops already contain certain 
 amounts of micronutrients. For instance, high-cooperating with/producing/giving up wheat varieties contain about 38 parts 
 per million (ppm) of iron and 31 ppm of zinc. Popular rice varieties contain 3 ppm of iron and 
 13 ppm of zinc in the milled grain. The possible ability to  further increase these micronutrient 
 contents by ordinary breeding exists. (good) enough (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) differences/different versions in concentrations of 
 beta-carotene, other carotenoids, iron, zinc, and other minerals has been identified among 
 cultivars, making selection of (related to healthy eating) appropriate breeding materials possible. For 
 example, available orange-fleshed sweetpotato varieties contain over 100 Âµg/g of betacarotene. Anyway, with ordinary breeding, (able to be done) micronutrient contents are 
 limited by the available (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) difference/different version within each crop species. Transgenic ways of doing things can 
 help to further increase these levels, or to introduce micronutrients not naturally happening in 
 the crop. A case in point is Golden Rice: scientists managed to produce a transgenic 
 rice line containing up to 31 Âµg/g of beta-carotene in the endosperm (Paine et al., 2005). 
 Where exactly the micronutrient is located within the grain matters much. If it is found 
 mainly in the aleurone layer of the grain, the (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) hit/effect can be small, since the outer 
 layers are removed during the process of milling and polishing; the hit/effect is greater when it 
 is located in the endosperm. Micronutrient poisonous qualities are not expected at levels (accomplished or gained) 
 through biofortification. For beta-carotene, poisonous quality is not an issue at all, because the human 
 body only soaks up as much beta-carotene as it needs. 
 6 
 
 Micronutrient keeping/holding onto/remembering. Micronutrient contents in the food actually ate/destroyed might be 
 lower than those produced in the crop, because after-harvest and processing losses can happen. 
 Beta-carotene in particular is sensitive to bright sunlight and extreme heat. For orange-fleshed 
 sweetpotatoes, beta-carotene keeping/holding onto/remembering after boiling is around 80% (Nestel et al., 2006), but 
 losses can be much higher with inappropriate storage and cooking ways of doing things. Also for 
 minerals, losses can happen, although they are usually less sensitive than vitamins and 
 carotenoids. 
 Bioavailability. How much of particular micronutrients the human body can soak up and 
 use for body functions depends on some factors. The exact (percentages of different chemicals within a substance) of 
 the micronutrient matters and also how the compound is stored within the plant cell. 
 What's more, improving and stoping factors in people's diets can have an important 
 influence. Beta-carotene (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid), for instance, depends on minimum fat intakes, while 
 alcohol reduces bioavailability. Iron bioavailability is positively influenced by vitamin C 
 intake, but phytates and tannins act as stopping factors. Haas et al. (2005) have shown that 
 high-iron rice can in fact improve the iron status of women. (in almost the same way), van Jaarsveld et al. 
 (2005) have shown that the consumption of orange-fleshed sweetpotato improves the vitamin 
 A status of children: with 100 Âµg/g of beta-carotene and 80% keeping/holding onto/remembering when ate/destroyed in 
 boiled form, even a 50 gram consumption of this crop is (good) enough for meeting 75% of the 
 recommended daily (money given/freedom to move) of vitamin A for children. Also for Golden Rice, a (compared to other things) 
 high bioavailability of the beta-carotene produced has been (showed/shown or proved) in early/incomplete 
 feeding trials (R. Russell, personal communication). While further research is needed to (check for truth/prove true) 
 these findings in community settings, early/incomplete results from the spreading around of orangefleshed sweetpotato in Mozambique are similar to big (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) hits/effects among 
 micronutrient-lacking target (groups of people/animals/things). 
 Farmer adoption. In order for farmers to adopt biofortified crops, micronutrient qualities 
 have to be raised/trained  into advanced lines, which are (related to scientific farming)ally superior. (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) 
 7 
 
 improvement at the cost of lower yields or other (related to scientific farming) disadvantages is a non-starter. For 
 example, wheat people (who help animals have babies) are trying to biofortify varieties resistant to a rust that is 
 expected to affect large areas in Pakistan and India. So, adoption of biofortified wheat there 
 is expected to be driven by rust resistance. It is rather unlikely that farmers are willing to pay 
 higher prices for biofortified seeds, unless these seeds directly add/give to higher incomes. 
 Also critical is local helpful change: varieties will have to be targeted to clearly stated/particular agroecological 
 and (how money affects people's lives) conditions. The greater the number of locally-changed biofortified 
 varieties, the higher the likely adoption. For wide coverage, plant people (who help animals have babies) will need to focus 
 first on biofortifying 'mega' varieties, such as BR28 and BR29 of rice in Bangladesh, which 
 together occupy almost 60% of the rice area in the Boro season, or BR11, which accounts for 
 over a quarter of the Aman season rice area (IRRI, personal communication). Finally, the 
 speed of adoption will depend on the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of existing seed (ways of moving things from point A to point B) and 
 farmers' seed replacement rates. Although biofortified seeds can be reproduced on-farm, 
 some initial public support might be needed for the new varieties to penetrate formal and 
 informal seed markets. 
 Person acceptance. For reasons organized and listed earlier, knowledge of micronutrient 
 shortages is generally low, so that the (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) advantages of biofortification might not 
 be fully appreciated. But even if they are, the desire and ability to pay higher prices for 
 biofortified foods are likely to be limited among the poor, who carry the biggest part of micronutrient 
 (bad food quality). Also at equal prices, people will only buy micronutrient-dense crops, if 
 they meet their personal preferences in terms of taste, texture, and visual appearance. Mineral 
 biofortification at realistic levels is not expected to change personal (features/ qualities/ traits), that is, 
 iron and zinc qualities are invisible (Nestel et al., 2006). This is different for beta-carotene, which 
 changes the color of the crop to deep yellow or orange, so that it will be necessary to invest 
 more in demand creation for these varieties through communication and marketing efforts. 
 
 8 
 
 Consumer acceptance also influences farmer adoption decisions, as low acceptance would 
 translate into lower market prices. 
 
 4 
 
 Way(s) of doing things for impact test 
 
 In farming-based money flow/money-based studies, the usual approach to test the hit/effect of new crop technologies is 
 to number the money-based benefits arising from working well increases as a result of technology 
 adoption by farmers. Such working well increases - either through yield gains or savings in 
 production costs - cause a downward move/change in the crop supply curve, based on which group 
 money-based extra and extra distribution effects can be received/made from (Alston et al., 1995). 
 However, the main focus of biofortification is on improving the (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) status of 
 people through quality improvement. Quality improvements generally lead to a not important 
 benefit increase for people, which different authors have modeled as an upward move/change in 
 the crop's demand function (e.g. Unnevehr, 1986). Yet it is unlikely that biofortification 
 would result in an upward move/change in demand, because of knowledge and buying power 
 restrictions among the poor, as discussed above. In this case, benefits of biofortification 
 should rather be thought about/believed as positive nutrition and health results for people suffering 
 from micronutrient (bad food quality) and related externalities for (community of people/all good people in the world) at large. Such 
 externalities are more complex to test. 
 Dawe et al. (2002) looked at the potential (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) effects of Golden Rice by 
 carefully studying likely improvements in vitamin A intakes in the Philippines. This approach 
 completely/in a hinting way builds on a measure of program success, which is commonly used also for other 
 micronutrient helping actions, namely the (accomplished or gained) reduction in the number of people with 
 micronutrient intakes below a defined dividing line (e.g. Fiedler et al., 2000). However, since 
 micronutrient intake is not an end in itself but only a means to secure/make sure of healthy body functions, 
 it is more appropriate to go further and number health results directly. In a early/incomplete 
 
 9 
 
 assessment of iron biofortification in India and Bangladesh, Bouis (2002) guessed the 
 reduction in the number of blood disease cases and attributed a money-based value to each case avoided 
 for a cost-benefit analysis. Zimmermann and Qaim (2004) suggested a more complete 
 approach in their analysis of the possible health benefits of Golden Rice in the Philippines: 
 since micronutrient (bad food quality) causes significant health costs, which could be reduced 
 through biofortification, they put into numbers the health cost of vitamin A shortage with and 
 without Golden Rice and understood/explained the difference - that is, the health cost saved - as the 
 (related to computers and science) benefit. 
 
 4.1 
 
 (putting into numbers) of health costs 
 
 There are different ways of doing things available for the (putting into numbers) of health costs, including 
 money-planning medical treatment costs, guessing working well losses, and desire to pay 
 approaches (e.g., Brent, 2003). A (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) which appears appropriate to number the health 
 costs of micronutrient (bad food quality) in developing countries is the disability-(changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) life years 
 (DALYs) approach. DALYs are used to establish the load of a disease by measuring the 
 health loss through death and deadliness in a single index (Murray and Lopez, 1996). The 
 once-a-year health costs of a disease are expressed in terms of the number of DALYs lost: 
 (1) 
 
 Health costs = DALYs lost = YLL + YLD weighted 
 
 where YLL are years of life lost due to (too) early or soon deaths and YLD are years lived with 
 disabilities resulting from the disease, which are weighted according to the extreme harshness of 
 disabling conditions. 
 The DALYs approach has been used in very different contexts, such as numbering the 
 health costs of bad disease or HIV/AIDS (e.g., Lomborg, 2004). The World Health Organization 
 has used it to test the worldwide  health costs of different (disease danger signs), including undernutrition 
 and micronutrient (bad food quality) (WHO, 2002). In their Golden Rice study, Zimmermann and 
 
 10 
 
 Qaim (2004) have cleaned/made better the DALYs way(s) of doing things to think about  more clearly different 
 bad health results of vitamin A shortage. Stein et al. (2005) have further developed 
 the approach by including new nutrition ideas and extending it also to iron and zinc 
 (bad food quality). For each micronutrient, the number of DALYs lost can be calculated as: 
 (2) 
 
 DALYslost 
 
 aŽ› 1 aˆ' e aˆ' rL j aŽž 
 aŽ› 1 aˆ' e aˆ' rd ij aŽž 
 aŽœ 
 aŽŸ 
 aŽœ 
 aŽŸ 
 = aˆ' j Tj M j aŽœ 
 aŽŸ + aˆ'i aˆ' j T j I ij Dij aŽœ 
 aŽŸ 
 r 
 r 
 aŽ 444 
 aŽ 4443aŽ  
 14442 
 3aŽ  
 1444424 
 YLL 
 
 YLD 
 
 where Tj is the total number of people in target group j, and Mj is the death rate connected 
 with the particular shortage. Iij is the (number of times something happens) rate of bad health result i in target 
 group j, Dij is the similar disability weight, and dij is the length of time of the result. For 
 permanent health problems, dij equals the average remaining (how long a person is expected to live) Lj. Future life 
 years lost are discounted at a discount rate of r. An summary of bad health results of 
 iron, zinc, and vitamin A shortage is shown in Table 1. Only those results for which a 
 definite (proof that one thing definitely causes another) relationship has been established in meta-analyses are included (Stein et al., 
 2005a). 
 Here should appear Table 1. 
 Inserting appropriate health and (related to information about people) statistics in equation (2), the health costs of 
 micronutrient (bad food quality) in a country or area can be calculated. Since biofortified crops 
 are not yet ate/destroyed, this (the way things are now) situation is the test result without biofortification. 
 Improved micronutrient intakes through consumption of biofortified crops will reduce 
 death and (number of times something happens) rates of bad functional results, so that the number of DALYs 
 lost decreases.1 The difference in micronutrient-related health costs - that is, the number of 
 DALYs saved - is carefully thought about/believed as the benefit of biofortification. 
 
 1 
 
 How the reduction in death and (number of times something happens) rates can be received/made from is explained in the next sub-section. 
 
 11 
 
 4.2 
 
 Improved nutrition and health status through biofortification 
 
 Micronutrient intakes needed/demanded for healthy body functions change/differ  from individual to individual, 
 based on age, sex, physical activity, and many other factors. Recommended dietary reference 
 intake levels for each micronutrient are usually specified for particular target groups. If the 
 actual intake of an person is below the recommended one, the person is likely to be 
 lacking. An interesting distribution of micronutrient intakes is shown in panel (a) of Figure 
 3. In this example, a certain fraction of people/of the group is lacking at current intake levels 
 without biofortification. 
 Here should appear Figure 3. 
 Future consumption of biofortified crops will shift the intake distribution to the right, 
 within which/by which the importance of the shift will depend on the actual improvement in bioavailable 
 micronutrients, which is a function of effectiveness and coverage, as discussed above. Some 
 people, who were lacking (before that/before now), will (accomplish or gain with effort) good amount status; for them, possible 
 bad health results will stop. However, especially people at the lower end of the 
 intake distribution might still remain lacking, even after the shift. Also for these people 
 there will be an improvement in health status, though, because the number and extreme harshness of 
 bad health results is related to the degree of micronutrient shortage. In fact, a 
 curving out relationship between micronutrient intake and bad health results can be 
 assumed (Hallberg et al., 2000; Zimmermann and Qaim, 2004), as shown in panel (b) of 
 Figure 3. The effectiveness of biofortification in improving health status can then be 
 calculated as the ratio of the areas A and (A + B). The mean effectiveness for a particular 
 target group (Ej) can be used to get new, reduced (number of times something happens) rates of bad health 
 results as I ijnew = (1 aˆ' E j ) a‹... I ij . For the reduction in death rates, the same formula can be 
 used.2 
 
 2 
 
 While the approach described here can be used for all micronutrients, Stein et al. (2005a) proposed an 
 
 12 
 
 4.3 
 
 Cost-effectiveness and returns on R&amp;D investments 
 
 A complete money-based analysis of projects or policies needs/demands that group benefits 
 are next to group costs. The major cost of biofortification is the investment in 
 breeding and spreading around micronutrient-dense varieties. If the discounted biofortification 
 investments are divided by the discounted number of DALYs saved, the average cost per 
 DALY saved can be calculated, which is a common measure for the (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness of 
 health programs (e.g., World Bank, 1993). Based on this per-DALY cost, it is possible to 
 compare the (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness of biofortification with that of other choice micronutrient 
 helping actions, other public health measures, or pre-defined dividing lines for what is carefully thought about/believed 
 (producing a lot for a given amount of money). 
 One of the advantages of the DALYs approach is actually that health and life do not have 
 to be expressed in money-based terms, since this is always connected with good concerns. Yet, 
 since biofortification is an farming-based technology, which also competes with non-health 
 related, working well-improving technologies in terms of money/giving money (to), a comparison of the returns 
 on R&amp;D investments might be desirable sometimes. This needs/demands that a money-based value be 
 attributed to each DALY saved, in order to convert the health benefits into a dollar figure. 
 What value to choose per DALY saved is not a plain/honest/easy decision. In developing 
 country contexts, a (done or made to look the same way every time) rate of $1000 has sometimes been used (e.g., World Bank, 
 1994). Other authors have valued DALYs at the average per person income in a country (e.g., 
 Zimmermann and Qaim, 2004). These are certainly lower-bound values, and they should not 
 be thought about/believed as an approach to number the built-in value of life. But, since higher values 
 translate into larger money-based benefits, the results are more cautious and convincing if 
 good returns can already be shown at these lower-bound values. 
 
 different method for iron, which gets the reduction in the number of bad health results through 
 biofortification by using the total amount of distribution function of iron intakes in a population. Where data 
 availability permits, this different method is better for iron, but it is not good for zinc and vitamin A. 
 
 13 
 
 5 
 5.1 
 
 Scientific analyses 
 Biofortification in India 
 
 Using the way(s) of doing things organized and listed in the previous section, first complete studies on the 
 hits/effects of biofortification have been carried for in India (Stein et al., 2005b; 2006a; 2006b), 
 where micronutrient (bad food quality) is a (existing all over a large area) problem. About half of all women in India 
 and three quarters of all children are weak (IIPS, 2000),3 the risk of zinc shortage is high 
 (Hotz and Brown, 2004), and almost one-third of all preschool children are vitamin A 
 lacking (UN-SCN, 2004). In the (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) of the HarvestPlus Challenge Program, crop 
 scientists at IRRI and CIMMYT are using ordinary tools to breed higher amounts of iron 
 and zinc into rice and wheat. The resulting breeding lines will be shared with the Indian 
 public research system for backcrossing the micronutrient qualities into local varieties. In 
 addition, transgenic Golden Rice breeding lines, with high amounts of beta-carotene, will be 
 moved (from one place to another) to India through the Golden Rice People-helping Board. (able to change and get better) research, testing, 
 and (removing the laws from) the technologies will still take some time; it is expected that the first 
 biofortified varieties might be released in India in 2010. Both rice and wheat are important 
 staple foods in India, so that significant positive nutrition and health benefits can be expected 
 in the future. 
 Since much of the information needed for impact test is not (capable of being seen and known) at this 
 stage, ideas (you think are true) have to be made for ex ante analyses. Based on expert interviews, two 
 impact pictures/situations were built - one with hopeful and the other one with more 
 negative-minded ideas (you think are true). The major ideas (you think are true) made on technology effectiveness and coverage 
 are shown in Table 2. What's more, guessed (money-related) costs are shown. These costs include 
 only part of the international R&amp;D investments, because the biofortified breeding lines will be 
 
 3 
 
 Iron shortage blood disease is only a subgroup of blood disease. But, because it is the most important form, blood disease is 
 often used as substitute for iron shortage. It should be noted, however, that people can also suffer from iron 
 shortage without being weak (Nestel and Davidsson, 2002). 
 
 14 
 
 shared also with other developing countries. Also, national program costs for (able to change and get better) 
 breeding, testing, and spreading around have been carefully thought about/believed. For Golden Rice, the group 
 costs are higher than for iron and zinc biofortification for two reasons. First, since Golden 
 Rice is a transgenic technology, more expensive biosafety and food safety tests have to be carried 
 out under the national rules. Second, since the beta-carotene turns the color 
 of the rice grain yellow, public marketing efforts will be necessary to (help increase/show in a good way) farmer and 
 personal acceptance. More intensive marketing efforts are expected to increase technology 
 coverage. Since the projected marketing expenses account for a large part of the total cost, 
 the cost guesses for Golden Rice are higher in the hopeful than in the negative-minded picture/situation. 
 Here should appear Table 2. 
 Based on recent health and (related to information about people) statistics, the current health costs of 
 micronutrient (bad food quality) in India were calculated. This was done separately for the three 
 micronutrients iron, zinc, and vitamin A. The results are shown in Table 3. With a once-a-year 
 loss of 4 million DALYs, the group costs of iron shortage are higher than those of zinc 
 and vitamin A shortage. Although the last thing just mentioned two are related to higher death, 
 especially among children, they are less (existing all over a large area) than iron shortage. For an on-the-spot 
 guess of the total health costs of all three micronutrient shortages together, the individual 
 results can be added up, resulting in a once-a-year loss of over 9 million DALYs. This points to/shows 
 that hidden hunger is in fact a huge public health problem in India. The DALYs sum will 
 underestimate the true costs, however, because - because of micronutrient interactions - 
 many shortages in people can lead to added/more bad health results, which are 
 not (taken/took control of) here. Only (not very long ago) have food experts started to pay more attention to 
 micronutrient interactions. At this stage, the knowledge available is not (good) enough to 
 includes these interactions into money-based analyses. This is also the reason why iron, zinc, 
 and provitamin A biofortification have been carefully studied separately, although all three 
 micronutrients might eventually be raised/trained  into the same crop varieties. 
 15 
 
 Here should appear Table 3. 
 For the impact analyses, a nationally representative data set was used, which includes 
 described/explained food consumption data for 120,000 Indian families (NSSO, 2001). Using local 
 food composition tables and personal (almost-equal state) units, the consumption of different food 
 valuable things was translated into micronutrient intakes for people. The results on health 
 cost reductions through biofortification for the two hit/effect pictures/situations are shown in the lower 
 part of Table 3. Under hopeful ideas (you think are true), biofortified rice and wheat varieties could 
 more than halve the health costs connected with micronutrient (bad food quality) in India. Even 
 under negative-minded ideas (you think are true), the reduction is still significant, ranging between 9-19%. 
 These studies suggest that biofortification is an effective way to reduce hidden hunger, although 
 it is unlikely to eliminate the problem completely. The differences in hits/effects between the two 
 pictures/situations are mainly due to the hidden (under) ideas (you think are true) on micronutrient contents in the grain 
 and coverage rates of biofortified varieties. Since these limits/guidelines can still be influenced 
 through appropriate policies, the results also (show or prove) that public support is important for 
 increasing the good effects. 
 Results of (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness analyses for the individual technologies are also shown in 
 Table 3. The cost per DALY saved through biofortification is very low. The World Bank 
 (1993) classifies health helping actions as (producing a lot for a given amount of money), when the cost of saving one DALY is 
 lower than US$_$ 200.4 So, biofortification is highly (producing a lot for a given amount of money), even under negative-minded 
 ideas (you think are true). Also, the (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness of biofortification compares positively/well with other 
 micronutrient helping actions. For instance, the cost per DALY saved through iron 
 addition (to something else) and industrial strengthening efforts ranges between US$_$ 5.6-16.3 (Gillespie, 
 1998). For zinc addition (to something else) and strengthening programs, it ranges between US$_$ 5.0-18.0, 
 and for vitamin A helping actions between US$_$ 84-599 (Tan-Torres Edejer et al., 2005). The 
 
 4 
 
 The World Bank (1993) gives a dividing line of US$_$ 150 (in 1990 dollars); in current terms this goes along with 
 more than US$_$ 200. 
 
 16 
 
 major reasons for the high (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness of biofortification are the huge health gains 
 it creates and the low repeating cost that builds up once micronutrient-dense varieties have 
 been developed and fed into existing seed distribution systems.5 This was discussed in greater 
 detail in section 3. 
 Also, internal rates of return (IRRs) for R&amp;D investments in biofortification have 
 been calculated using the lower-bound money-based values talked about/said above for valuing each 
 DALY saved, namely the international standard of US$_$ 1000 and the average Indian percapita income of US$_$ 620. Under hopeful ideas (you think are true) especially, IRRs are very high 
 (Table 3). Even under negative-minded ideas (you think are true), they are still just like the average 
 returns on R&amp;D investments in working well-improving farming-based technologies (Alston et 
 al., 2000). These are clear indications that biofortification can be a worthwhile investment 
 from a social point of view. 
 
 5.2 
 
 Summary of other studies 
 
 Further ex ante studies on the hits/effects of biofortification have been carried out at different 
 CGIAR centers for HarvestPlus target crops and countries. These studies were mainly 
 conducted for research priority setting within the HarvestPlus Challenge Program. The 
 methodological approach in these added/more studies was mostly the same as the one organized and listed 
 here, although data restrictions required/resulted in the use of average food consumption data instead 
 of individual household (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements). Therefore, projections of (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) improvements are 
 based on mean values for the individual target groups rather than the whole sample 
 distribution of micronutrient intakes. Added/more details on ideas (you think are true) are given in 
 Meenakshi et al. (2006). Results in terms of health benefits and (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness are shown 
 in Table 4 for selected crops and countries. All the examples shown are based on 
 
 5 
 
 Of course, where seed distribution systems are behaving badly, coverage rates of biofortification will be lower or 
 spreading around costs will be higher, both of which would result in a less good (producing a lot for a given amount of money)ness. 
 
 17 
 
 micronutrient amounts that people (who help animals have babies) figure out/think they can (accomplish or gain with effort) using ordinary breeding 
 ways of doing things. 
 Here should appear Table 4. 
 These added/more results confirm that biofortification can reduce the problem of 
 micronutrient (bad food quality) in developing countries. Most of the examples also suggest that 
 biofortification is a (producing a lot for a given amount of money) approach, certainly in Asia and Africa, and also in certain 
 contexts in Latin America. However, there are also striking differences between the individual 
 results. Comparison of the studies for rice in Bangladesh and the Philippines, for instance, 
 demonstrates the influence of local dietary patterns. While rice is the main food staple for the 
 poor in Bangladesh, average rice amounts ate/destroyed in the Philippines are lower, because 
 maize is also an important staple in certain parts of the country. (in almost the same way), cassava is only one 
 staple crop among other important ones for poor families in the Northeast of Brazil. More 
 described/explained tests on appropriate approaches have to be case-specific. It is clear, however, 
 that there is no single crop or way of doing things that will work in every situation. In fact, in certain 
 situations, biofortification may not enjoy a cost advantage over other helping actions. 
 
 6 
 
 Ends/end results and research challenges ahead 
 
 Micronutrient (bad food quality) is a (existing all over a large area) problem in developing countries, especially 
 among women and children in the poorer pieces/parts of people/of the group. The social costs 
 connected with bad health results are often big. Biofortification is a new, 
 agriculture-based helping action, which is likely to gain in importance in the future, as pointed to/showed 
 by the large number of related international research programs (not very long ago) launched. As 
 biofortified crops are still being worked on now, (compared to other things) little is known about their money-based 
 hits/effects and wider results/consequences. In this article, we have discussed the main factors that will 
 influence their future success and have illustrated a good way(s) of doing things for money-based 
 
 18 
 
 impact test, which combines farming-based, nutrition, and health aspects. Ex ante studies 
 from India and other developing countries suggest that biofortified crops can reduce the 
 problem of micronutrient (bad food quality) in a (producing a lot for a given amount of money) way, when they are targeted to 
 clearly stated/particular situations. 
 The approach presented here is only a first step to clearly think about/believe nutrition and health 
 aspects in hit/effect tests of farming-based technology. More basic research could help to 
 further improve and extend the way(s) of doing things and develop welfare measures which include 
 health and quality of life parts/pieces. More than that, added/more scientific work must 
 (check for truth/prove true) the early/incomplete results reported here, including ex post studies building on (capable of being seen and known) 
 data once biofortified crops are spread around. In the case of the use/military service of orange-fleshed 
 sweetpotato, HarvestPlus (people who work to find information) are planning a randomized test of hit/effect, an 
 approach not commonly used in farming-based money flow/money-based studies. Such ex post analysis will present/cause new 
 challenges, especially with respect to indicators of success, as hit/effect on crop adoption, food 
 and micronutrient intakes, and (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) results have rarely been tested under a 
 bringing together (as one) way of thinking. This combined research - involving money-flow experts, other social 
 scientists, farm experts, and food experts - is critical for a more complete analysis of the 
 variety of hits/effects of biofortification. 
 Apart from impact analyses, there are also other open issues, which require further 
 research. These include questions of bioavailability and micronutrient interactions in the 
 human body. For instance, improved iron and zinc content go hand-in-hand for a few crops, 
 and their combined hit/effect may be greater than what a single nutrient alone may (accomplish or gain with effort). 
 (in almost the same way), nutrient interactions are important in understanding the hit/effect of biofortifying 
 many crops. In many countries, diets often feature a first (or most important) and one or more secondary 
 staple crops - cassava is commonly eaten with beans in many parts of Africa and Latin 
 America, for example. The higher beta-carotene content of cassava may improve the 
 (mental concentration/picking up of a liquid) of the iron in beans. Also, nutrient interactions in plants and linkages between 
 19 
 
 high micronutrient concentrations and other crop (features/ qualities/ traits) are not yet fully understood. 
 And finally, it is still unclear how stable the micronutrient qualities will be when seeds are 
 over and over again reproduced by farmers. A fast feature  dilution would certainly put the assumed 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of the biofortification approach into question. 
 Where there are technical restrictions in breeding, transgenic approaches could help to 
 increase the amounts beyond what is possible through ordinary breeding alone. 
 Transgenic approaches are also needed when a particular micronutrient does not happen 
 naturally in a crop. Cases in point are the lack of beta-carotene in the endosperm of rice and 
 wheat. While transgenic approaches may further increase the hit/effect of biofortification, they 
 may also involve added/more difficulties in terms of rules and personal 
 acceptance. 
 In spite of further research challenges ahead, an important policy hint/result/effect, which 
 already comes out from the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) so far, is that biofortification can play an important role in 
 (accomplishing or gaining) nutrition security in particular situations. Apart from the high expected costeffectiveness, early/incomplete cost-benefit analyses show that social returns on R&amp;D investments 
 into biofortification are good and highly competitive with working well-improving 
 farming-based technologies. Therefore, further chasing after the plan of biofortification appears 
 to be worthwhile. Related money/giving money (to) will have to come mostly from the (government) or 
 people-helping organizations. Although the projected social benefits are big, neither 
 farmers nor poor people are likely to have a higher desire to pay for biofortified 
 crops, so that (rewards or reasons for doing something) for the (people and businesses that are not part of the government) to invest are rather limited. 
 To end/decide, biofortification should not be seen as substitute for existing micronutrient 
 helping actions but as a (completing/matching) plan. No single approach will eliminate the problem 
 of micronutrient (bad food quality), as our results also point to/show. All helping actions have their 
 strengths and weaknesses in particular situations. While addition (to something else) and industrial 
 strengthening might be more good for city-based  areas and feeding programs for well defined 
 20 
 
 target groups, biofortification is likely to (accomplish or gain with effort) a wider coverage, including in remote (away from cities) 
 areas, which are often underserved by other helping actions. It is only in the long run that 
 poorness reduction and money-based growth may be expected to add/give to dietary 
 (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing); in the meantime, other helping actions need to be done. 
 
 Responses 
 The money-based help of the German Research Foundation (DFG) is thankfully admitted/recognized. 
 We thank Penelope Nestel, H.P.S. Sachdev, and Zulfiqar A. Bhutta, who cooperated with us 
 in this research and given invaluable inputs on (related to vitamins, protein, etc., in food) details. 
 
 References 
 Allen, L.H., 2003. Helping actions for Micronutrient Shortage Control in Developing 
 Countries: Past, Present and Future. Journal of Nutrition 133, 3875S-3878S. 
 Alston, J.M., C. Chan-Kang, M.C. Marra, P.G. Pardey, and T.J. Wyatt, 2000. A MetaAnalysis of Rates of Return to Farming-based R&amp;D - Ex Pede Herculem? IFPRI Research 
 Report 113, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC. 
 Alston, J.M., G.W. Norton, and P.G. Pardey, 1995. Science Under (not enough of something): Rules/basic truths and 
 Practice for Farming-based Research Test and Priority Setting. Cornell University 
 Press, Ithaca. 
 Bouis, H.E., 2002. Plant Breeding: a New Tool for Fighting Micronutrient (bad food quality). 
 Journal of Nutrition 132, 491S-494S. 
 Brent, R.J., 2003. Cost-Benefit Analysis and Health Care Tests. Edward Elgar, 
 Cheltenham. 
 Dawe, D., R. Robertson, and L. Unnevehr, 2002. Golden Rice: What Role Could it Play in 
 Help of Vitamin A Shortage? Food Policy 27, 541-560. 
 Drakakaki, G., S. Marcel, R.P. Glahn, E.K. Lund, S. Pariagh, R. Fischer, P. Christou, and E. 
 Stoger, 2005. Endosperm-Specific Co-Expression of Recombinant Soybean Ferritin and 
 Aspergillus Phytase in Maize Results in Significant Increases in the Levels of Bioavailable 
 Iron. Plant Molecular (study of living things/qualities of living things) 59, 869-880. 
 21 
 
 Ducreux, L.J.M., W.L. Morris, P.E. Hedley, T. Guard/guide, H.V. Davies, S. Millam, and M.A. 
 Taylor, 2005. (related to processing and using food) Engineering of High Carotenoid Potato Tubers Containing 
 Improved Levels of Î²-Carotene and Lutein. Journal of Experimental Plant science 56, 81-89. 
 FAO, 2004. The State of Food (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) in the World 2004. Food and Farming 
 Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
 Fiedler, J.L., D. Dado, H. Maglalang, N.R. Juban, M. Capistrano, and M.V. Magpantay, 2000. 
 Cost Analysis as a Vitamin A Program Design and Test Tool: A Case Study of the 
 Philippines. Social Science &amp; Medicine 51, 223-242. 
 Gillespie, S., 1998. Major Issues in the Control of Iron Shortage. Micronutrient Effort, 
 Ottawa. 
 Goto, F., T. Yoshihara, N. Shigemoto S. Toki, and F. Takaiwa, 1999. Iron Strengthening of 
 Rice Seed by Soybean Ferritin (tiny chemical assembly instruction inside of living things). Nature Science 17, 282-286. 
 Graham, R.D., D. Senadhira, S.E. Beebe, C. Iglesias, and I. Ortiz-Monasterio, 1999. Breeding 
 for Micronutrient Density in Eatable Parts of/amounts of Staple Food Crops: Ordinary 
 Approaches. Field Crop Research 60, 57-80. 
 Hallberg, L., L. Hulthen, and L. Garby, 2000. Iron Stores and Blood Iron Shortages in 
 Menstruating Women; Calculations Based on Differences/different versions in Iron Needed things and 
 Bioavailability of Dietary Iron. (related to Europe) Journal of Medical Nutrition 54, 650-657. 
 Haas, J.D., J.L. Beard, L.E. Murray-Kolb, A.M. del Mundo, A. Felix, and G.B. Gregorio, 
 2005. Iron-Biofortified Rice Improves the Iron Stores of Nonanemic Filipino Women. 
 Journal of Nutrition 135, 2823-2830. 
 Horton, S. and J. Ross, 2003. The Money flow of Iron Shortage. Food Policy 28, 51-75. 
 Hotz, C. and K.H. Brown (Eds.), 2004. Test of the Risk of Zinc Shortage in 
 (groups of people/animals/things) and Options for its Control. International Zinc Nutrition Advice-giving Group 
 Technical Document No. 1, Food and Nutrition Announcement 25, S91-S204. 
 IIPS, 2000. National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2), 1998-99: India. International Institute 
 for Population Sciences, Mumbai. 
 Lomborg, B. (Ed.), 2004. Worldwide  Problems, Worldwide  Solutions. Cambridge University Press, 
 Cambridge. 
 Low, J., P. Kinyae, S. Gichuki, M.A. Oyunga, V. Hagenimana, and J. Kabira, 1997. 
 Fighting Vitamin A Shortage through the Use of Sweetpotato. International Potato 
 Center, Lima. 
 
 22 
 
 Lucca, P., R. Hurrell, and I. Potrykus, 2001. (related to tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) Engineering Approaches to Improve the 
 Bioavailability and the Level of Iron in Rice Grains. Possible and Applied (the study of tiny chemical assembly instructions inside of living things) 
 102, 392-397. 
 Meenakshi, J.V. N. Johnson, V.M. Manyong, H. De Groote, D. Yanggen, J. Javelosa, F. 
 Naher, C. Gonzalez, J. Garcia, and E. Meng, 2006. Analysing the Cost-Effectiveness of 
 Biofortification: A (creation/combination) of the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something). Paper presented at the Once-a-year AAEA 
 Meeting, J<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
