 Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 Farm working well and (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the CEE person 
 countries: a (creation/combination) of results 
 Matthew Gorton a , Sophia Davidova b,aˆ-- 
 a 
 
 Department of Farming-based Money flow and Food Marketing, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK 
 b Applied Money flow and Business Management Section, King/queen-like College London, Wye Campus, 
 University of London, Wye, Ashford, Kent TN25 5AH, UK 
 Received 23 July 2001; received in changed form 27 February 2002; accepted 11 September 2002 
 
 Abstract 
 This article draws together results from farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) studies in six Central and East (related to Europe) countries that are part of 
 the EU enlargement process. The main questions talked to/looked at concern whether there is a clear (quality of being better than everything else) of one organisational 
 type, namely, family farms, over (related to big business) structures (production co-operatives and different types of farming companies) and 
 the nature of the relationship between size and farm (wasting very little while working or producing something). Results from scientific research show that there is no clear 
 cut (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of (related to big business) farms being basically and mostly less (producing a lot with very little waste) for all farming activities than family farms. Where significant 
 differences have been found in favour of family farms against the average (related to big business) farm, the best (related to big business) farms still tend 
 to (do as expected) as well as the best family farms. As far as size in concerned, in countries in change where small family farms 
 are (done or used by many people) and managed continuously by the present farm household, they appear to be less inefficient compared to 
 larger groups of people as against countries where small family farms are a (compared to other things) new thing/event. 
 Â© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: L25; Q12 
 Keywords: Technical (wasting very little while working or producing something); Farm size; Change; (related to big business) farms; Individual farms 
 
 1. Introduction 
 Since the beginning of change, schoolwork and 
 policy makers have been interested in the relative 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of farming in Central and East (related to Europe) 
 Countries (CEECs). This interest has been stimulated 
 by the want to understand how the CEECs may 
 fair in an enlarged (related to Europe) Union (EU), given that 
 overall farming accounts for a larger share of GDP 
 aˆ-- Corresponding author. Present address: AEBM, King/queen-like College at Wye, Wye, Ashford, Kent TN25 5AH, UK. 
 Tel.: +44-207-59-42-690; fax: +44-207-59-42-838. 
 E-mail address: s.davidova@ic.ac.uk (S. Davidova). 
 
 and employment in the candidate states. This avenue of research was given further importance after 
 early studies noted large differences/different versions between farms in 
 terms of their relative (wasting very little while working or producing something). Understanding why 
 farms differ in their relative (wasting very little while working or producing something) has been seen 
 as important to a few debates concerning likely future (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change (Mathijs and Swinnen, 1998), 
 supply response (Hughes, 2000a), the size of the 
 farming-based labour force (Rizov et al., 2001) and international (wanting to beat others in contests) (Gorton and Davidova, 
 2001). However, previous studies have used a variety 
 of competing methods to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 with results presented on a country by country basis. 
 This paper tries to draw together these individual 
 
 0169-5150/$ - see front matter Â© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
 doi:10.1016/j.agecon.2002.09.002 
 
 2 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 country studies to present a (creation/combination) of findings 
 from the area and draw out (connected/related) cross-national 
 patterns. It (focuses mental and physical effort) on six of the ten CEECs that 
 are part of the EU enlargement process. Only studies 
 covering the after-communist period are included. 
 The paper is structured as follows. The next section 
 reviews the main (solid basic structures on which bigger things can be built) employed for (thinking about/when one thinks about) farm performance and factors affecting farm 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). Section 3 outlines the scientific studies 
 conducted for the CEECs and the ways of doing things employed. Attention is given to the differences between 
 ways of doing things and their importance for the (understanding/ explanation) of results. The findings of farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) studies 
 for the CEECs are presented in Section 4 with the 
 discussion grouped around the debate on farm size, 
 organisational type and other factors. Ends/end results are 
 drawn in Section 5. 
 
 2. Factors affecting farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Studies of farm performance and farming-based change in the CEECs have mostly been embedded 
 within one of two widely-used possible (solid basic structures on which bigger things can be built). 
 First, broadly new-classical studies have tried to 
 understand differences/different versions in farm performance, especially technical (wasting very little while working or producing something), through access to help to differences in the internal structure of farms (especially 
 size and legal type) and (service business/government unit/power/functioning) factors such as the 
 level of workers (Mathijs and Vranken, 2000; 
 Hughes, 2000b). In these studies the unit of analysis is the individual farm and a common idea (you think is true) 
 has been that understanding differences/different versions in technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) provides a basis for (describing the future) (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 change (Hughes, 2000b). The second set of studies, 
 drawing on the writings of institutional money-flow experts, 
 argue that human behaviour is shaped by institutions 
 (formal and informal rules, rules and laws) 
 (Williamson, 1988). In this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) the unit of 
 analysis should not only be the internal structure 
 of farms but rather take by force/take control of a farm's institutional 
 embeddedness and inter-organisational relationships 
 (transaction costs) (Pollak, 1985). Difference/different version in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) is only one of some factors 
 that may explain (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) change in farming and 
 the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of a farm will be figured out by/decided by both 
 intra- and inter-organisational arrangements (Brem 
 and Kim, 2000). Authors within this school have been 
 
 especially interested in control problems, path 
 dependency and differences/different versions in transaction costs between family and (related to big business) farms as factors that may 
 explain organisational change in the CEECs (Schmitt, 
 1993; Brem, 2000). The rest of this section 
 reviews the books on factors identified by both 
 schools that may explain differences/different versions in farm (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 2.1. (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size and the 'optimal farm size' 
 debate 
 The books on changing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) has seen a wide debate about the relationship between 
 farm size and (wasting very little while working or producing something) as land reform and farm rebuilding have brought about complete, politically caused changes in the distribution of farm sizes. 
 When land reform plans were created at the 
 beginning of change, some argued that it was desirable 
 to preserve large farm structures and chase after attempts 
 to (related to managers) stop farm breaking (up) on the 
 basis that smaller farms are less (producing a lot with very little waste). These authors tended to see repayment plans, where they 
 would lead to farm structures returning to the (before the war) 
 pattern of small-scale poor (person) units, as highly undesirable (Kanchev, 2000). In contrast, others argued that 
 the large farms in Eastern Europe suffered from diseconomies of size so that land reform plans must 
 include proposals to reduce the mean size of farms 
 (Koester and Striewe, 1999). 
 Debates about the 'optimal farm structure' 
 and 'optimal farm size' have a long history in farming-based money flow/money-based studies. Writings on Western (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 have tried to understand whether larger farms benefit from being more technically (producing a lot with very little waste) (which may 
 be rotten into total/totally/with nothing else mixed in technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and 
 scale effects), and/or more allocatively (producing a lot with very little waste) (Hall 
 and LeVeen, 1978). As mean farm sizes in Western 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) have increased, many have guessed 
 that significant size effects exist (Seckler and Young, 
 1978). This assumes that firms in a competitive industry will be driven to produce at the lowest point 
 of the long-run average cost (LAC) curve and that 
 the frequency distribution of farm sizes will show/tell about 
 the lowest LAC point. From this one can guess  that 
 rising mean sizes points to/shows the presence of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 of size (Seckler and Young, 1978). It was, at first, 
 assumed that the LAC curve is U-shaped, but scientific research for Western farming has tended 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 to point to/show that an L-shaped curve is more common. 
 Dawson and Hubbard (1987), for example, found 
 sharply decreasing LAC curves when small farms 
 grow to a 'family' size in the UK but much less (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) for increasing costs for the group of largest 
 farms. These findings suggest that increasing average 
 farm sizes do not necessarily suggest the presence of 
 (making a lot of an item so each item costs less), only the (not being there; not being present) of significant 
 diseconomies (Seckler and Young, 1978; Dawson and 
 Hubbard, 1987). 
 Research on developing countries has centred 
 round the 'inverse guess' that smaller farms 
 are more productive because land is used more intensively (Bharadwaj, 1974; Johnson and Ruttan, 
 1994; Cornia, 1985). These studies, have mostly (focused mental and physical effort) on partial working well measures, usually 
 yields per hectare, with size measured in terms of 
 total hectares (ha) managed (Barrett, 1998) and often 
 do not account for the differential use of other inputs. 
 The most common explanation of the inverse guess has been labour market (existence of two things/belief that the world consists of two opposing things). According to 
 this explanation, families are believed to face a lower 
 opportunity cost of labour than large, commercial 
 farms. As a result, small farms apply their own labour 
 in such amounts that the expected not important value 
 product of household labour applied to own (producing crops/helping something grow) is less than a market-wage-based measure of the 
 opportunity cost of labour (Carter and Wiebe, 1990). 
 Assuming farming-based production technology does 
 not show increasing returns to scale, poor (person) farms 
 with a assumed natural desire to labour (Barrett, 1998), 
 produce an inverse relationship between farm size and 
 working well. Binswanger and Elgin (1998) use this 
 explanation to explain why small-scale private plots produced a big share of farming-based output 
 in the CEECs during the communist period. While 
 these traditional Western (related to Europe) and development 
 literatures approach the size-(wasting very little while working or producing something) debate from 
 different opinions, they are both united in a belief 
 that an best farm size can be figured out by/decided by scientific study and that this should be (helped increase/showed in a good way) (Munroe, 
 2001). 
 Traditional approaches to the size-(wasting very little while working or producing something) debate 
 have been more and more criticised on both scientific and 
 idea-based grounds (Kislev and Peterson, 1996). Mentally, Kislev and Peterson (1996) argue that scale 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) are (lasting for a short time) unbalance things 
 that continue only under particular facts or conditions (that surround someone). A few 
 
 3 
 
 authors have argued that the watched/followed relationships 
 between farm size and (wasting very little while working or producing something) may be due to unseen (numbers that change/things that change) and that traditional explanations of 
 farm growth as a way for fully using (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 of size are not enough to explain the growth in mean 
 farm sizes. This is developed by Seckler and Young 
 (1978) who argue that differences in management input are more important: farms with good managers 
 yield (money made/good things received) to invest in land to increase their income 
 and may buy loss-making farms that have inferior management. So, what is showed in practice, that 
 mean farm size increases and that larger farms are 
 more money-making and (producing a lot with very little waste), is rather related to the 
 influence of management than to the relationship between size and (wasting very little while working or producing something) (by itself/in and of itself). Such a (popular thing/general way things are going) could 
 happen even if the LAC curve was flat/left-and-right (Seckler 
 and Young, 1978). A discussion of other 'missing 
 (numbers that change/things that change)' is presented in Section 2.3 below. 
 The scientific measures used to classify farm size 
 have also been criticised. As Lund (1983) notes, there 
 has been no generally accepted measure of firm size in 
 the money-related books to guide the choice in farming-based studies. Different measures of outputs, inputs (both 
 flow and stock based such as the number of workers 
 or value of fixed capital), and of incomes have been 
 employed. The most commonly employed farming-based measure, (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) land area managed, may 
 be inappropriate for taking (prisoners) by force differences in farming 
 systems, for example the size of intensive animals 
 production. Another commonly used set of measures 
 of farm size are those based on the stocking of different types of animals and spread around areas for crops, often 
 weighted on the basis of the typical gross margins 
 earned or the typical amount of labour input (Lund and 
 Price, 1998). These weighting approaches have been 
 used to guess standard gross margins (SGM) which 
 are used to guess (related to Europe) Size Units (ESUs), 
 based on occasionally changed tests of the SGMs 
 earned from animals and other land uses (Lund and 
 Price, 1998). However ESUs have rarely been used 
 as a measure of farm size in (wasting very little while working or producing something) studies. 
 Having used one measure of size, it has been 
 common for scientific studies to divide samples into 
 two groups, of 'large' and 'small' farms (Verma and 
 Bromley, 1987). This approach suffers from the random nature of the division of what is mostly a 
 continuous (number or thing that changes) and a lack of (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on whether 
 the results are strong with respect to other groupings 
 
 4 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 (Doran, 1985). In dealing with this, Doran (1985) 
 suggests applying a logistic function that enables the 
 data to decide/figure out whether a simple classification into 
 small and large is appropriate and, if so, what the 
 cut-off value should be. 
 In classifying farm size, two other scientific issues 
 should be noted surrounding farm breaking (up) and 
 differences between land ownership and use. The issue of farm breaking (up) has been highlighted in 
 the development money flow/money-based studies books as, for example, 
 Sau (1973) for India notes that a farm of 20 ha will 
 usually contain five separate plots. An important thing to think about of farm breaking (up) in (wasting very little while working or producing something) studies appears important as work on China by Nguyen 
 et al. (1996) found that gains were connected with 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) in plot size rather than farm size. Given the 
 nature of decollectivisation processes in the CEECs 
 and the structure of poor (person) farms that were never 
 collectivised, farm breaking (up) is a concern in the 
 area. Mech (1999) reports a high degree of land 
 breaking (up) in Poland with "small long strips of 
 ribbon-like fields" winning/most common. Second, the distribution of farm sizes may be very different according 
 to whether measured by ownership or management 
 (Binswanger et al., 1993). This is a particular issue 
 in the CEECs where repayment has very much increased the number of owners, many of whom however choose to rent out their land to (related to big business) actors. 
 As Man (1998) notes, decollectivisation in the area has created a structure of rental arrangements in 
 which many own and few rent, the inverse of the historical norm and Western patterns. 
 Given these scientific and idea-based issues, Verma 
 and Bromley (1987) argue that size is a relative idea  and studies that do not recognise this are of 
 limited usefulness. The search for a single 'optimal 
 size' is useless given the mixed-up nature of farming systems and (focusing on doing one thing very well) of factors of production. Instead Verma and Bromley (1987) decide that the 
 "fetish for farm size-working well relations" has took away (related to careful studying or deep thinking) attention from understanding the importance of the larger institutional and infrastructural 
 (surrounding conditions). 
 2.2. Organisational type 
 At the beginning of the change process, there 
 were a few ideas (you think are true) about the farm structures 
 
 that would come out  as a result of land reform and farm 
 rebuilding in the CEECs. These ideas (you think are true) were 
 widely shared by schoolwork and the main international (people who give money or other things) (World Bank, 1998). The most common 
 view was the strong belief that once the centrally 
 planned system had been taken apart, farm structures 
 would go back to their 'normal' path, namely 
 smaller individual/family type farms (Csaki and 
 Lerman, 1996). On money-based grounds, this idea (you think is true) was based on the view that family farms are more 
 (producing a lot with very little waste) than co-operatives and other types of (related to big business) farms (Schmitt, 1991). The created guess 
 (Schmitt, 1993; Hagedorn, 1994) is that "if the freedom of self-organisation is (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described), mainly family 
 farms develop and survive, except for explainable exceptions, because they have low transaction costs" 
 (Hagedorn, 1994, p. 5). One of descriptive arguments 
 employed in support of this guess is that in 
 Western Europe family farms rule. Hagedorn 
 (1994), however, admits/recognizes/responds to that although family 
 farms are expected to be the main result from the 
 institutional reorganisation of socialised farming, 
 they may differ from the present structure in Western 
 Europe, mainly in a sense of a higher proportion of 
 larger farms employing non-family labour. 
 Studies employing a New Institutional Money flow 
 (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) have tried to explain the facts or conditions (that surround someone) under which it could be expected that one 
 organisational form is preferred (Allen and Lueck, 
 1998; Roumasset, 1995). Allen and Lueck (1998) 
 present a model of farm organisation with at one end 
 of a spectrum "pure family farms", with labour paid 
 by leftover/extra claims, and at the other "factory style (related to big business) farming", where farms have many owners 
 and (focused on doing one thing very well) wage labour. In between are different 
 partnerships. As the family farmer is the full leftover/extra 
 claimant, there are no moral danger/risk costs connected 
 with a worker's gains from avoiding. However, due 
 to the lack of labour job  (focusing on doing one thing very well) in the family 
 farm, the not important product of labour in any given 
 job  is lower than in the case of (made to do one thing very well) labour 
 in the (related to big business) farms. Also, family farmers 
 have the highest capital costs, as they don't have the pool 
 of useful things/valuable supplies that is available to (related to big business) farms from 
 their group of owners. As a result, family farms are 
 smaller than partnerships and (related to big business) farms, and 
 possess less equipment. At the opposite end of the 
 spectrum, the 'factory style' (related to big business) farms have 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 high costs to watch labour as hired workers have 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) to avoid. However, as corporations face the 
 lowest capital costs they are more capital intensive. 
 The amount of hired labour depends on the balance 
 between the gains from (focusing on doing one thing very well) and the costs 
 of watching. From these suggestions (or plans), Allen and 
 Lueck (1998) argue that (related to big business) farming will be 
 (producing more with less waste) and rule when the production 
 job  makes it less expensive for the leftover/extra claimant to 
 relate individual effort to commonly produced results 
 (such as capital intensive, less seasonal parts/areas like 
 (related to chickens, hens, turkeys, etc.) or (plant-related) production). Using data from 
 Canada and the USA, they argue that plantable farming 
 will continue to be ruled by family farming as 
 waged labour is hard to monitor and the benefits 
 of (focusing on doing one thing very well) are limited. In contrast, animals 
 production, which is usually more (related to space or existing in space)ly (focused one's effort/increased/mainly studied) and where farmers can better control the effects 
 of nature and correctly monitor individual labour, 
 will move toward large scale (related to big business) forms as 
 found in the rest of the (process of people making, selling, and buying things) (Allen and Lueck, 
 1998). In this model, the nature of the production 
 system decides/figures out which organisational type will be 
 (producing more with less waste). Brem and Kim (2000) have applied 
 this (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) to study the reorganisation of Czech 
 farming. However, as they note, farm control 
 structures in changing (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) are usually more 
 complex than the stylised models of farming-based firms 
 presented by Allen and Lueck (1998). Workers in 
 (related to big business) farms (producer co-operatives or other type 
 of companies) are often not only wage earners, but 
 also leftover/extra claimants as they add/give land and 
 non-land valuable things to the company. 
 2.3. Other factors affecting farm working well and 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 Many  other issues has been (examined closely) in studying differences/different versions in farm (wasting very little while working or producing something), and these can be 
 divided into (service business/government unit/power/functioning) and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) factors. The most 
 common (service business/government unit/power/functioning) factor (examined closely) has been human 
 capital. Stefanou and Saxena (1988) test for the effects of education and training of farm operators on 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something). They found that both education and experience have a significant positive effect on the level of 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) and that they are substitutes. Welch (1970) 
 treats education as a factor of production and attributes 
 the 'productive value of education' to two different 
 
 5 
 
 things. The first is the 'worker's effect' that allows the worker to (accomplish or gain with effort) more with the available 
 useful things/valuable supplies, and the second is 'allocative effect' that improves a worker's ability to get/gain and (change secret code into understandable language) information about other inputs (Welch, 1970). Sumner and 
 Leiby (1987) link the importance of workers to 
 the size debate by arguing that the selection of people 
 to work at farming and their decision to stay in the 
 part/area will affect the size distribution. Particular focus is placed on experience in farming (Sumner and 
 Leiby, 1987; Evans, 1987), as farmers with more experience have lower average not important production costs 
 and may choose to operate larger farms. This (quality of changing over time or at different places) in management input, human and other useful things/valuable supplies 
 hints that there may be more difference/different version in working well within farm size groups than between size groups 
 due to factors other than (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size (Buckwell 
 and Davidova, 1993). 
 (related to/looking at/thinking about) (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) factors, these can be divided into on-farm and off-farm issues. The most 
 well-known/obvious on-farm issue (examined closely) has been 
 agri-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) conditions, including soil quality, 
 height, climate, rainfall and access to water. For 
 example, Davidova et al. (2002) found a significant 
 effect of farm location on (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the Navarra area of Spain with the best performing farms located 
 in the middle of the area and the worst in the northern counties due mostly to their huge (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land). (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) factors have been seen as the 
 'missing (numbers that change/things that change)' from tests of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of 
 size (Bhalla and Roy, 1988). For example, Benjamin 
 (1995) claims that unseen agri-(related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 factors are responsible for the watched/followed inverse working well relationship seen in studies of developing 
 farming. Using data on rice production in Java 
 he argues that to the extent that high-quality land is 
 subdivided more often than low quality land, yields 
 per hectare are greater for smaller farms. Bhalla and 
 Roy (1988) also found that differences in soil quality 
 across families within the same district partially 
 explain the inverse working well relationship. In other 
 words, land quality is one (thing that decides something) of farm size 
 and (wasting very little while working or producing something) studies should account for this. Finally 
 (related to/looking at/thinking about) on-farm structures, security of land ownership rights can produce farm performance (Cristoiu, 
 2001) as farms with more secure ownership rights are 
 more likely to experience/likely to get make long-term investments and so 
 may display higher (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 
 6 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 Off-farm (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) factors include wider institutional factors such as up- and downstream relationships and the nature of transaction costs between 
 agents along agri-food supply chains. For example, 
 the performance gains from better functioning upstream markets may include better terms of trade 
 that lower the average costs of production. (in almost the same way), 
 farms may benefit from the 'backward transmission' 
 of scale (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) from the downstream part/area via 
 improved (based on a written agreement) arrangements with processors 
 or marketing businesses/projects (Hughes, 2000a). The nature of supply chain relationships has been seen as 
 critical by some authors in explaining the performance of after-communist farming in the area 
 (Hughes, 2000a; Gow and Swinnen, 2001). Hughes 
 (2000a) for example argues that some CEECs have 
 institutional (surrounding conditions) that are more good for 
 small-scale farming than others because supply and 
 marketing opportunities were better developed in the 
 pre-reform period with lower transaction costs. Got learning is also important. Established farms 
 may benefit from saved respect which 
 can provide advantages in (back-and-forth conversations to agree on something) with input 
 suppliers, banks and processing firms (Meurs, 
 2001). 
 In summary, the farm size-(wasting very little while working or producing something) debate on its 
 own is too (serving to severely limit or control) a (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) for studying differences/different versions in farm performance in the CEECs. No total (big statements based on very little information) can be made (related to/looking at/thinking about) an best 
 farm size (Binswanger and Elgin, 1998), as the best farm size for a particular production system in a 
 particular country will depend on a set of (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 and (service business/government unit/power/functioning) factors. 
 
 3. Ways of doing things employed and studies 
 conducted 
 Broadly three sets of approaches to the measurement of production (wasting very little while working or producing something) can be described/separated: 
 parametric ways of doing things (pre-decided and (random/including random data points)), 
 non-parametric ways of doing things based on Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), and working well indices based 
 on growth accounting and index explanation ways of thinking/basic truths/rules 
 (Coelli et al., 1998). Each of these broad approaches 
 has been applied in studies on the CEECs (Table 1). 
 Before looking at (again) the scientific results of these studies 
 it is necessary to understand the differences between 
 
 these methods and how such differences/different versions can affect the 
 results presented. 
 The pre-decided edge of something/unexplored area approach attributes all mistakes from the edge of something/unexplored area to inefficiencies. Therefore, 
 it does not take into account the effects of errors of 
 measurement and other random noises. For this reason, it has not usually been applied to (wasting very little while working or producing something) guesses in change (processes of people making, selling, and buying things), except in studies 
 with a stronger focus on methodological comparison (Piesse, 1999). In contrast, the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area 
 (Aigner et al., 1977; Meeusen and van den Broeck, 
 1977) accounts for the effect of random factors such as 
 errors of measurement, unknown (numbers that change/things that change), or danger-related factors. Morrison (2000) and Curtiss (2000) have 
 used the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area approach in farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 studies on change countries. It has been admitted/recognized/responded to that data from change (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) are usually noisy in comparison to those from developed 
 (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) (Morrison, 2000). From this point of view, 
 the (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area approach is more appropriate 
 than the pre-decided one. 
 The (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area way(s) of doing things is, however, 
 more good for a single-output case. In multiple 
 output situations, data must be grouped and this 
 needs/demands price data, which are not always easily 
 available for change countries. There is also another 
 point that raises doubts about the appropriateness of 
 the production edge of something/unexplored area approach to farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 studies for the CEECs. If farms operate using different technologies, the production function becomes 
 farm-specific. In this case the idea (you think is true) that the 
 slope coefficients are equal across farms is no longer 
 valid and the measurement of (wasting very little while working or producing something) is not reliable (Lansik, 2000). The idea (you think is true) that all farms 
 in change (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) apply the same technology is 
 quite strong. At the very least, there are differences 
 between individual and (related to big business) farms, especially 
 co-operatives. For example, in the Czech Republic 
 limited (something you owe/something you're responsible for/disadvantage) companies have their origins in the 
 (turning things over from the government to private companies) of the state farms. At the beginning of the 
 process, the valuable things of state farms were leased to small 
 groups of people, usually including the former farm 
 managers (Ratinger and Rabinowicz, 1997). Slowly, the non-land valuable things were sold to these lessees 
 at good/willing conditions with rescheduled payments. 
 So the managers of these companies had some 
 managerial experience from the pre-reform period and 
 access to machinery from the previous state farms at 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 7 
 
 Table 1 
 Scientific studies of farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the CEECs and the ways of doing things employed 
 Country 
 
 Author(s) 
 
 Dataset 
 
 Sample size 
 
 Way(s) of doing things 
 
 Comments 
 
 Bulgaria 
 
 Mathijs and Vranken 
 (2000) 
 Hughes (1998) 
 
 1998 ACE survey 
 
 93 
 
 Specialist crop farms onlya 
 
 VUZE panel 1996 
 
 411 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Mathijs and Swinnen 
 (2000) 
 
 227 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Curtiss (2000) 
 
 Agrocensus and 
 VUZE panel data 
 for 1996 
 VUZE FADN 
 1996-1998 
 
 Data envelopment 
 analysis (DEA) 
 Tornquvist-Theil 
 TFP Index 
 DEA 
 
 (random/including random data points) Edge of something/unexplored area 
 Analysis (SFA) 
 
 Wheat, rape seed and 
 sugar red vegetable  only 
 
 Hungary 
 
 Hughes (2000a,b) 
 
 AKII 1996-1997 
 
 Hungary 
 
 1998 ACE survey 
 
 Poland 
 
 Mathijs and Vranken 
 (2000) 
 van Zyl et al. (1996) 
 
 1993 IERiGZ data 
 
 178 crop and 
 77 dairy 
 248 
 
 Poland 
 
 Munroe (2001) 
 
 1996 IERiGZ data 
 
 1200 
 
 Slovakia 
 
 Mathijs et al. (1999) 
 
 1996 
 
 151 
 
 Cobb-Douglas 
 (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area 
 DEA 
 
 Slovakia 
 
 Morrison (2000) 
 
 1994-1996 
 
 30-39 
 
 SFA 
 
 Slovakia 
 
 Hughes (2000b) 
 
 1990/1-1996 
 
 80 
 
 Slovenia 
 
 Brummer (2001) 
 
 1995/6 FADN data 
 
 147 useable 
 
 Tornquvist-Theil 
 TFP Index 
 SFA and DEA 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 95 wheat farms, 
 70 rapeseed &amp; 
 43 sugar red vegetable 
 153 (1997) 
 
 Tornquvist-Theil 
 TFP Index 
 DEA 
 TFP and DEA 
 
 Specialist crop and 
 dairy farms onlya 
 Two areas. Individual 
 farms above 3ha only 
 Individual farms only 
 Producer co-ops &amp; 
 companies only 
 Edges of something/unexplored areas built for 
 7 products. Co-ops only 
 Only covered producer 
 co-operatives 
 Specialist (the study of plants) 
 left out/kept out 
 
 a Specialist dairy and crop farms defined as businesses/projects for which cow milk or grain production accounted for more than 50% of the 
 total value of farming-based output. 
 
 good/willing conditions. Yet most of this machinery was 
 old, and therefore, weighed down the companies with high 
 replacement costs. The limited (something you owe/something you're responsible for/disadvantage) companies 
 also piled up (things you owe/things you're responsible for/disadvantages) to the state for owning 
 valuable things from the former state farms. This might have 
 stopped their access to credit. So, due to their different histories, the visible farm structures in CEECs 
 have different restrictions and different qualities of 
 management, which makes the idea (you think is true) that farms 
 use the same technologies highly (possibly not true, good, or honest). In 
 addition, there is some (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that individual farms 
 face different factor and output prices and therefore 
 use different technologies (Meurs, 2001). Therefore, 
 it is not surprising that only a few of the reviewed 
 studies have used a production edge of something/unexplored area approach. 
 More often, non-parametric approaches have been 
 applied. DEA does not require random ideas (you think are true) 
 about the functional forms and the distribution of the 
 error term. Basically, DEA uses a linear programming 
 
 procedure to (make small) inputs per unit of output to 
 decide/figure out the edge of something/unexplored area of best-practice firms, and then 
 to decide/figure out the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of each production unit 
 relative to their edge of something/unexplored area (Ali and Seiford, 1993). The 
 main reasons for its wide use are math-based ease 
 and the possibility of separating scale (wasting very little while working or producing something) from 
 technical and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 Two issues have pre-occupied (people who work to find information) studying 
 farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) during the first years of change: 
 First, whether there is planned (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) about the 
 (quality of being better than everything else) of one or another management form, and 
 especially whether individual farms are (producing more with less waste) than the co-operatives; and second, whether the 
 individual farms created as a result of land repayment 
 have been too small and showed scale inefficiencies. DEA, given that it allows for the separation of 
 scale and total/totally/with nothing else mixed in techincal (wasting very little while working or producing something) effects, has been 
 seen as  an (good) enough approach these questions. 
 Another advantage of DEA in comparison to 
 
 8 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 Table 2 
 Summary of edge of something/unexplored area (wasting very little while working or producing something) analysis for Hungarian farm-related 
 Year 
 
 1985 
 1986 
 1987 
 1988 
 1989 
 1990 
 1991 
 
 Pre-decided 
 
 (random/including random data points) 
 
 Non-parametric 
 
 Mean 
 
 Standard moving away 
 
 Mean 
 
 Standard moving away 
 
 Mean 
 
 Standard moving away 
 
 0.669 
 0.628 
 0.637 
 0.715 
 0.499 
 0.669 
 0.478 
 
 0.094 
 0.086 
 0.093 
 0.094 
 0.084 
 0.106 
 0.097 
 
 0.865 
 0.989 
 0.946 
 0.896 
 NA 
 NA 
 NA 
 
 0.075 
 0.046 
 0.012 
 0.049 
 NA 
 NA 
 NA 
 
 0.843 
 0.803 
 0.788 
 0.787 
 0.599 
 0.759 
 0.763 
 
 0.115 
 0.120 
 0.117 
 0.109 
 0.138 
 0.123 
 0.137 
 
 Source: Piesse (1999). 
 
 the parametric approach is that it can handle 
 multiple-output and multiple-input situations (at the same time) and cases where inputs and outputs are put into numbers using different units of measurement (Thiele and 
 Brodersen, 1999). However, DEA is based on a pre-decided approach, so all mistakes from the edge of something/unexplored area 
 are attributed to inefficiencies. Hence, the above talked about/said 'noisy' data for change (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) might not 
 be well-suited for DEA. More than that, DEA guesses 
 could be too nice tos higher scores if the (producing the most with the least waste) farms within the population are not contained in 
 the sample. So, a certain overestimation of sample 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) is possible. 
 Given these issues, some authors have (fought for/pleaded for) 
 the use of index methods, using Malmquist 
 or Tornqvist-Theil working well indices (Piesse, 1999; 
 Hughes, 2000a,b).1 Indices allow the (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of 
 described/explained data on inputs and outputs but by their very 
 nature cannot be checked for (state of always working or appearing the same way) (related to numbers). 
 However, they are easy to calculate and analysis may 
 be carried out on a small sample, and this has made 
 them appealing to (people who work to find information) studying (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) in 
 change.2 
 In order to show the importance of the above 
 points when understanding/explaining results received/made from by different methods, Table 2 shows the results of three 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) edge of something/unexplored area guesses based on 117 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) in Hungary. (wasting very little while working or producing something) measures built by 
 1 Under the idea (you think is true) of constant returns to scale, the last thing just mentioned is 
 calculated as a geometric mean of two Malmquist indices (Caves 
 et al., 1982). 
 2 When Farm (the study of money) Data Network (FADN) procedures 
 were introduced in the EU person countries, they were based on 
 small samples. For example, the FADN survey began in Hungary 
 in 1996 with a sample of just 42 farms (Hughes, 2000b). 
 
 (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area are consistency higher than those 
 came/coming from the pre-decided one. The same is true 
 for the non-parametric edge of something/unexplored area, but the standard moving away is also higher. The number-based results of studies 
 of farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) in the CEECs should be understood/explained 
 accounting for the method of guess. 
 
 4. Review of results 
 The scientific findings of the studies listed in 
 Table 1 are grouped according to three topics mirroring 
 the topics discussed in Section 2: farm size, farm structures and other factors. These are discussed in turn. 
 4.1. Differences/different versions between farm sizes 
 As expected from the arguments presented in 
 Section 2, the clearest finding on the size-(wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 relationship is that there does not appear to be a 
 uniform, cross-national 'optimum' farm size. This is 
 based on studies that in most cases have 
 used hectares managed as a measure of farm size. 
 An exception to this has been for animals farming 
 where the value of total valuable things or total output has 
 been applied (Mathijs and Vranken, 2000; Hughes, 
 2000b). None of the studies have measured size in 
 terms of ESUs or controlled for farm breaking (up) 
 and differences in plot sizes. 
 For plantable farming, in the Czech Republic there appear to be (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size up to 750 ha, in Slovakia 
 (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) continue above 2000 ha,3 while in 
 3 TFP analysis by Hughes (2000b) and the scholastic edge of something/unexplored area 
 analysis by Morrison (2000) received/got very almost the same  results for 
 Slovakia. 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 9 
 
 Table 3 
 Evidence on differences/different versions in (wasting very little while working or producing something) by farm size 
 Country 
 
 Author(s) 
 
 Findings 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Hughes (1998) 
 
 (making a lot of an item so each item costs less) up to 750 ha for plantable farming and up to 1,000,000 CZK in 1996 for 
 animals farms 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Curtiss (2000) 
 
 On average farms above 150 ha perform better for wheat and rapeseed production 
 
 Hungary 
 
 Hughes (2000b) 
 
 Diseconomies of scale over 500 ha, but difference/different version could be accounted for by (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) 
 factors rather than size (by itself/in and of itself). Small private farms (up to 10 ha) perform very well 
 
 Poland 
 
 van Zyl et al. (1996) 
 
 Larger private farms (above 15 ha) are in general less (producing a lot with very little waste) although results are sensitive 
 to the way(s) of doing things employed 
 
 Poland 
 
 Munroe (2001) 
 
 Farms greater than 15 ha were less (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 
 Slovakia 
 
 Morrison (2000) 
 
 For all valuable things analysed, a positive relationship between the scale of production and 
 level of (wasting very little while working or producing something) is watched/followed 
 
 Slovakia 
 
 Hughes (2000b) 
 
 Strong (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size in crop production (best performing farms over 
 2000 ha). No (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size in animals production. Small farms' relative 
 working well improved over the period 1991-1996 
 
 Hungary diseconomies of scale appear to set in above 
 500 ha (Table 3). For Poland, van Zyl et al.'s (1996) 
 analysis pointed to/showed that farms which are (compared to other things) large 
 by Polish standards (above 15 ha) were, on average, 
 less (producing a lot with very little waste) for the year of study (1993) than their 
 smaller partners. While the van Zyl et al. (1996) 
 study is outdated, Munroe (2001) using data from 
 1996 also found that farms greater than 15 ha showed lower (wasting very little while working or producing something). 
 The van Zyl et al. (1996) study also illustrates 
 how results may differ according to the way(s) of doing things 
 applied. Their TFP results point to/show that large farms 
 are not (producing more with less waste) than smaller farms, especially 
 those within the 10-15 ha range and in fact a downward sloping curve for TFP with respect to farm size 
 was watched/followed (van Zyl et al., 1996). The DEA analysis, however, found unimportant differences between 
 the mean sizes of scale (producing a lot with very little waste) (SE) and inefficient 
 farms (P &amp;lt; 0.10), as well as for the different farm 
 size categories. The results for allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 (AE) were almost the same, cooperating with/producing/giving up no a big differences. 
 On the other hand, large farms (&amp;gt;15 ha) were significantly (P &amp;lt; 0.10) less technically (producing a lot with very little waste) (TE) 
 than smaller farms, but in terms of total (wasting very little while working or producing something) 
 (SE Ã-- TE Ã-- AE) large farms (&amp;gt;15 ha) did not differ significantly from smaller farms (van Zyl et al., 
 1996). The differences between the results received/got 
 by the two approaches may be attributed to built-in 
 differences in way(s) of doing things. While DEA separates scale 
 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) from technical and allocative (wasting very little while working or producing something), 
 TFP measurements do not tell/show the difference between them. 
 The discussion of the lack of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size for 
 Poland by Munroe (2001) and van Zyl et al. (1996) is 
 based on a two-part thing of small and large farms with 
 15 ha set as the dividing line. This is an random honor/difference, as criticised by Doran (1985) and in one of the 
 areas studied by van Zyl et al. (1996) no farm went beyond 54 ha. By Czech and Slovakian standards, all 
 farms in this Polish area are 'small' and it is not possible to say whether (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size exist outside the 
 range of farm sizes given in the Polish samples.4 
 This illustrates how size is a relative idea. 
 Not prevented by/not part of the issue these sampling issues, Hughes 
 (2000b) argues that cross-national differences are 
 linked to differences/different versions in the institutional (surrounding conditions) 
 for, and respect of, small-scale farming. In 
 Poland and Hungary small-scale farming was (compared to other things) more important during the communist time 
 (especially in Poland) and more helpful support 
 structures were developed in these countries. Hungary 
 has had a much more supportive (surrounding conditions) for 
 small-scale private farming dating back to the New 
 Money-based (machine/method/way), and since 1989 has got on 
 on a more wholesale decollectivisation than the former Czechoslovakia, creating a larger, more well 
 4 Curtiss (2000) uses a dividing line of 150 ha for classifying 'small' 
 and 'large' farms in the Czech Republic. 
 
 10 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 supplied market for small farm inputs and services. 
 The availability of external services for crop production, such as collecting services and inputs for small 
 farms, has (in the past) been far better developed in 
 Hungary and Poland. The availability of such services 
 is seen as an important means of overcoming some of 
 the sources of diseconomies of size (Hughes, 2000b). 
 In the Czech Republic and Slovakia, far less land is 
 operated by small farms and the market for supplying 
 them with inputs and services is smaller and less well 
 developed. Small-scale farms created by repayment in 
 the Czech Republic and Slovakia are mostly new 
 things. In the last thing just mentioned two countries it is expected 
 that piled up appropriate human and respect 
 in small-scale farming is also smaller than in Hungary 
 and Poland. Where small, private farms are (done or used by many people) and managed continuously by the present farm 
 household, they appear to be less inefficient relative 
 to larger groups of people than in countries where small farms 
 are a (compared to other things) new thing/event. However, one must 
 note the time frame of these studies. The data used 
 by Brummer (2001); Curtiss (2000); Hughes (2000b); 
 Mathijs et al. (1999) and Munroe (2001) was from 
 the mid-1990s. van Zyl et al. (1996) use data from 
 1993. It may be that as new owners become more 
 
 experienced or sell their land to (producing more with less waste) farmers 
 and the former large state and total farms adopt 
 a more professional management approach, some of 
 these country differences/different versions, which have their origins in 
 pre-change farm structures, will reduce. 
 In their analysis of (processes of people making, selling, and buying things) of size, the majority 
 of authors do not control for differences in soil quality or other (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) factors (e.g. Mathijs and 
 Swinnen, 2000; Mathijs et al., 1999; van Zyl et al., 
 1996, Curtiss, 2000). In most cases this has been due 
 to lack of data, but where soil quality and height have 
 been measured they have proved significant. For example, Brummer (2001) found that Slovenian farms 
 600 m above sea level displayed lower technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) and these 'high height' farms are on average 
 larger. 
 4.2. Differences/different versions between structures 
 The most striking feature of the research on farm 
 structures and working well is that the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) is far 
 from clear cut (Table 4). In Hungary, when other factors are controlled for, family farms do appear to be 
 (producing more with less waste), based on both Tornqvist-Theil TFP 
 Indices and DEA analysis (Hughes, 2000a; Mathijs 
 
 Table 4 
 Evidence on differences/different versions in (wasting very little while working or producing something) by farm structure 
 Country 
 
 Author(s) 
 
 Findings 
 
 Bulgaria 
 
 Mathijs and Vranken (2000) 
 
 For crop production, companies (did/done/completed) better than family farms (although based on 
 a very small sample). The share of insiders has a positive influence on the technical 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) of co-operatives 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Hughes (1998) 
 
 Individual private farms were much more productive for animals, but not crop 
 farming. Co-operatives performed better than farming companies 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Mathijs and Swinnen (2000) 
 
 For animal breeding and dairy farming, family farms were (producing more with less waste) than 
 co-operatives and companies. For crops no a big differences between co-operatives 
 and companies are watched/followed. Co-operatives were found on the production technology 
 edge of something/unexplored area of all (focusing on doing one thing very well)s 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Curtiss (2000) 
 
 Co-operatives performed better than individual farms and companies except for sugar 
 red vegetable  where individual private farms performed best. The last thing just mentioned are more labour intensive 
 but (related to where mountains, rivers, cities, etc., are located) broke up 
 
 Hungary 
 
 Hughes (2000b) 
 
 Individual private farmers had much higher TFP scores than any other farm type 
 
 Hungary 
 
 Mathijs and Vranken (2000) 
 
 For crop farming, while all three structures (examined closely) (family farms, companies, 
 co-operatives) could be technically (producing a lot with very little waste), on average family farms were best with 
 companies performing better than co-operatives 
 
 Slovakia 
 
 Mathijs et al. (1999) 
 
 Family farms performed best except for mixed crop-dairy farms where companies and 
 co-operatives were more scale (producing a lot with very little waste) 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 and Vranken, 2000), but no such relationships hold 
 in Bulgaria. For the Czech Republic, both Hughes 
 (1998) and Mathijs and Swinnen (2000) found that 
 individual private farms were much more productive than (related to big business) farms in animals farming but 
 not in crop production. In Curtiss' (2000) analysis of 
 crop production in the Czech Republic she found that 
 co-operatives (did/done/completed) better in wheat and rapeseed 
 (producing crops/helping something grow) compared to individual farms but that the 
 latter were superior in sugar red vegetable  production. In Slovakia family farms appear to be (producing more with less waste) in the 
 specialist animals part/area but not for combined dairy 
 and crop production (Mathijs et al., 1999). 
 (compared to something else) testing these results, it appears 
 that arguments that co-operatives or other forms of 
 (related to big business) farming are basically and mostly less (producing a lot with very little waste), for all 
 types of farming, than family farms are misplaced. 
 Even where the average (related to big business) farm is less productive than the average family farm, one still sees some 
 co-operatives and companies which are on the edge of something/unexplored area or registering high TFP scores (Hughes, 2000a; 
 Mathijs and Vranken, 2000). In explaining why there 
 appear to be a big differences in (wasting very little while working or producing something) between (related to big business) farms and family farms for certain 
 activities and not others, Mathijs and Vranken (2000) 
 follow the suggestions (or plans) of Allen and Lueck (1998). 
 They argue that control problems in (related to big business) 
 farms will be worst where production is (related to space or existing in space)ly spread and (one after the other), as in these cases the 
 costs of supervising and watching hired labour are 
 highest (e.g. plantable farming). Mathijs et al. (1999) and 
 Mathijs and Vranken (2000) argue that this explains 
 why family farms in the Czech Republic, Hungary and 
 Slovakia appear (producing more with less waste) for crop production 
 but such advantages disappear in the dairy part/area. It 
 should be noted, however, that Curtiss (2000) finds no 
 such advantages for family farms in wheat or rapeseed 
 production. In her (random/including random data points) edge of something/unexplored area analysis, individual farms were only for sugar red vegetable  production seen 
 to be (producing more with less waste). She argues that this result might 
 be due to sugar red vegetable  production being more labour intensive so that only in this case are the advantages of 
 family farms in the supervision of labour significant. 
 Hughes (2000b) takes a different approach in arguing why the performance of (related to big business) farms has 
 been better than some of the first ideas (you think are true) made 
 about them would have led one to suppose. He argues that while in the pre-reform period co-operatives 
 
 11 
 
 and state farms were attacked by low labour effort, 
 free-riding problems and principal-agent (problems, delays, etc.), 
 these have now been much reduced by changes in the 
 external (surrounding conditions) and internal structures. Worker 
 (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) power has been reduced by the presence of 
 high (away from cities) unemployment, so that whereas (before that/before now) 
 villagers could hold on to a co-operative job ignoring work effort, today the costs of being caught 
 avoiding and being dismissed are far higher. Political 
 developments in the Czech and Slovak Republics have 
 also reduced worker (arriving at an agreed price or set of terms for an exchange) power in the general 
 (groups of people/devices made up of smaller parts) of co-operatives so that decisions are no 
 longer (promised that something will definitely happen or that something will definitely work as described) to be made on the basis of one 
 member one vote (Hughes, 2000a).5 In this (surrounding conditions) as the not important working well of labour is higher, 
 managers have a greater ability to detect and resist 
 free riding by farm workers (Hughes, 2000a). From 
 this viewpoint many of the control problems attributed to (related to big business) farms are not seen as being built-in to this structure (by itself/in and of itself), but were rather created 
 by the external (surrounding conditions) in which they operated 
 before change. On these grounds, and given the 
 evidence from other studies, one should not 
 expect non-family farms to disappear in the area 
 or to be basically and mostly less competitive, although one 
 may see greater (focusing on doing one thing very well) into activities in which 
 labour supervision and watching is less expensive. 
 4.3. Test of other factors 
 Most farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) studies for the area have focused on size and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) matters. Both 
 the control of size and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) issues in policy 
 debates and the availability of data have influenced 
 this. Most previous studies have used farm accounting 
 records that do not contain information on human and 
 respect. This is unfortunate given that, where (examined something closely), human and respect appear to be significantly related to farm (wasting very little while working or producing something) (Lockheed et al., 
 1980; Stefanou and Saxena, 1988). The (serious thought/something to think about/respect) 
 of workers-(wasting very little while working or producing something) effects is of particular importance for the CEECs as the level of formal education and training held by small-scale farmers in the 
 area tends to be low. 
 5 Hungary's 1992 Co-operative Change Law also weakened the (related to arriving at an agreement) power of workers as the needed thing that 
 co-operatives had to provide jobs for all members was removed. 
 
 12 
 
 M. Gorton, S. Davidova / Farming-based Money flow 30 (2004) 1-16 
 
 Table 5 
 Evidence on differences/different versions in (wasting very little while working or producing something) accounted for by other factors 
 Country 
 
 Author(s) 
 
 Findings 
 
 Bulgaria 
 
 Mathijs and Vranken (2000) 
 
 Strong relationship between education and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for dairy and crop 
 production. Positive relationship with contracting 
 
 Czech Republic 
 
 Hughes (1998) 
 
 Significant (related to a large area) difference/different version (huge farms registered the worst performance) 
 
 Hungary 
 
 Mathijs and Vranken (2000) 
 
 Strong relationship between education and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) for dairy and crop 
 production. Share of women in the household has a positive effect but only significantly 
 so for crop farms. Farms that have bought land are (producing more with less waste). Contracting was 
 positively related with technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) especially for crop farming 
 
 Poland 
 
 Munroe (2001) 
 
 Positive relationship between (wasting very little while working or producing something) and both experience (age of farmer) and farm 
 modernisation (measured as use of electricity and gas heating) 
 
 Slovenia 
 
 Brummer (2001) 
 
 Lower (wasting very little while working or producing something) connected with higher height (&amp;gt;600 m above sea level) and part-time 
 farming 
 
 Some attempts, however, have been made to (ask lots of questions about/try to find the truth about) other (service business/government unit/power/functioning) and (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) factors affecting farm 
 (wasting very little while working or producing something) (Table 5). In both Bulgaria and Hungary, 
 Mathijs and Vranken (2000) found a significantly positive relationship between education and technical (wasting very little while working or producing something) in family farms for both crop and dairy farming, 
 where education was measured as years spent in formal education. However, the (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on other aspects 
 of workers was less clear. For example, age had 
 a good effect on the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of Hungarian crop 
 farms, as it did in Munroe's (2001) analysis for Poland, 
 but a negative relationship was recorded for Bulgaria. 
 Both of these studies found no significant rel<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
