AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Adoption of soil (protecting something from harm): the case of the Philippine uplands 
 Ma. Lucila A. Lapar, Sushil Pandey* 
 Social Sciences Division, International Rice Research Institute, P.O. Box 933, Manila 1099, Philippines 
 
 Received 11 February 1998; received in changed form 18 June 1999; accepted 6 July 1999 
 
 Abstract 
 Soil worsening in the sloping uplands of Asia is a serious problem that threatens the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of farming. Although a few soil (protecting something from harm) technologies have been developed and (helped increase/showed in a good way), their adoption has not been (existing all over a large area). A 
 micro-money-based analysis of adoption of outline hedgerows by upland farmers in the Philippines is conducted to identify the 
 factors that decide/figure out adoption. The scientific results show that adoption depends on a few farm and farmer (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 and the relative importance of these factors differs across places/locations. The high cost of establishment, maintenance and the loss of 
 land to hedgerows are carefully thought about/believed to be the major restrictions to adoption by non-adopters. The money flow/money-based studies of the outline 
 hedgerow system is found to improve (in a big way) if crop (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) or cash cropping is possible. In addition to the need 
 to develop a range of (producing a lot for a given amount of money) technologies, the study points to/shows that in the more not important (surrounding conditions), on-site benefits 
 alone may not be (good) enough to permit investment in soil (protecting something from harm). ©1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Soil (protecting something from harm); Uplands; Outline hedgerow technology 
 
 1. Introduction 
 One of the major factors leading to the unsustainability of farming in the sloping uplands is soil 
 wearing away (Blaikie and Brookfield, 1987). Although the 
 extent of human-like soil wearing away is unknown 
 (Oldeman et al., 1991), activities such as (chopping down trees) 
 and strengthened/got worse land use in the uplands definitely 
 have led to increased soil wearing away. In the humid tropics of Asia, farmers grow a range of survival/income crops 
 in sloping and not important uplands using practices which 
 are often highly erosive (Garrity et al., 1993). In addition to reducing the in-situ working well and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going), these practices also reduce the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 of lowland farming through siltation and damage 
 of crop-watering/rinsing with water (set of machines) (Francisco, 1994). 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +632-845-0563 
 E-mail address: spandey@irri.cgiar.org (S. Pandey) 
 
 What are the conditions under which farmers will 
 put into use practices which (protect from harm) soil and improve the 
 long-term (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of farming-based production systems in these sloping uplands? Experiences from a 
 large number of projects put into use in these uplands 
 point to/show that the problem is often not the lack of technology (by itself/in and of itself)  but rather the (can't work together) of the technology (helped increase/showed in a good way) with the (related to how much money and power people have) conditions 
 under which farming is carried out (Fujisaka, 1989; 
 Anderson and Thampapillai, 1990; Baum et al., 1993; 
 Lutz et al., 1994). Engineering solutions such as rock 
 walls, check dams, and terraces have had very little 
 success in creating a wider hit/effect due to their high 
 costs. Other less expensive technologies such as outline 
 hedgerows, outline plowing, and cover management 
 have also been adopted but here and there/rarely. Overall, (related to computers and science) research and (related to telling a lot of people about something) work done so far 
 seem to have had a limited hit/effect in increasing the 
 adoption of (using less of something) technologies. 
 
 0169-5150/99/$ - see front matter ©1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: SO 169-5150(99)00028-6 
 
 242 
 
 M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 The limited success of these efforts highlights 
 the need to develop a better understanding of conditions which encourage the adoption of (protecting something from harm) practices. Such factors could be farmer-specific, 
 farm-specific, or technology-specific. Farmer-specific 
 factors include the goals of the farmer and the useful thing/valuable supply base. At a wider level, the (related to how much money and power people have) 
 environment under which production happens decides/figures out 
 the useful thing/valuable supply base by allowing useful thing/valuable supply enlargement 
 through market participation. Farm-clearly stated/particular factors 
 are related to the biophysical (features/ qualities/ traits) of the 
 production systems such as soil (features/ qualities/ traits) and 
 climate, as well as the wider (features/ qualities/ traits) of the 
 production system. Technology-clearly stated/particular factors are 
 features of the technology available to the farmers and 
 which are designed to change  the farmers' production 
 systems. This paper focuses on the microeconomic 
 factors conditioning the adoption decision of upland 
 farmers in the Philippines. The paper starts with a 
 discussion of the wider policy and institutional conditions very important for securing/making sure of that soil conservation 
 practices are possibly money-making to farmers. This 
 idea-based discussion is followed by the presentation 
 of results based on an analysis of adoption of outline 
 hedgerows in the Philippine uplands. 
 
 2. The nature of production systems and 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something) for soil conservation 
 As soil (protecting something from harm) is an investment to improve 
 the future productive ability (to hold or do something) of the soil, a microeconomic model of investment analysis can be used 
 to study adoption behavior. A few (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of 
 such models are available in the books (McConnell, 
 1983; Clarke, 1992; LaFrance, 1992). These models 
 point to/show that the factors deciding/figuring out both the possible benefits and costs of soil (protecting something from harm) depend critically on the nature of the production systems. The 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of the production system at any point 
 in time is the result of the interaction between the farmers' tries to change it in a particular way to meet 
 their goals and (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions)al factors which decide/figure out what is (able to be done). The three major (things that decide other things) 
 of the nature of the production system are population 
 density, market access, and the agroclimatic conditions (Boserup, 1965, 1981; Pandey, 1996). A simplified construct based on population density and mar- 
 
 ket access is presented in Fig. 1. When the population 
 density is low and no outside what people want to buy exists, 
 returns to labor are (made as big as possible) by adopting an long/big land use plan, such as shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) 
 based on long unplanted periods (Type I). The farmers' 
 first (or most important) goal in this land extra situation is to 
 set apart work hard to expand the area and not necessarily 
 to improve the produce. As a result of lack of investment, 
 land quality suffers over time until the field is finally 
 rested/fallowed and the farmer moves to a new plot. 
 During the long unplanted period, the natural regeneration may restore soil working well (good or well enough) to allow 
 re-(producing crops/helping something grow) of the field. (rewards or reasons for doing something) to soil (protecting something from harm) under this situation will be (almost nothing/very little). 
 When the land edge of something/unexplored area is closed, further increases 
 in population provide (rewards or reasons for doing something) for (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) 
 of farming-based production so that (sitting a lot) farming systems change (Type II). Farmers attempt to be 
 independent by producing a range of farming-based 
 output under an income mode of production in the 
 (not being there; not being present) of markets. As the scope for increasing the 
 area is limited, the only option available is to improve the yield per unit area by using more labor and 
 other inputs for current production. Labor-intensive 
 methods of soil (protecting something from harm) are likely to be more 
 appropriate to Type II systems. Although investment 
 in soil quality is also a way of improving working well, whether or not farmers will actually do so will 
 depend on a few factors which decide/figure out money-based 
 (rewards or reasons for doing something). Where such (rewards or reasons for doing something) are missing, soil 
 worsening will continue until traveling reduces the 
 population pressure or the area itself is forgotten. 
 When population density is low but market access is 
 well-developed, (large farm with crops)-type made money from production systems are likely to come out (Type III). 
 Once-a-year or repeating food/fiber or industrial crops 
 rule depending on market conditions. On the 
 other hand, made money from production systems are 
 likely to develop when both population density and 
 market access are high (Type IV). Such production 
 systems may be (branched out/done different things) or (made to do one thing very well) depending 
 on a range of conditions. The opportunity to interact 
 with the market in these systems can influence soil 
 conservation decisions in two ways. First, to the extent that cash crops are more money-making per unit area 
 than food crops, an increase in cash crop production 
 would increase the not important value product of soil 
 and encourage the adoption of (protecting something from harm) practices. 
 
 M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Farming-based Money flow 21 ( 1999) 241-256 
 
 243 
 
 MARKET ACCESS 
 
 High 
 
 Low 
 
 Low 
 
 * Traditional 
 
 Repeating or food crop 
 
 * Survival/income 
 
 (able to last/helping the planet)? 
 
 * (able to last/helping the planet) 
 Type I 
 
 Type III 
 
 POPULATION 
 DENSITY 
 
 High 
 
 * Strengthened/got worse 
 
 * (branched out/done different things) 
 
 * Survival/income 
 
 * Food and cash crops 
 
 * (able to last/helping the planet)?? 
 
 * (able to last/helping the planet)?? 
 Type II 
 
 Type IV 
 
 Fig. 1. Effect of market access and population pressure on land use and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) (Source: Pandey, 1996). 
 
 Income from cash crops will also help relax liquidity 
 restrictions that may restrict such investments. Second, market access will also increase the opportunity cost of labor used for (protecting something from harm) investment. 
 This will make labor-intensive (protecting something from harm) practices 
 more expensive, this way encouraging a preference for 
 labor-saving methods. If such ways of doing things are not available or limited security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) restricts the planning 
 (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet), farmers may allow the land to insult/worsen. 
 
 3. (process by which something becomes stronger or worse), property rights, and soil 
 conservation 
 Extensification of land use as a means of improving 
 (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) is not an option in densely-populated areas of Asia. Land use needs to be strengthened/got worse to feed 
 the increasing population. What are the conditions 
 under which land use (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) is compatible 
 with (protecting something from harm)? 
 The effect of (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) on soil conservation 
 depends on the structure of property rights, the level 
 of development of land and capital markets, access to 
 technology and information, and developments in the 
 nonfarm part/area. Security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) is a critical (number or thing that changes) deciding/figuring out (rewards or reasons for doing something) to (protect from harm) land quality. 
 
 If property rights to land are (clearly visible/clearly understood) and (able to be backed up with punishment if a rule is broken), farmers will have (rewards or reasons for doing something) to (protect from harm) soil as 
 future benefits from soil (protecting something from harm) will build up to the 
 farmer who makes the investment. Security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 will lengthen the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet)  or lower the effective discount rate. On the other hand, if property 
 rights are (not well defined) or are (a law or rule that you can't make anyone obey), a 'mining' 
 plan based on fast (having nothing left/having no strength left) of soil life-creating ability will 
 be adopted. This kind of 'mining' plan can be watched/followed mainly in the forest margins, as well as in 
 quickly making money from areas with (not well defined) property rights (Fujisaka et al., 1986; Cruz and Repetto, 
 1992). For example, farmers who followed loggers 
 in the uplands of the Philippines grew food crops in 
 logged areas for a few years and forgotten the fields 
 later/after that. As these fields did not belong to the farmers, they had no (reward or reason for doing something) to (protect something natural/use less fuel, water, etc.) the productive 
 ability (to hold or do something) of such fields. 
 The possession of a legal title to land is not, however, necessary for securing/making sure of the security of land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 (Bromley, 1992; Place and Hazell, 1993). Scientific 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) points to/shows that farmers who do not have legal 
 titles have often invested in soil (protecting something from harm) while 
 others with legal titles have not always done so. In 
 many communities, the local land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) system provides the security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) which a legal title does 
 
 244 
 
 M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 not necessarily provide. The local land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) system 
 can in fact assign rights to own, use, and move (from one place to another) land 
 in the same way that a legal title does, but often at a 
 much lower cost due to community enforcement. In 
 fact, attempts by governments to replace the community land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) system by legal titles that are expensive 
 to enforce have often increased the (state of not being safe/source of mental worry) of land 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) in many (communities of people) (Bromley, 1992). 
 How do the property rights to land change as land 
 use is stronger? The explanation of caused invention of new things 
 points to/shows that when the land use strength is low, the 
 property rights to land tend to be non-specific and 
 usufruct (Hayarni and Ruttan, 1985; Binswanger and 
 Pingali, 1987). As the land use strength increases due 
 to population pressure and/or expanded export opportunities, property rights become more specific with 
 rights to own, use, and move (from one place to another). The natural (change over time) 
 of property rights to land from general to specific 
 rights breaks down if (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) happens at a pace 
 faster than the ability (to hold or do something) of local institutions to change to fit 
 the changes in property rights or if government policies interfere with such a natural (change over time). When (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) happens in response to fast traveling to a newly 
 opened area, the natural process of (change over time) of property rights tends to break down leading to adoption 
 of farming-based practices that are not (able to last/helping the planet) 
 (Fujisaka et al., 1986). If such areas happen to be 
 sloping uplands with highly (able to be easily worn away by rain, wind, etc.) soils, land worsening in such (communities of people) can be a extreme problem. 
 The existence of (clearly visible/clearly understood) and (able to be backed up with punishment if a rule is broken) property rights to land is a necessary but not a (good) enough 
 condition to adoption. The adoption of soil (protecting something from harm) practices is dependent on the existence of a few 
 added/more conditions. A poorly-developed land market may not (make a part of you) land quality improvements 
 in land values, this way discouraging the adoption of (protecting something from harm) practices. (in almost the same way), a poorly-developed capital market may hold back adoption by limiting money 
 available for such investments. Soil (protecting something from harm) in 
 the sloping uplands may be more effective if put into use at the (related to an area of land that drains into a river) level. Without strong community level enforcement, such efforts could be frustrated/blocked 
 by the free-rider problem. The adoption of (protecting something from harm) practices in the uplands is also tied up with 
 the macro and part/areaal policies that decide/figure out (rewards or reasons for doing something) for different land use patterns (Cruz and Repetto, 
 1992; Coxhead and Jayasuriya, 1994). Some types of 
 land use are soil eroding while others are soil conserv- 
 
 ing. For example, soil wearing away under most repeating 
 crops is (almost nothing/very little) as such crops provide a continuous 
 year-round ground cover. On the other hand, the production of once-a-year food crops tends to cause more wearing away unless healing measures are begun/tried. When 
 faced with rising population, limited off-farm employment opportunities, and limited access to markets, upland farmers may have no other choice but to strengthen 
 the production of staple food using an income mode 
 of production even though the long-run (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 is threatened. The history of upland development in 
 the Philippines, Vietnam, and Thailand highlights the 
 effect of macro and part/areaal policies on the adoption 
 of (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) practices very well. The traveling of 
 lowland population to the uplands in the Philippines 
 in the 70s and 80s has been attributed mainly to the 
 spoiled working well of rice in the lowlands, a high 
 rate of population growth and low (able to/ability to hold or take in something else) ability (to hold or do something) of the nonfarm part/area. The traveling, joined with 
 poorly defined property rights in the uplands, is carefully thought about/believed to be a major factor causing soil wearing away in 
 the uplands. Also, the (with a too-high value assigned) exchange rate 
 encouraged the production of food crops at the cost 
 of repeating export crops. (in almost the same way) in Vietnam, the 
 government policy of (related to a large area) food independence 
 until the late 80s was a major factor for the (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of area under shifting (producing crops/helping something grow) and the resulting soil wearing away. On the other hand, improved market 
 access through increased investment in (set of machines) 
 in the uplands helped (branch out into different things) the upland production systems in Thailand (Shinawatra, 1985). The (getting involved with different types of things; not sticking with only one thing) and market (combination of different things together that work as one unit) not only relaxed 
 the liquidity restrictions to investment in conservation 
 practices faced by upland farmers, but also improved 
 their food security with the coming into view of land use 
 patterns based on (serving to compare two or more things) advantage. Also, the fast growth in the nonfarm part/area helped 
 to take-off the excess population from these delicate 
 upland areas and (after that) reduced the pressure 
 for (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). 
 With the right mix of policy and institutional helping actions, there is no reason why (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) cannot 
 be (accomplished or gained) sustainably. The Machakos experience in 
 Kenya is a case in point. (even though there is the existence of) a five-fold increase 
 in population, Machakos residents were able to increase per person farming-based output through a correct 
 mix of institutional and inventionss 
 and improved linkage with the nonfarm (process of people making, selling, and buying things) 
 
 M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 (English et al., 1994). Although the Machakos experience may not be repeatable in many of the Asian 
 uplands, it highlights the importance of different policy 
 and institutional options in encouraging the adoption 
 of (able to last/helping the planet) practices. 
 
 4. Some microeconomic (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the 
 Philippines 
 4.1. Study area and sampling design 
 Claveria and Cebu are the two major places/locations in the 
 Philippines where the outline hedgerow technology 
 was actively (helped increase/showed in a good way) in the early 80s. The World 
 Neighbors, in cooperation with the Department of 
 (surrounding conditions) and Natural Useful things/valuable supplies, (helped increase/showed in a good way) a 
 range of soil (protecting something from harm) practices including outline hedgerows in Cebu in the early 80s. The soil 
 conservation technology was a part of the 
 overall technology to encourage a move/change in production 
 systems from survival/income to cash crops. Overall, the 
 outline hedgerow technology has spread around the 
 initial target area and the Cebu case is often referred to as 
 a successful example of adoption of soil conservation 
 technology (Garcia and Gerrits, 1995). 
 In 1985, the International Rice Research Institute 
 started a farming systems research program in the 
 acid uplands of Claveria, Misamis Oriental in cooperation with the Department of Farming. A outline hedgerow-based farming system was (helped increase/showed in a good way) 
 using the farmer-to-farmer extension approach based 
 on the plan of the World Neighbors in Cebu 
 (Fujisaka and Garrity, 1988). Sixty-four out of 182 
 farmers trained had established outline hedgerows by 
 the end of 1990 (Fujisaka, 1993). A later study 
 by Cenas and Pandey (1996) recorded/supported the status 
 of the outline hedgerow systems of these farmers 
 in 1995. While outline hedgerows were thought about/believed 
 ineffective and (after that) forgotten by about 
 25% of the first adopters, others changed and/or 
 maintained their hedgerow structures. 
 This study focuses on the outline hedgerow technology as a soil (protecting something from harm) practice. A sample of 130 
 farmers consisting of74 adopters and 56 non-adopters 
 was selected from Cebu and Claveria. The city of 
 Cebu provides a good market outlet for commercial 
 
 245 
 
 production from the peri-city-based  sloping areas. On the 
 other hand, the market for the products from Claveria 
 which is located in the area of control/area of land of Misamis Oriental 
 is somewhat limited to the smaller city of Cagayan de 
 Oro. The population densities in the areas of Cebu 
 and Misarnis Oriental are 574 people per km2 and 
 285 people per km2 , (match up each pair of items in order) (NCSO, 1997). The 
 study area in Cebu comes under Cebu City which has 
 a population density of 2358 people per km2 . So, 
 in terms of Fig. 1, Cebu represents an area with good 
 market access and high population density, whereas 
 Claveria represents an area with a lower population 
 density and somewhat limited market access. 
 The sampling design used to select farmers was 
 layered purposive. As the goal of the study is to 
 carry out an in-depth analysis of adoption behavior, 
 farmers were divided into two layers, namely adopters 
 and non-adopters. Adopters were defined as farmers 
 who have established outline hedgerows in at least 
 one parcel of their farms, were helping grow and maintaining their smoothly shaped parcels, and had crop production during the year before the survey year. The 
 sample consisted of 39 adopters and 21 non-adopters 
 from nine villages in Claveria and 35 adopters and 
 35 non-adopters from six villages in Cebu. In order to reduce the effect of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) differences/different versions, 
 non-adopters were selected from the same villages 
 and, where possible, were farmers with fields next to the outline hedgerow fields of the adopters. 
 Given the purposive nature of the sampling design, 
 caution should be exercised in predicting the farm 
 and farmer (features/ qualities/ traits) of the sample farmers to the 
 overall population. 
 A structured list of questions was used for the field 
 interviews. Described/explained information on production systems, input use, costs and returns, nature and extent of adoption of outline hedgerows, adoption 
 of soil (protecting something from harm) practices other than outline 
 hedgerows, and farmers' perceptions (related to/looking at/thinking about) advantages/disadvantages of outline hedgerows were 
 collected. Interviews with key informants including 
 government (people in charge), non-government organizations, 
 and other government (services businesses/government units) working at soil (protecting something from harm) were also managed and did/done. 
 The farm level data on production systems collected 
 during the survey has to do with the 1995 cropping season. 
 The basic (features/ qualities/ traits) of the production systems in 
 these two locations are summarized in Table 1. While 
 
 246 
 
 M .. A. Lapar; S. Pandey! Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 Table 1 
 General (features/ qualities/ traits) of the production systems in the study area 
 Features 
 
 Cebu 
 
 Average area per household (ha) 
 Average parcel size (ha) 
 Cropping strength (%) 
 Average slope (%) 
 Area under maize (%) 
 Area under cash crops (%) 
 Average yield of maize (kg ha-l) 
 Average gross income ($_$ household-! )a 
 
 0.7 
 150 
 32 
 54 
 14 
 902 
 1616 
 
 1.7 
 
 operating. Families of adopters also live closer to 
 the main road relative to those of non-adopters. 
 
 Claveria 
 
 3.0 
 1.2 
 190 
 24 
 84 
 5 
 1284 
 1470 
 
 auS$1=P25. 
 
 maize is the most in control/most common crop in both locations, cash 
 crops (mainly vegetables and flowers) are more a lot produced in Cebu compared to Claveria. The 
 average farm size in Claveria (3.0 ha) is much larger 
 than that in Cebu (1.7 ha). Due to the (compared to other things) larger 
 share of cash crops, the gross farm income per household in Cebu is higher than that in Claveria. 
 4.2. (features/ qualities/ traits) of adoption and adopters 
 The extent of adoption, as measured by the proportion of farm area with outline hedgerows of 
 families who have adopted the technology and the 
 proportion of farmers who have established outline 
 hedgerows in the whole farm, is higher in Cebu than 
 in Claveria (Table 2). Adoption started earlier in Cebu 
 where almost a quarter of the sample farmers have 
 adopted outline hedgerows for more than 10 years. 
 Adopters of outline hedgerows in both Cebu and 
 Claveria have a larger proportion of farm area under 
 cash crops than under survival/income crops (Table 3). 
 The adoption of outline hedgerows may have encouraged a move/change towards cash cropping 1 . The heads 
 of families that have adopted outline hedgerows 
 are younger and have more years of education. A 
 larger proportion of families that have adopted 
 outline hedgerows are members of alayon, a local 
 labor-sharing group, and have received training in soil 
 conservation for a (a) little longer period compared to 
 those of non-adopters. Also, a larger proportion 
 of adopters own at least a parcel of the land they are 
 1 If the (things causing other things to happen) runs in this direction, the opportunity cost of 
 not adopting outline hedgerows is the income from cash cropping 
 forgone. Benefit-cost analysis of (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) practice based only 
 on the difference in yield of food crops with and without outline 
 hedgerow will underestimate the money-based value. 
 
 4.3. (features/ qualities/ traits) of outline hedgerows 
 Based on the combined data for Cebu and Claveria, 
 the average height of the riser 2 is guessed to be 
 0.8 m.lt is found to be positively related to the number 
 of years of adoption. The average once-a-year increase in 
 the height of the riser is guessed at 5 em per year. 
 The average width of the hedgerows is 1.3 m and the 
 average length of hedgerows per hectare smoothly shaped is 
 1300m. 
 Natural grasses are the most important hedgerow 
 species (Table 4). Napier grass is the second most 
 commonly used species. A larger proportion of smoothly shaped parcels in Cebu are planted with Napier grass 
 compared to those in Claveria. Due to the limited 
 grazing area in Cebu, farmers think about/believe Napier grass 
 hedgerows to be valuable as food. Other hedgerow 
 species used are gliricidia (Gliricidia sepium), setaria 
 (Setaria sp.), and leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala). 
 There appears to be a movement towards natural 
 grass-based hedgerows which is agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with the 
 results of a previous study done in Claveria by Cenas 
 and Pandey (1996). While only about 8% ofthe fields 
 started out with natural grass as hedgerow species and 
 have remained that way, 35% of the fields have shifted 
 from planted species to natural grasses as hedgerow 
 species. Natural rule of grasses and high death of the planted species are the major reasons referred to 
 for a move/change towards a natural grass-based system. 
 4.4. Farmer perceptions (related to/looking at/thinking about) outline 
 hedgerows 
 More than half of the people who responded thought about/believed the 
 reduction of soil wearing away to be the major benefit from 
 outline hedgerows 3 , while 16% of the people who responded 
 pointed to/showed that hedgerows improve soil life-creating ability. Obviously, one would expect the reduction in soil wearing away 
 and improvement in soil life-creating ability to (in the end) help 
 2 A riser is the part of/amount of the land that connects the upper terrace 
 with the terrace immediately below it. For a given slope, flatter 
 terraces have higher risers. 
 3 Farmer perceptions were gotten using an open-ended interview format. 
 
 247 
 
 M.. A. Lapar; S. Pandey/Agricultural Money flow 21 ( 1999) 241-256 
 
 Table 2 
 Extent of adoption of outline hedgerows 
 
 Percent share of outline hedgerow area to total area operated by adoptersa 
 Percentage of full adoptersb 
 Partial adopters: 
 :0::50% but&amp;lt; 100%c 
 &amp;lt;50%d 
 a Average share 
 b Adopters who 
 c Adopters who 
 d Adopters who 
 
 for all adopters. Figs. in 
 have established outline 
 have established outline 
 have established outline 
 
 Cebu 
 
 Claveria 
 
 All 
 
 87(23) 
 
 69(33) 
 46 
 
 78(30) 
 54 
 
 26 
 28 
 
 27 
 
 63 
 
 29 
 9 
 
 19 
 
 parentheses are standard mistakes. 
 hedgerows on 100% of their farm. 
 hedgerows on at least half but less than all area of their farm. 
 hedgerows on less than half of their farm. 
 
 Table 3 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) of adopters and non-adopters of outline hedgerows 
 (features/ qualities/ traits) 
 
 Adopters 
 
 Non-adopters 
 
 Mean age of the household head (years) 
 Mean years of education (years) 
 Farmers with membership in alayona (%) 
 Mean length of time of training on soil (protecting something from harm) received/got (weeks) 
 Average distance of house from road (km) 
 Farmers owning at least a parcel of land (%) 
 Area under cash crop (%) 
 
 45 
 
 47 
 
 a 
 
 4 
 2 
 0.6 
 0.55 
 
 6 
 
 13 
 1.4 
 0.47 
 54 
 
 37 
 5 
 
 12 
 
 Alayon is a local organization of farmers with labor-exchange arrangements among members. 
 
 improve the yield. But yield increase ranked only third 
 among the responses ( 11%). Although there may have 
 been visible improvements in soil attributes with adoption, farmers probably did not watch/notice a very clear 
 yield gain. This points to/shows that yield gain is probably 
 not very big and is confused by other factors. If farmers do not in fact think about/believe yield gain to 
 be the major benefit, the extension message for (helping increase/showing in a good way) soil wearing away is likely to be better received if 
 surrounded by terms of other benefits that farmers can easily perceive. Other benefits referred to by the people who responded 
 were the ease of land preparation as alleys become 
 flatter (5%), hedgerow species serving as food (8%), 
 and the avoidance of physical damage to crops due to 
 gully (creation and construction/ group of objects) and landslide (4%). These other benefits, however, tend to be somewhat location specific. 
 In terms of problems with the technology, 50% of 
 the people who responded pointed to/showed no problem with the technology while 35% thought about/believed the high cost of labor 
 for establishment and maintenance to be the major 
 problem. Other problems referred to include the increased 
 labor time for land preparation (3%), destruction of 
 hedgerows by stray animals (4%), shading of crops 
 by hedgerows (2%), and the constant state of soil 
 wearing away (even though there is the existence of) the presence of hedgerows (2%). A 
 
 Table 4 
 Percent shares of parcels by type of hedgerow species 
 Species 
 
 Cebu 
 
 Claveria 
 
 All 
 
 Natural grass 
 Napier grass 
 G. sepium 
 Setaria sp. 
 L. leucocephala 
 Others- 
 
 45 
 37 
 6 
 3 
 5 
 4 
 
 47 
 19 
 9 
 9 
 
 46 
 30 
 8 
 5 
 3 
 8 
 
 16 
 
 a Includes gmelina, guinea grass, bananas, mulberry, pineapple 
 and ferns. 
 
 comparison of the (features/ qualities/ traits) of the farm, farmer, 
 and hedgerows of farmers who have no problems with 
 the technology with the (features/ qualities/ traits) of those having 
 problems show no (meaningful numbers) differences 
 (based on t-tests and chi-square tests) except for the 
 membership in alayon which is higher (21 %) among 
 farmers reporting no problem than for farmers having 
 problems (6%) 4 . An a layon is an informal group of 
 farmers in which labor exchange among members is 
 practiced under the way of thinking/basic truth/rule of exchange. As alayon 
 is a (machine/method/way) to help relax labor restrictions, differences in perception may be related, at least in part, 
 4 
 
 Significant at the 10% level. 
 
 248 
 
 M.. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Farming-based Money flow 2 I (1999) 241-256 
 
 to the extreme harshness of labor restrictions faced by different 
 families. 
 Responses from non-adopters about the reasons 
 for not adopting outline hedgerows point to/show that the 
 high labor needed things to establish and maintain the 
 hedgerows is the most commonly referred to major reason 
 (38%). Lack of technical knowledge and loss of cultivable area are carefully thought about/believed to be the major reasons for 
 non-adoption by more than 10% of the people who responded. 
 Other reasons referred to include the (problems, delays, etc.) in land 
 preparation in the presence of outline hedgerows 
 (5% ), non-ownership of the land (5% ), lack of capital 
 (2%), and the perception that soil wearing away is not a 
 problem (5%). 
 Among the factors that would encourage non-adopters 
 to adopt outline hedgerows, the need for technical help and training on the technology and the need 
 to have (good) enough labor and capital are referred to/are given a ticket by almost 
 one-third and one-fifth of the people who responded, (match up each pair of items in order). A wider choice of hedgerow species (11% ), 
 ownership of the land (5% ), and clear (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) of 
 loss of soil on their farms (5%) are the other major 
 factors that would encourage non-adopters to adopt 
 outline hedgerows. On the other hand, about 15% of 
 the people who responded feel that there is no need for them to 
 adopt outline hedgerows as they do not perceive soil 
 wearing away to be a major problem on their farms. 
 Most non-adopters think about/believe the destruction of crops and loss of seedlings and inputs to be the 
 major wearing away-related problems on their farms while 
 about 16% of the farmers think about/believe gully (creation and construction/ group of objects) to 
 be the major problem resulting from wearing away. Judging 
 from these responses, it appears that visible damage 
 to the fields and physical losses of seedlings and crops 
 are near and threatening in the farmers' minds. No farmer talked about/said the reduction of yield due to soil wearing away as a 
 major problem. 
 Most non-adopters have taken measures 
 to reduce the soil wearing away on their fields, of which 
 23% have built diversion/drainage narrow waterways, another 23% have practiced outline plowing, and about 
 16% have responded simply by using more (material that makes plants grow better). 
 Unplanteding the land and placing other physical (blocking things) are the other wearing away-reducing measures practiced 
 by 12% of the farmers. These responses point to/show that 
 farmers use other practices that may be more good 
 to the particular conditions of their fields and/or cheaper 
 to begin/try than outline hedgerows. The hint/result/effect 
 
 is that (help increase/show in a good way)rs of soil (protecting something from harm) in the uplands 
 must not view outline hedgerows as the universal solution for all farmers but only as one of the options. 
 If a wider range of methods is (helped increase/showed in a good way), farmers will 
 have the flexibility to choose practices that they think about/believe to be the most appropriate to their fields. 
 
 4.5. Factors deciding/figuring out adoption 
 
 The adoption data were carefully studied using a probit 
 model (Maddala, 1983; Greene, 1997) to identify the 
 factors deciding/figuring out the adoption of outline hedgerows 
 for soil (protecting something from harm). Some (numbers that change/things that change) are guessed to decide/figure out the farmer's decision to adopt 
 a soil (protecting something from harm) technology. These (numbers that change/things that change) are 
 classified into four categories, namely, personal factors, money-based (numbers that change/things that change), institutional factors and the 
 soil wearing away (possible power or ability within/possibility of)  the field. Descriptive statistics of these (numbers that change/things that change) and their expected effects are 
 summarized in Table 5. 
 The effect of age of the farmer on adoption decision 
 can be taken as a (thing made up of different things) of the effects of farming 
 experience and planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet). While longer farming experience as equated with older farmers is expected to have a positive effect on adoption, younger 
 farmers, on the other hand, may have longer planning 
 horizons and, because of this, may be more likely to invest in 
 conservation. The net effect on adoption, therefore, 
 could not be serious and stubborn good. Hoover and Wiitala 
 (1980) found in their study of Nebraska farmers that 
 age has a significant negative influence on adoption. 
 College levels may be connected with 
 greater information on (protecting something from harm) measures and 
 the working well results of wearing away, and higher 
 management intelligence (Ervin and Ervin, 1982; Hoover 
 and Wiitala, 1980; Feder et al., 1985). As a human 
 capital (number or thing that changes), education is also found to positively 
 affect the (wasting very little while working or producing something) of adoption of (using less of something) practices (Rahm and Huffman, 1984). Because of this adoption 
 is guessed to be positively related to the 
 farmer's education level. 
 Membership in local labor exchange groups, called 
 alayon, is suggested/said to have a positive effect on adoption. 
 The labor-exchange (machine/method/way) that is (typical and expected) 
 of these groups may help relax the labor restriction to 
 adoption. Studies in other locations in the Philippines 
 have found membership in alayon to be positively cor- 
 
 M .. A. Lapm; S. Pandey/Agricultural Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 249 
 
 Table 5 
 Sample mean values of the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) used in the probit model and their expected effects on adoption 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Cebu 
 
 Claveria 
 
 Effect 
 
 Age of household head 
 Education (years) 
 Land/labor ratio 
 Slope (percent) 
 Distance from the road (km) 
 Nonfarm incomea 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment)b 
 Memberc 
 
 48.2 (13.5)d 
 4.4 (2.7) 
 0.1 (0.1) 
 31.3 (11.5) 
 0.2 (0.4) 
 48.8 (35.2) 
 30 
 12 
 
 46.5 (11.0) 
 7.1 (3.4) 
 0.2 (0.2) 
 21.9 (13.3) 
 0.8 (1.0) 
 35.3 (33.4) 
 52 
 3 
 
 +, + 
 -,+ 
 + 
 +,+ 
 + 
 
 a Percent share of nonfarm income to total household income. 
 b Percent share of owned parcels. 
 c Percent share of parcels helped grow by alayon members. 
 d Figs. in parentheses are standard mistakes. 
 
 related with the adoption of soil (protecting something from harm) (Sajise 
 and Ganapin, 1991; Gabunada and Barker, 1995) 5 . 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) status affects investments in soil (protecting something from harm) by changing the planning (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet). As discussed 
 earlier, security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) can be expected to be positively related to adoption. Our interview with farmers points to/shows, however, that ownership is not always 
 a necessary condition for having security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 that would lead to investment in outline hedgerows 
 in the Philippines. For example, in Cebu, almost 72% 
 of the fields with outline hedgerows is rented while 
 only 28% is owned. More than that, most of the adopters 
 of hedgerows in Cebu have showed that their rented 
 fields belong to a close relative. This hints that the 
 exchange involved in relationship ties may encourage the 
 farmers to treat the rented field as their own. Recent 
 (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) from the Philippines shows that the behavior of share-croppers with a relationship relation with their 
 (managers of apartment buildings) is not affected by the bad thing effects 
 of product and factor sharing (Sadoulet et al., 1997). 
 Such relationship relations may also (in almost the same way) influence investment decisions. 
 Land/labor ratio, measured as the ratio of the area 
 operated to the number of family members engaged 
 5 Alayon groups may be strengthened and activated in the big picture  of a clearly stated/particular project. To the extent that farmers get the 
 alayon membership after deciding to adopt outline hedgerows, 
 the (when one thing definitely causes another) may be reversed. Our survey data do not permit an 
 test of the extent to which this may have happened in the 
 study area. Anyway, studies in other places/locations in the Philippines 
 (Sajise and Ganapin, 1991; Gabunada and Barker, 1995) show 
 that alayons were pre-existing at the time of adoption of outline 
 hedgerows. 
 
 in farming on a full-time basis, is used as an indicator of people/of the group pressure. Families with 
 lower land/labor ratio may have (rewards or reasons for doing something) to invest in 
 soil (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) for crop (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). On the other 
 hand, the possible loss of land to outline hedgerows 
 may discourage adoption. It has been found that outline hedgerows occupy nearly 20% of the land (Cenas 
 and Pandey, 1996) resulting in reduced cropping area. 
 For families with more land per unit of labor, this 
 possible loss of land and the later reduction in 
 cropping area may be less of a restriction relative to 
 those with little land. Because of this, families with higher 
 land/labor ratio may be more likely to adopt outline 
 hedgerows. The effect of land/labor ratio on adoption 
 is, therefore, unknown good. 
 The distance of the home to the nearest road, 
 as a substitute for market access, may take by force/take control of the effect 
 of a few (numbers that change/things that change). Access to markets provides the 
 farmer with opportunities for income-earning activities. So, there is more (reward or reason for doing something) for the farmer to 
 secure/make sure of that farm working well is improved or at least 
 maintained in order to take advantage of market opportunities. Farmers who can possibly create good 
 returns from the production and sale of crops that are 
 highly demanded in the market may therefore find soil 
 conservation (money-based)/cheaply attractive (Clarke, 1992). 
 A few farmers talked about/said during the interviews that 
 soil (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) is important for (understanding/making real/achieving) high levels 
 of (money made/good things received) from cash cropping. In addition to this effect, 
 farmers who live closer to the road are more likely 
 to be visited by extension agents than the ones who 
 are located far away. The cost of (using/getting to) technical 
 knowledge and information will be lower for farmers 
 
 250 
 
 M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/Agricultural Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 Table 6 
 Guessed coefficientsa of tbe probit model and the not important chances of the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 Constant 
 Age of household head 
 Education (years) 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) (dummy)b 
 Member (dummy)c 
 Landllabor ratio 
 Slope (percent) 
 Nonfarm income 
 Distance from tbe road 
 -2Log Chance ratio 
 Chance of adoption 
 
 Cebu coefficient 
 -1.78*** 
 0.007 
 0.17*** 
 -0.31 
 0.84** 
 0.10 
 0.02** 
 0.005 
 -0.94** 
 192.54*** 
 0.51 
 
 Not important chances (%) 
 0.3 
 6.7 
 -12.4 
 33.5 
 4.0 
 0.8 
 0.2 
 -37.3 
 
 Claveria coefficient 
 0.52 
 -0.03** 
 -0.03 
 1.02*** 
 0.34 
 -0.94 
 0.05*** 
 -0.005 
 -0.10 
 165.51*** 
 0.46 
 
 Not important chances (%) 
 -1.2 
 -1.2 
 40.2 
 13.4 
 -37.1 
 2.0 
 -0.2 
 -3.9 
 
 a ***Significant at 1%; **Significant at 5%; *Significant at 10%. 
 b 1 for owner, 0 otherwise. 
 c 1 for alayon member, 0 otherwise. 
 
 living close to the road. The expected effect of this 
 (number or thing that changes) is, therefore, positive. 
 To the extent that liquidity is a restriction to adoption, nonfarm income will have a positive effect on 
 adoption by relaxing this restriction. The level of nonfarm income, however, may not be (coming from the outside of something) but be 
 affected by the money-making ability of the farming operation 
 that in tum depends on (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) decisions. So, 
 adoption of (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) practices and the level of 
 nonfarm income may be decided/figured out (at the same time). 
 The (happening at the same time) rises due to the labor portion decisions of the families into farm and nonfarm activities. The nonfarm income of the families surveyed 
 is, however, mostly came/coming from payments of family members working across the ocean, from nonfarm business 
 activities, and from employment in the nonfarm part/area. As skill needed things for these jobs are likely to be 
 different from that for farming, the farm and nonfarm 
 employment may be thought about/believed as non-competitive 
 activities. In this situation, the level of non-farm income would be mostly (coming from the outside of something) to the adoption decision. 
 Slope of the field is the only indicator used as a 
 substitute for the wearing away (possible greatness or power). Although the wearing away potential depends on rainfall pattern, soil physical (features/ qualities/ traits) and slope in a complex way, 
 the nature of the data collected does not permit 
 including factors other than slope. Also, rainfall patterns and soil physical (features/ qualities/ traits) may not change/differ  much from field to field within a 
 location. 
 
 The results of the probit analysis are presented in 
 Table 6. Two separate probit equations were guessed 
 for each site after an F-test for the null guess of 
 no (related to what holds something together and makes it strong) differences between the data from Cebu 
 and Claveria turned out significant. A test of multicollinearity among the (things that you control (like study times), that cause other things to change (like test scores)) did not 
 point to/show collinear relationships among the (numbers that change/things that change) to 
 be a problem. The condition number (Belsley et al., 
 1980) was used to decide/figure out the presence of multicollinearity. 
 Adoption in Claveria is found to be significantly 
 influenced by the age of the household head, ownership of the land, and slope. The results suggest that a 
 farmer who is younger, owns the farm, and operates 
 a field with steeper slope is more likely to adopt the 
 outline hedgerow technology. The chance of adoption in Claveria is guessed at 46% on average. For 
 Cebu, adoption is significantly influenced by the level 
 of education, membership in alayon, slope, and market access. The effect of all these (numbers that change/things that change) on adoption is positive. The chance of adoption in Cebu 
 is guessed at 51% on average. If only the significant factors in these two places/locations are carefully thought about/believed, they are 
 age of the farmer, level of education, land ownership, 
 membership in alayon, access to markets, and slope 6 . 
 
 6 Given the nature of the data collected, it is not possible to 
 explain tbe reasons for the different sets of factors tbat significantly 
 affect adoption in these two locations. A more in-depth study of 
 the differences in the production systems in these two places/locations is 
 needed to provide a acceptable answer to tbis question. 
 
 M.. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 
 251 
 
 Table 7 
 Average labor mandays per hectare for construction and maintenance of outline hedgerows, by type of hedgerows 
 Natural (like a vegetable) 
 
 Planted species- 
 
 All 
 
 Construction 
 A-frame construction 
 Layouting 
 Plowing 
 Shoveling 
 Dragging/carrying of planting materials 
 Seeding/planting 
 
 12.4 (13.9)b 
 0.0 
 1.6 
 10.1 
 0.7 
 
 55.1 (63.7) 
 0.5 
 9.5 
 8.1 
 22.5 
 5.3 
 9.2 
 
 48.9 (58.9) 
 
 Maintenance 
 (material that makes plants grow better) application 
 Trimming and weeding 
 Replanting 
 Gully repair 
 
 13.2 (13.9) 
 
 13.5 (13.8) 
 0.1 
 10.7 
 0.9 
 1.8 
 
 13.5 (13.7) 
 
 13.1 
 0.1 
 
 a Includes (containing peas, beans, lentils, etc.) species, search grasses and repeating species. 
 Figures in parentheses are standard mistakes. 
 
 b 
 
 The effect of land ownership turned out to be significant in Claveria but not in Cebu. The difference in 
 the importance of ownership in deciding/figuring out adoption 
 behavior in these two places/locations points to/shows that ownership is 
 not a good substitute for security of (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) in the uplands 
 of the Philippines. There are other factors such as the 
 customer/financial supporter-client relationship between the (person or business who occupies a house, office, etc.) and (manager of an apartment building) and relationship relations that may provide security of 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) even if the land is not owned. Obviously, these 
 conditioning social factors change/differ  from location to location. (in almost the same way), the different sets of significant (numbers that change/things that change), except for the field slope, in these two locations 
 also makes it hard to generalize the results across 
 locations. This can make the job  of designing policy and institutional helping actions much harder 
 since a blanket approach would not be appropriate. A 
 multi-site (serving to compare two or more things) study backed up by a described/explained 
 description of the production systems in each site 
 may be needed to identify the (middle-position) conditioning factors that create (quality of changing over time or at different places) in responses. 
 4.6. Returns to adoption 
 Data problems attacked a truly energetic cost-benefit 
 analysis of investment in outline hedgerows. Two 
 major relationships are needed/demanded. The first is the 
 relationship between wearing away (or soil depth) and working well. The second is the relationship between (protecting something from harm) measure and soil wearing away. The time path of 
 land working well with wearing away control measure can be 
 (described the future) by combining these two relationships. Con- 
 
 siderable investments in research efforts have been 
 made to understand the nature of these relationships, 
 as well as to develop (testing out) models to (describe the future) the 
 effect of soil (protecting something from harm) practices on working well. 
 Although a few models with different degrees of 
 sophistication are now available (Young and Muraya, 
 1990; McCown et al., 1995), the professional is held back by the fact that the adjustment and validation 
 of these models often require (large/relatively large) data and, 
 sometimes, the redoing/redesigning of some of the relationships. 
 Given the (problems, delays, etc.) talked about/said above, a somewhat 
 simpler approach of depending on sensitivity analysis to 
 highlight the major factors that decide/figure out the money-making ability of investment in soil wearing away control is begun/tried instead of conducting a real cost-benefit 
 analysis. Time-related patterns of changes in yield from 
 fields with and without outline hedgerows are ignored 
 in this approach and, instead, yield is assumed to remain constant over time at their (pertaining to each person or thing) levels in 
 both situations. The average cost of beginning and building on outline hedgerows (49 mandays), the average once-a-year cost 
 of maintenance (14 mandays), and the (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else) 
 area lost to hedgerows (20%) are received/got from the 
 survey data (Table 7). The percentage increase in yield 
 of maize needed/demanded to recover these costs at different discount rates are calculated assuming the life of outline 
 hedgerows to be 10 years 7 . As adoption of outline 
 7 Outline hedgerows help in the (creation and construction/ group of objects) of flatter alleys that 
 could be maintained at a (compared to other things) low cost almost forever. 
 The assumed life of 10 years provides a somewhat (probably a little low) 
 guess of the benefits of outline hedgerows. 
 
 M .. A. Lapar, S. Pandey I Farming-based Money flow 21 ( 1999) 241-256 
 
 252 
 
 \ 
 
 .&#126;14 
 
 "'E 
 
 '012 
 
 Cropping Strength- 1 
 
 -e-- Discount rate 0.4 
 
 -+- Discount rate 0.2 
 
 "'"&amp;gt;.10 
 a; 
 
 Cropping strength= 2 
 
 .,c 
 
 -.- Discount rate 0.4 
 
 &#126; 80 
 
 """.,"' 
 .ii 
 
 -+- Discount rate 0.2 
 
 60 
 
 ·=&#126; 40 
 !!! 
 
 -&#126; 20 
 #- 
 
 0 
 0 
 
 200 
 
 400 
 
 600 
 
 800 
 
 1000 
 
 1200 
 
 1400 
 
 1600 
 
 Yield of maize (kg ha"1) 
 without outline hedgerows 
 
 Fig. 2. Percentage increase in yield of maize needed for investment in outline hedgerows to break-even at different discount rates and 
 cropping strength. 
 
 hedgerows may encourage (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) of production, two levels of cropping strength are also thought about/believed, namely, single cropping (cropping strength= 1) 
 and double cropping (cropping strength= 2) 8 . 
 The results presented in Fig. 2 point to/show that the 
 breakeven increase in percentage yield declines 
 quickly with the increase in base yield in the case of 
 no (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.). In very poor (surrounding conditions) where the 
 maize yield is only 200 kg/ha, the breakeven increase 
 in yield needed/demanded is as high as 160% under a 40% 
 discount rate and single cropping picture/situation. On the 
 other hand, the needed/demanded yield increase is only 26% 
 under the most good picture/situation of maize yield of 
 1.6 tlha, a 20% discount rate, and double cropping idea (you think is true). These results highlight a weird statement. A much 
 higher increase in working well is needed to convince 
 farmers to put into use (protecting something from harm) practices in (compared to other things) 
 (producing or giving very little)ing (or more insulted/got worse) (surrounding conditions) where 
 investment in soil (protecting something from harm) may be most needed 
 to prevent further wearing away. In contrast, yield gains 
 needed/demanded are much lower in (compared to other things) high-cooperating with/producing/giving up 
 (or less insulted/got worse) (surrounding conditions) where the need to 
 conserve soils may not be so seen/obvious. These suggest that farming-based (people who work to find information) face a much tougher 
 8 Although we have assumed that outline hedgerows may lead to 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) through more frequent cropping, changes in farming 
 practices (such as the use of more input) may be the source of 
 added/more (money made/good things received) while the cropping strength remains constant. 
 The result of the breakeven analysis is independent of the 
 (machine/method/way) through which added/more (money made/good things received) are created. 
 
 challenge in making investment in soil conservation 
 (money-based)/cheaply attractive to farmers in areas with low 
 initial working well. It may be hard to permit soil 
 conservation in these insulted/got worse not important areas on the 
 basis of on-site benefits alone. On the other hand, 
 even if the on-site benefits are low, off-site effects 
 may be large enough to permit a publicly-helped 
 conservation program in these low working well (surrounding conditions). Further research on the off-site benefits 
 from soil (protecting something from harm) is needed to deal with this issue 
 which is beyond the extent of/the range of the present analysis. 
 The breakeven increase in yield is lower if the adoption of outline hedgerows (after that) encourages 
 cropping (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) (or helps create more income by encouraging farmers to switch to high-value 
 crops). In areas with more good (related to the Earth's weather) conditions, an improvement in market access may, this way, (help increase/show in a good way) adoption by helping crop (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) or 
 a switch to cash cropping. Yield-increasing technologies may also (in almost the same way) help develop adoption. 
 Why do farmers need such a large increase in yield, 
 especially in areas with lower initial working well? Is 
 investment in outline hedgerows too expensive? Which 
 of the three parts/pieces of cost matters the most? 
 To answer these questions, the above analyses are repeated for different pictures/situations of cost reduction. The 
 base values assumed are maize yield of 400 kg/ha, a 
 20% discount rate, and single cropping. The analysis 
 is done by changing one of the cost parts/pieces at a 
 time while keeping the other two fixed at their base 
 
 253 
 
 M.. A. Lapar, S. Pandey/ Farming-based Money flow 21 (1999) 241-256 
 :! 
 ·; 
 
 75 
 &mdash;--_: Loss of area to hedgerows 
 
 &#126; 70 
 
 -+- Establishment cost 
 
 0 
 
 "0 
 
 &#126;65 
 c 
 
 -.- Maintenance cost 
 
 . 
 
 &#126; 60 
 &#126; 
 
 ..0 
 
 ·&#126; 55 
 
 .. 
 
 &#126; 
 
 .&#126;50 
 "it. 
 45 
 40 
 0 
 
 10 
 
 20 
 
 30 
 
 40 
 
 50 
 
 60 
 
 70 
 
 80 
 
 90 
 
 100 
 
 % reduction in cost of hedgerow 
 
 Fig. 3. Percentage increase in yield of maize needed for investment in con<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
