AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 www.elsevier.com/locate/agecon 
 
 Valuing (underground water that supplies wells) recharge through farming-based production in the 
 Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water) in northern Nigeria 
 Gayatri Acharyaa·*, Edward B. Barbierb 
 " (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) Money-flow expert, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, Washington DC 20433, USA 
 b Reader, (surrounding conditions) Department, University of York, Heslington, York Y01, 5DD, UK 
 Received 5 May 1998; received in changed form 10 November 1999; accepted 24 November 1999 
 
 Abstract 
 
 This study applies a production function approach to value the (underground water that supplies wells) recharge function of the Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water) 
 in northern Nigeria. The (underground water that supplies wells) recharge function supports dry season farming-based production which is dependent on 
 (underground water that supplies wells) idea for crop-watering/rinsing with water. Using survey data this paper first carries out an money-based (putting a value on something) of farming-based 
 production, per hectare of watered land. We then value the recharge function as an (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) input into the dry season 
 farming-based production and get appropriate welfare change measures. Welfare change is calculated using the guessed 
 production functions and possible changes in (underground water that supplies wells) recharge and because of this, (underground water that supplies wells) levels. By focusing on 
 farming-based production dependent only on (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies from the shallow underground water, this study establishes that the 
 (underground water that supplies wells) recharge function of the (lands with a layer of water) is of significant importance for the floodplain. © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. 
 All rights reserved. 
 JEL classification: QlO; Q25 
 Keywords: Production function approach; (putting a value on something); (lands with a layer of water); (underground water that supplies wells) recharge; Community function 
 
 1. Introduction 
 The Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water) in northern Nigeria are 
 formed by the floodwaters of the area's two principal rivers, the Hadejia and the Jama'are. The rivers 
 show short-lived flow patterns with periods of no 
 flow in the dry season (October-April). Almost 80% 
 of the total once-a-year runoff happens in August/September. 
 (Thompson and Hollis, 1995). During this period, (full of water) areas known as fadamas are formed and are 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-202-458-9545; 
 fax: + 1-202-676-0977. 
 E-mail address: gacharya@worldbank.org (G. Acharya) 
 
 important not only for fishing and farming-based activities, making these some of the most productive areas 
 in northern Nigeria, but also for providing recharge to 
 the hidden (under) underground waters (Hollis and Thompson, 1993). 
 Water from these underground waters is used for domestic consumption and for crop-watering/rinsing with water during the dry season. 
 Some water diversion big plans/layouts/dishonest plans have been 
 built or are planned upstream of these (lands with a layer of water). These big plans/layouts/dishonest plans will (change the normal flow or route of) floodwater away 
 from the (lands with a layer of water), reducing the once-a-year flooding 
 within the floodplain (Hollis et al., 1993). Barbier 
 et al., (1993) and Barbier and Thompson (1998) have 
 shown that the money-based value of the (lands with a layer of water) in 
 terms of floodplain farming and fishing, is signif- 
 
 0169-5150/00/$ - see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 PII: SO 169-5150(99)00054-7 
 
 248 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier I Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 icant and will be affected by the construction of new 
 dams and water diversion big plans/layouts/dishonest plans. The money-based 
 value of the opportunity costs connected with (changing to flow or route differently) this water away from the (lands with a layer of water) has not been 
 fully (understood/made real/achieved) and included into the development 
 plans for this area. Scientists have noted that an 
 important (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) function of these (lands with a layer of water) 
 is in recharging the (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies of the area 
 (DIYAM, 1987; Thompson and Hollis, 1995). 
 The aim of this paper is to partially value the 
 (underground water that supplies wells) recharge function of the (lands with a layer of water) by applying the production function approach to analysing 
 (underground water that supplies wells) use in watered farming. 1 The 
 (underground water that supplies wells) recharge function is assumed to support dry season farming-based production dependent 
 on (underground water that supplies wells) idea for crop-watering/rinsing with water. Using survey data on farming-based production in the floodplain, 
 this paper first carries out an money-based (putting a value on something) of 
 farming-based production, per hectare of watered land. 
 Following approaches (fought for/pleaded for) in the (putting a value on something) books (Ellis and Fisher, 1987; Maler, 1992; Freeman, 
 1993; Barbier, 1994), we value the recharge function 
 (through water input) as an (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) input in dry 
 season farming-based production dependent only on 
 (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies from the shallow underground water. Two 
 welfare change measures are received/made from and related to the 
 recharge function of the (land with a layer of water). Welfare change is 
 then calculated using the guessed production functions and possible changes in (underground water that supplies wells) level. 
 
 2. (underground water that supplies wells) use in watered dry season 
 farming 
 Farming in the Hadejia-Jama'are floodplain involves both dryland andfadama farming. These areas 
 are flooded during the wet season and slowly dry 
 out until they are flooded again during the next wet 
 season. Floodplain activities have changed to fit make use 
 of the floodwaters and the fadamas in an smart 
 way, taking advantage of the (land with a layer of water)'s useful things/valuable supplies for 
 grazing, farming and other money-based uses. 
 1 Throughout this paper, watered farming refers to crop-watering/rinsing with water 
 with (underground water that supplies wells) pumped up from the shallow underground water with the 
 use of small tubewells. Domestic water use within the 
 (lands with a layer of water) is also dependent on (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies, see Acharya 
 
 (1998). 
 
 Total (helped to grow) area in the floodplain is guessed 
 as 230,000ha (Barbier et al., 1993). Upland or dryland farming is rain-fed, and millet, (grass grown for food) and 
 cow-melon are (helped to grow). Fadama farming is mainly 
 rice (producing crops/helping something grow). Also, there are watered lands 
 where vegetables may be grown during the dry season. The three main types of crop-watering/rinsing with water technologies 
 used in this area are identified by Adams (1993) as 
 ditch crop-watering/rinsing with water, shadoof crop-watering/rinsing with water and pump crop-watering/rinsing with water. This study focuses on pump crop-watering/rinsing with water using water from shallow underground waters. Crop-watering/rinsing with water farming begins in 
 October, after the floods have moved back, and continues 
 up until March/April. The floodplain has experienced 
 a big rise in small-scale crop-watering/rinsing with water following the 
 introduction of small petrol powered pumps for surface water crop-watering/rinsing with water and tubewells to tap the shallow 
 underground waters under the floodplain (Kimmage and Adams, 
 1992; Kaigama and Omeje, 1994). Although the 
 extent of small scale tubewell crop-watering/rinsing with water within the 
 Hadejia-Jama'are (lands with a layer of water) is not well recorded/supported, 
 changes in water-based conditions, money-based conditions, government efforts, and in particular the 
 policies of World Bank supported Farming-based Development Programs (ADPs) have (helped increase/showed in a good way) the use of 
 small crop-watering/rinsing with water pumps through payments and/or loans 
 for tubewell drilling and pump (instance of buying something for money). DIYAM 
 (1987) hints that shallow underground waters could irrigate 
 19,000 ha within the (lands with a layer of water) through the use of these 
 small tubewells. NEAZDP (1994) hints that the 
 once-a-year increase in cropped area within the (lands with a layer of water) 
 is at least 10% and could be higher in areas where 
 water and good land is available. 
 (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) of dry season (producing crops/helping something grow) in the area has 
 resulted from the increased availability of small-scale 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water technology and higher producer prices for 
 some dry-season crops such as peppers, onions and 
 wheat. In the influence area of the Madachi fadama, 
 the increase in tubewell crop-watering/rinsing with water is clearly visible 
 in the large numbers of watered fields producing 
 off-season grains such as watered rice and wheat and 
 high value (likely to go bad in a short time)s such as tomatoes, onions and 
 pepper. The availability of pumps has also resulted in 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water of certain dry-season crops such as sweet 
 potato, to increase yields, and farmers in the area are 
 experimenting with new commercial crops such as lettuce and garlic. Availability of, and access to, (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies secures/makes sure of the farmers a more secure and 
 year-round water supply for these crops. Farming in 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 Table I 
 Main commercial crops helped grow 
 Crop 
 Grains 
 Wheat 
 Rice 
 Vegetables 
 Onions 
 Spring onions 
 Tomatoes 
 Pepper (sweet) 
 Pepper (chilli) 
 Tubers 
 Sweet potatoes 
 
 Percentage of farmers 
 surveyed growing crop (%) 
 56.7 
 42.4 
 36.4 
 15.6 
 60.6 
 27.3 
 9.1 
 12.1 
 
 this area is generally survival/income and to hedge against 
 doubt farmers practice multi-cropping and intercropping. Farmers are, therefore, mainly survival/income 
 oriented farming-based families, also producing cash 
 crops. 
 
 3. Money-based (putting a value on something) of dry season watered 
 farm-related 
 Production data on crops grown in the study area 
 are based on the results of field surveys carried out in 
 four villages in the Madachi fadama from November 
 1995-March 1996. The villages of Madachi, Ando, 
 Alaye and Maluri are believed to be representative of 
 the villages in the (lands with a layer of water), making up a range of 
 large, medium and small farmers. A total of 37 farms 
 were surveyed for crop production data. Also, 
 the whole influence area of the Madachi fadama 
 was surveyed to establish the number of operational 
 tubewells in the area and a total of 309 operational 
 tubewells were counted during this survey period 
 (HNWCP, 1996). Wheat, tomatoes and pepper are the 
 main cash crops being helped grow in the study area 
 (Table 1). Okra and eggplant (the latter is grown in 
 large amounts where there is surface crop-watering/rinsing with water) are 
 also grown but mainly for home consumption and in 
 small amounts. 
 The total area of small scale crop-watering/rinsing with water using (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies within the Madachi fadama and its 
 influence area is guessed to be around 66 krn2 , or ap- 
 
 249 
 
 close/nearestly 6600 ha. 2 The value of the output from 
 the farms surveyed as shown in Table 2. (money-related) 
 prices for the outputs are guessed from market surveys managed and did/done between December 1995 and May 
 1996 and from survey findings of farmgate prices received by farmers. Outputs are based on harvest figures reported in sacks or bundles by farmers and converted to weight measures, based on results from the 
 market survey. 
 The per hectare value for watered farming in 
 the Madachi area is 36,308 Naira or US$_$ 412.5 per 
 hectare. The money-based value of dry season watered 
 farming from the Madachi fadama influence area 
 (6600 ha) is guessed as 2.39x 108 Naira or US$_$ 
 2,723,077. 3 
 
 4. The production function approach and 
 crop-water relationships 
 This section develops the hidden (under) general welfare guess explanation based on the production function approach (see Maler, 1992; Freeman, 1993; 
 Barbier, 1994). The clearly stated/particular production functions for 
 wheat and vegetables based on the production and 
 input data collected by the survey are guessed in 
 Section 5. Based on this analysis and the production 
 functions, welfare guesses related to a change in 
 water input are calculated in Section 6. 
 4.1. Productionfunction approach 
 
 We begin by assuming that farmers produce 1= 1, 
 ... , n crops, watered by (underground water that supplies wells). Let Yi be the 
 group output of the ith rop produced by the farmers. The production of Yi needs/demands a water input Wi, 
 2 This figure is based on Thompson and Goes (1997) which states 
 that the influence area of the Madachi fadama may be guessed 
 as 136km2 , assuming a minimum of 1 km radius of influence. 
 The largest extent of the actual swamp area has been guessed as 
 78 km 2 and we guess an area of 66 km 2 as being serviced by the 
 recharge from the fadama and as being available for farming-based 
 activities. 
 3 Money-based prices for the grains are calculated from World Bank 
 data on valuable thing prices. For non-tradables (i.e. vegetables and 
 tubers), the standard (changing from one form, state, or state of mind to another) factor is about I and no 
 added/more (change to make better/related to changing something) is carefully thought about/believed necessary since most of the 
 (process of people making, selling, and buying things) uses the (where people buy and sell stolen things) rate of N88 to US$_$ I for its 
 transactions and faces no foreign exchange higher cost. 
 
 G. Acharya, E.B. Barbier/Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 250 
 
 Table 2 
 Money-based (putting a value on something) of watered farming for survey villages (area: 20.23 ha)- 
 Crop 
 
 Output 
 (kg) 
 
 (money-related) 
 price (per kg) 
 
 Money-based 
 price (per kg) 
 
 (money-related) 
 benefits (N) 
 
 Money-based 
 benefits (N) 
 
 Wheat 
 Rice 
 Tomatoes 
 Onions 
 Spring onions 
 Sweet pepper 
 Chilli pepper 
 Sweet potatoes 
 Total 
 Money-based benefits per ha (Niha) 
 Gross Money-based benefits per ha (N/ha) 
 Costs of inputs (N/ha) 
 Net Money-based Benefits per ha (N/ha) 
 
 57,250.00 
 29,070.00 
 11,030.25 
 21,336.00 
 3,280.00 
 2,607.00 
 1,423.75 
 1,400.00 
 127,397.00 
 
 22.00 
 12.50 
 25.60 
 4.80 
 6.25 
 50.10 
 22.00 
 5.10 
 
 6.86 
 12.3 
 25.60 
 4.80 
 6.25 
 50.10 
 22.00 
 5.10 
 
 1,259,500 
 363,375 
 282,374 
 102,413 
 20,500 
 130,611 
 31,323 
 7,140 
 2,197,235.40 
 
 392,964 
 357,561 
 282,374 
 102,413 
 20,500 
 130,611 
 31,323 
 7,140 
 1,324,886 
 108,612.7. 
 65,491.15 
 29,183.38 
 36,307.7 
 
 - Exchange rate N88=$1. 
 
 (thought about (or related to) ideas and possibilities) through shallow tubewells, and}=l, ... , J 
 of other (number or thing that changes) inputs (e.g. fertilisers, seed, labour), 
 which we represent as x;, ... , XJ or in vector form as X J. 
 Because of the relationship between recharge and the 
 level of water in the underground water, we also assume that the 
 amount of water available to the farmer for idea 
 is dependent on the (underground water that supplies wells) level, R. The group production function for crop i can be expressed 
 as: 
 Yi = y;(x; 1 
 
 &mdash;_: 
 
 x;j, W;(R)) 
 
 foralli 
 
 (1) 
 
 curve (3), less the cost of the inputs used in production 4 : 
 S; = S; (x; 1 , 
 
 = 
 
 &mdash;_: 
 
 x;,, W; (R); cw(R)) 
 
 foYI P;(u)du- CxXJ-Cw(R)W; 
 
 foralli, j 
 
 To (make as big as possible) (4) we find the best values of input 
 and water input W; through setting the following 
 first order conditions to zero: 
 
 x; 1 
 
 (5) 
 
 and the connected costs of producing y; are: 
 C; =CxXJ +cw(R)W; 
 
 foralli 
 
 (4) 
 
 (2) 
 
 where C; is the minimum costs connected with producing Yi during a single growing season, Cw is the 
 cost of pumping water and C x is a vector of Cx; ... ex, 
 strictly positive, input prices connected with the changeable inputs x; 1 &mdash;_: x; 1 . Note that we assume cw is an 
 increasing function of the (underground water that supplies wells) level, R, to 
 allow for the possibility of increased pumping costs 
 from greater depths, (in other words) c'w &amp;gt; 0, c"w &amp;gt; 0. We first 
 assume that there exists an inverse demand curve for 
 the group crop output, Yi: 
 (3) 
 
 where P; is the market price for Yi, and all other 
 marketed input prices are assumed constant. 
 Representing S; as the social welfare arising from producing Yi, S; is measured as the area under the demand 
 
 as; 
 
 yes; 
 
 aw; = P;(y;) aw; - cw(R) = 
 
 o 
 
 for all i 
 
 (6) 
 
 Eqs. (5) and (6) are the standard bestity conditions 
 pointing to/showing that the socially (producing a lot with very little waste) level of input use 
 happens where the value of the not important product of each 
 input equals its price. If each farmer is a price-taker, 
 then this welfare best is also the competitive balance. We assume that this is the case. 
 4 We assume here that the demand function in (3) is paid/made up for, 
 so that personal welfare can be measured by the appropriate areas. 
 Welfare change is the sum of the person and producer extra 
 measures. However, if the production units are small relative to the 
 market for the final output, and they are mostly price-takers, it 
 can be assumed that product and changeable input prices will remain 
 fixed after a change in (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions)al useful thing/valuable supply, W. In this 
 case the benefits of a change in W will build up to the producers 
 (Freeman, 1993). 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 The first order conditions in (5) and (6) can be 
 used to define best input demand functions for 
 all other inputs as x;J * = Xi 1 * (cx 1 , Cw(R), R) and 
 for water as Wt = Wt(cx 1 , Cw(R), R). In turn, the 
 best production and welfare functions are defined as y( = Yt(x(, ... , xj, Wj(R)) and s; = 
 
 251 
 
 farmers yields the welfare effects of a no-not important 
 change in (underground water that supplies wells) levels on the group output 
 of crop i. 
 
 s;cx0' ... 'x;J' WJ(R); Cw(R)). 5 
 From the above relationships, we are interested 
 in solving clearly for the effects on social welfare of a change in (underground water that supplies wells) levels, R, due to a 
 fall in recharge rates. Assuming that all other inputs 
 are held constant at their best levels, and that all 
 input and output prices (with the exception of cw) 
 are unchanged, it follows from the envelope true idea 
 that: 
 dS; _ 
 
 dR- 
 
 (P· 
 
 * ayi _ c ) (awi acw 
 aW;) 
 ,(y;)awi 
 w 
 acwaR+aR 
 
 - W;* ( 
 
 &#126;c;) 
 
 (7) 
 
 The net welfare change is, therefore, the effect of 
 a change in (underground water that supplies wells) levels on the value of the 
 not important product of water in production, less the per 
 unit cost of a change in water input. The not important 
 change in pumping costs also affects the total costs of 
 water pumped (W;*(acw/aR)). The effect of a change 
 in water input due to a change in (underground water that supplies wells) levels 
 happens both directly (aW jaR) and indirectly through 
 the not important effect of a change in pumping costs on 
 water input ((aW;jacw)(acwfaR)). As long as per 
 unit pumping costs are not (way too much) high, one 
 would expect an increase in (underground water that supplies wells) levels (to a 
 point) to lead to a welfare benefit, or at least to maintain the first welfare levels, whereas a decrease in 
 (underground water that supplies wells) levels would result in a welfare loss, 
 either due to increased pumping costs and/or change 
 in working well. 
 If we now assume that all farmers face the same 
 production and cost relationships (I) and (2) for each 
 crop i and are price takers, then it is possible to get 
 the group welfare effects of a non-not important change 
 in (underground water that supplies wells) levels. Let there be 1, ... , k farmers 
 producing Yik output of crop i and using w;k water 
 inputs. It follows that by (combining different things together so they work as one unit) (7) over Ro (old 
 level) to R1 (new level) and collecting across all K 
 5 
 
 Asterisks represent well chosen amounts. 
 
 Putting into use the above welfare measure in (8) needs/demands knowledge of the production function for each 
 crop, as well as how the balance output and inputs change with R. Or, we could measure 
 the group welfare effects directly from changes 
 in social welfare, S;, in Eq. (4) above. This would 
 suggest: 
 f:!..S; = (SR 1 ) - (SR 0 ) = 
 
 laYt P;(yt)dy 
 
 -CxXj- Cw(Rl)Wj(Rl) 
 -CxXj+cw(R)Wj(Ro) 
 
 laYl P;(yt}dy 
 foralli,j 
 
 (9) 
 
 where Your  is the first output level and Yl is the final 
 output level. To use (9) as a welfare measure we would 
 also need to guess production functions for each 
 crop and calculate best levels of inputs and outputs. We return to these welfare measures in Section 
 6 where, using the information from guessed production functions, we use both measures to calculate 
 welfare change for our sample of wheat and vegetable 
 farmers. 
 4.2. Crop-watering/rinsing with water inputs and crop yields 
 Testing the importance of (underground water that supplies wells) recharge 
 for the maintenance of (underground water that supplies wells) at levels good 
 for watered farming needs/demands that we know that (i) 
 the water-yield relationships influencing the crops and 
 (ii) the (related to computers and science) ability of the pumps to pump water. The extent to which crop yields will be affected by 
 changes in water use will depend on a number 
 of factors including, the stage of crop development affected by reduced or no availability of crop-watering/rinsing with water water; the sensitivity of the crop to ups and downs in water 
 
 252 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 availability; (related to the Earth's weather) factors such as (change from a liquid to a gas) rates; 
 soil factors, including soil type and soil moisture and 
 the length of the growing period. Fig. 1 below shows 
 seasonal crop response to variable water input showing zones of increasing returns (0, W), reducing 
 returns (Wr,Wz) and negative returns (&amp;gt;Wz). 
 Different functional forms have been used in the books to describe production technologies using data 
 from field experiments and from watched/followed farm data. 
 The simplest conception of crop response to water 
 application is the linear response and is most likely 
 when the range of application of the changeable inputs is 
 small. Log-linear relationships using Cobb-Douglas 
 production functions have also been used to guess 
 crop-water relationships, although a maximum product is not defined by the Cobb-Douglas and as a result, a decreasing total product (e.g. at high levels 
 of water application) is not possible. A polynomial 
 function such as a quadratic or Gompertz function 
 would allow guess of the effect of increasing input levels and reducing not important returns, as would 
 a Cobb-Douglas translog function, especially when 
 a wider range of inputs are carefully thought about/believed (Hexem and 
 Intelligent, 1978; Carruthers and Clark, 1981). 6 The 
 survey data used here contains information on actual amounts and market prices of inputs used and 
 yields. It therefore reflects optimisation behaviour on 
 the part of the farmers and is more than a physical 
 relationship between the inputs it reflects money-based 
 
 j" 
 Seasonal water input 
 
 Fig. I. Crop-water relationships (changed from Carruthers and 
 Clark, 1981). 
 
 Cw =f(R) 
 
 Cz 
 
 &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;- 
 
 R 
 
 Fig. 2. Water pumping costs as a function of water table depth. 
 6 Crop-input functions such as Mitscherlich-Spillman functions 
 are often used to guess effects of changes in water input, 
 given that the use of all other inputs remain constant. 
 These functional forms exactly follow the von Liebig law of the minimum 
 which defends/expresses that there may be non-substitution between some 
 (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) and a yield (flat land/stop getting better (or worse)). Mitscherlich proposed an huge 
 functional form specified as: 
 
 y; = m(l - ke-fl 2;) 
 where y; is the watched/followed produce and a; is the growth factor of the 
 crop. m is defined as the asymptotic yield (flat land/stop getting better (or worse)). The Von Liebig 
 function assumes that output increases linearly in the input up 
 to some highest value. These functional forms have been used with 
 experimental data to study the input-crop production relationship. 
 Experimental data would need to be created to find the maximum 
 for each input. Produce and output data created by these (related to scientific farming) 
 experiments do not, however, reflect optimising behaviour and we 
 use market created and farm data for the production function 
 guess. 
 
 decisions also. Hence, production functions for the 
 crops are guessed using the survey data. 7 
 Before guessing production functions and welfare 
 changes we also think about/believe the (related to computers and science) relationship between (underground water that supplies wells) levels and tubewells. A typical tubewell consists of a length of pipe pump casing 
 sunk into the ground below the deepest depth to the 
 water table. This deepest depth should be such that 
 during pumping, the aquifer's water level does not fall 
 below the pipe's reach. If the rate of withdrawal from 
 7 Cost functions are not guessed, although the book-related fighters (for something) the guess of cost function instead of production function 
 whenever possible. The cost data in this case is less reliable than 
 the physical data since some or all of the inputs are (bought) at 
 helping payment prices, market prices or (where people buy and sell stolen things) prices. 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 253 
 
 W (water inputs) 
 
 X (other inputs) 
 
 Fig. 3. Effect of a non-not important change in water table depth on the production possibilities edge of something/unexplored area. 
 
 the underground water goes beyond the recharge, and (underground water that supplies wells) levels do not recover to the original base level, the use of 
 the shallow tubewell will need to be left alone. 8 
 For the purpose of this study, there are two possible 
 effects of a fall in (underground water that supplies wells) levels: 
 (i) as (underground water that supplies wells) falls below a certain level, the 
 costs of pumping water are likely to rise, and 
 (ii) if (underground water that supplies wells) levels fall below the maximum 
 depth of the sunken tubewells, the farmer will stop 
 pumping for the rest of the dry season and farming-based production will fall. 
 Fig. 2 describes the effect of changing (underground water that supplies wells) levels on the not important costs of pumping water and 
 Fig. 3 shows the effect of changing (underground water that supplies wells) levels on the farmer's production possibilities edge of something/unexplored area. 
 Water inputs are represented by W and other inputs by X, 
 while R represents (underground water that supplies wells) levels. 
 The tubewells in the study area are sunk to depths 
 of about 9 m. This hints that the (underground water that supplies wells) table would have to fall to a level greater than 9 m 
 (Rs in Fig. 2) before pumping abilities fall to zero, 
 (in other words) for case (ii) to happen. If this happens, and assuming that all other inputs are held constant, the farmer 
 (usually/ in a common and regular way) producing at Point A (Wo,Xo) is forced to 
 operate at Point B, defined by (W,,Xo) in Fig. 3. The 
 
 farmer's production possibilities edge of something/unexplored area (PPF) moves 
 in because of a fall in depth beyond 9 m. He cannot 
 maintain his original level of utility and move to Point 
 C at (W1 ,x,) because this point lies outside the production possibilities edge of something/unexplored area (since the farmer cannot 
 change input decisions during the season). The farmer 
 will, therefore, operate at Point B and produce a lower 
 output, or not produce at all. 9 At Rs, the (instance where things are uneven and interrupted) that sets in due to (related to computers and science) limits, in 
 effect drives the cost of pumping water to infinity for 
 the farmer. This non-curviness in the cost curve may 
 be offset by inventions. However, given 
 the present level of technology, if the water levels stay 
 below 9 m, the farmer will not be able to irrigate at 
 all and the connected drop in yield can be calculated 
 from the production function by setting water input to 
 zero. This is only expected to happen in the (lands with a layer of water) 
 if there is a long period of very low flooding and no 
 (related to computers and science) change. 
 For case (i) to happen, we expect that the speed of the 
 pump will be affected by a drop in (underground water that supplies wells) levels 
 but water will still be available to the farmer using the 
 given technology. The pumps being used in the floodplain are surface mounted pumps, and it is likely that 
 at depths approaching 7 m (represented as R1 in Fig. 2), 
 
 8 However, increased costs of pumping from a greater depth may 
 cause pumping to be stopped until a new (underground water that supplies wells) level is 
 established. Because the farmer is forced to stop pumping, water 
 levels may recover, allowing some rare pumping throughout 
 the season. This introduces doubt into the problem and makes 
 it a energetic problem. This is beyond the extent of/the range of the present 
 paper. 
 
 9 We are assuming no technology moves/changes in this case since, in the 
 short run, the farmer is unable to change technologies. There are 
 high (money-related) costs connected with the change in technology to 
 deeper boreholes and very few farmers were watched/followed to be using 
 the deep boreholes for crop-watering/rinsing with water. The small pumps are give money tod 
 and are being (helped increase/showed in a good way) by government and two-sided organisations. 
 
 G. Acharya, E.B. Barbier/Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 254 
 
 these pumps will slow down because of the increase 
 in lift. To maintain input levels, the farmer would have 
 to increase pumping hours, by that/in that way getting/causing higher 
 costs of production (C1). However, the farmer may be 
 able to continue production in the short run. Using the 
 data on pumping hours and the (detailed descriptions of exactly what is required) of the 
 pumps being used, we guess that as water levels 
 drop from 6 m to 7 m, pump speeds will decrease from 
 37,636Uh to 26,434Uh (about 30% decrease 
 in speed). 10 
 We use this information to calculate the unit pumping cost at the new (underground water that supplies wells) level, R2. As Fig. 2 
 shows, Cw(R)=Co for levels of R-sRo. Pumping costs 
 increase after that. By linearising the cost function between Ro and R1 in Fig. 3, we get the functional 
 relationship between pumping costs, Cw and (underground water that supplies wells) level R for Ro"SR"SR1 as: 
 (10) 
 
 cw(R) =a +bR 
 
 where a=-19.56; b=5.34. 
 Note that this functional form, with the values for 
 a and b as noted above, only describes the portion 
 of the curve between Ro and R1 in Fig. 2. We can 
 guess the change in pumping costs due to a fall in 
 (underground water that supplies wells) levels using the above relationship and 
 the welfare measure in (9). Increases in pumping costs 
 will also affect the level of water input during the 
 growing season and best levels of water input and 
 connected change in output levels can be calculated 
 from the production functions, guessed in Section 5, 
 and the bestity conditions in (5) and (6). 
 
 5. Guessing production functions for wheat and 
 vegetables 
 In the production functions guessed below, we assume that output (y) depends on land (L), labour (B), 
 Seeds (S), fertiliser (F) and water inputs (W). The 
 farmers in the Madachi area mainly grow wheat, irri10 Although, possibly per unit costs of pumping water should 
 be constant for the given technology, surface mounted pumps are 
 less (producing a lot with very little waste) at (underground water that supplies wells) depths approaching 7 m. If costs are 
 constant the welfare change for the farmer would be measured by: 
 
 dS· 
 
 d&#126; 
 
 = 
 
 r 
 
 }Ro 
 
 1 
 
 [_(( 
 
 ay· 
 P;(yt) a&#126;i - 
 
 Cw 
 
 ) 
 
 (aw 
 ai )]_) 
 
 dR 
 
 gated rice and vegetables. The crops are divided into 
 these three groups because of the different nature of 
 crop-watering/rinsing with water, fertiliser application and other farming decisions. Wheat and rice are usually grown earlier 
 in the season and vegetables are grown well into the 
 dry season. In the following sections, we guess production relationships for wheat and vegetables only 
 since watered rice is grown by very few farmers in the 
 sample. 11 
 We think about/believe linear and log-linear functional forms 
 for wheat and vegetable production. 12 The linear form 
 assumes constant not important products and leaves out/keeps out any 
 interaction between the inputs. Although the lack of 
 interaction terms is (serving to severely limit or control), we watch/noticein the books that linear relationships are likely, especially for 
 wheat production and with low levels of inputs. The 
 log-linear form assumes constant input elasticities and 
 (number or thing that changes) not important products. Note that the coefficients 
 guessed by using this form represent output elasticities of individual (numbers that change/things that change) and the sum of these elasticities points to/shows the nature of returns to scale. Table 3 
 lists the (numbers that change/things that change) used in the analysis. The guessed 
 linear and log-linear production functions for wheat 
 are: 
 
 Y = ot + fhL + fhB + fhS + f34F + f3sW + 
 In Y = ot + fJ1ln L + f3zB 
 
 8J 
 
 (11) 
 
 + f33ln S 
 
 +f34ln F + f3sln W + ez 
 
 (12) 
 
 and Si is the random disturbance connected with the 
 production function. 
 The production function for vegetables was also guessed as a single function since all the vegetables 
 11 Since crop level data is often not available, many studies analyse 
 farm level grouped input demands. Although fixed factors, such 
 as land, may cause jointness in the production process, we argue 
 that crop level production functions can be guessed in this case 
 for wheat and for vegetables since (1) crop level data was collected 
 through the survey and is available and (2) vegetables are clearly 
 grown only after the winter wheat production suggesting that input 
 decisions may be thought about/believed as separate in terms of the production 
 processes. 
 12 Although a quadratic function allowing interactions between 
 (numbers that change/things that change) was also fitted to the data, the results are not reported 
 here. The small sample size for wheat production (21 farmers) 
 makes it impossible to include all the (numbers that change/things that change) specified by the 
 quadratic model in the guess. The model needs/demands 18 degrees 
 of freedom to guess. The quadratic function for vegetables also 
 performs poorly. 
 
 255 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 Table 3 
 Table of changeable names 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Definition 
 
 y 
 
 Output (kg) 
 Land (ha) 
 Labour (workers) 
 Fertiliser (kg) 
 Seeds (kg) 
 Water (I) 
 LN (Y) 
 LN (Land) 
 LN(Labour) 
 LN (Fertiliser) 
 LN(Seeds) 
 LN(Water) 
 
 L 
 B 
 F 
 
 s 
 w 
 LY 
 LL 
 LB 
 LF 
 LS 
 LW 
 
 are grown at the same time (after the wheat has been 
 collected) or in quick succession and receive almost the same  amounts of inputs. Data on seeds/seedlings (S) 
 was unreliable and this (number or thing that changes) was dropped from the 
 above guessed production functions (11) and (12) 
 for vegetables. 
 Table 4 reports the results for the linear and 
 log-linear functions for wheat production. The linear 
 model has an R2 of 0.93 and F statistic of 54.4. Both 
 the values suggest a good fit. The Breusch-Pagan Lagrange Multiplier test is not significant for the linear 
 model (critical value for LM x2 =13.27; with 5 d.f.), 
 Table 4 
 Results for the wheat production functiona 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Linear 
 
 Land 
 Labour (B) 
 Seeds 
 Fertiliser 
 Water 
 LL 
 LB 
 LS 
 LF 
 LW 
 Constant 
 (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R2 
 F statistic 
 Breusch-Pagan X 2 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 1993.7b (2.865) 
 52.711 (0.824) 
 3.6165° (2.566) 
 71.581" (2.438) 
 I 1.610° (2.134) 
 
 -1662.5b (3.598) 
 0.93 
 54.4 
 1.05 (d.f.5) 
 21 
 
 a t statistics in parenthesis. 
 b 2% importance level. 
 c 5% importance level. 
 d 10% importance level. 
 
 Log-linear 
 
 0.38 (1.442) 
 -0.024 (0. !56) 
 0.026 (0.33) 
 0.47b (2.71) 
 0.6885d (1.881) 
 3.4° (2.39) 
 0.9 
 37.49 
 18.27 (d.f.5) 
 21 
 
 and we accept the guess of homoscedasticity. 
 However, the large, negatively signed and (related to numbers) 
 significant value for the constant term would suggest 
 that there might be misspecification of the functional 
 form. 
 The log-linear functional form also performs well 
 in terms of R 2 (0.9) and F statistics (37 .49). The coefficients for LW and LF are found to be (related to numbers) 
 significant in the log-linear model, with the expected 
 signs. The Lagrange multiplier statistic is however 
 significant for the log-linear model, pointing to/showing some 
 heteroscedasticity in this model. The presence of this 
 heteroscedasticity points to/shows that the least squares estimators are still fair but inefficient. Since the 
 estimators of the variances are also (created unfair thinking in)/(unfair-thinking) we correct for the standard errors of the coefficients and 
 find (compared to other things) small differences in the values. The 
 log-linear model is, therefore, thought about/believed as the most 
 acceptable version of the wheat production function. 
 According to the books on crop-water production functions decided/figured out from experimental studies, 
 wheat is often seen to have a linear or log-linear shape 
 unlike other crops which may show (being worth less) at high levels of water application. Wheat may 
 continue to show increasing returns up to fairly high 
 levels of water application (Hexem and Intelligent, 1978; 
 Carruthers and Clark, 1981). 
 Table 5 reports the econometric results for the functions guess for vegetable production. The linear 
 Table 5 
 Results for the vegetable production functiona 
 (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Linear 
 
 Land 
 Labour (B) 
 Fertiliser 
 Water 
 LL 
 LB 
 LF 
 LW 
 Constant 
 (changed to make better/changed to fit new conditions) R2 
 F statistic 
 Breusch-Pagan 
 (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) 
 
 -786.67 ( -0.524) 
 282.76d (1.591) 
 265.04° (2.380) 
 5.8358° (2.433) 
 
 x2 
 
 -1449.4 (1.512) 
 0.55 
 11.9 
 13.49 (d.f.4) 
 37 
 
 a t statistics in parenthesis. 
 b 1% importance level. 
 c 5% importance level. 
 d 10% importance level. 
 
 Log-linear 
 
 0.23 I (0.823) 
 0.585c (2.206) 
 0.593b (2.827) 
 0.4268c (2.437) 
 3.13b (11.439) 
 0.66 
 18.88 
 4.24 (d.f.4) 
 37 
 
 256 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier/ Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 and log-linear models again (do as expected) well in terms 
 of R 2 and F statistics. The Breusch-Pagan Lagrange 
 Multiplier test is significant for the linear model 
 (x 2 =13.49; with 4 d.f.), and we reject the guess 
 of homoscedasticity. For the log-linear model, the 
 Lagrange multiplier statistic is less than the critical 
 value at the 5% importance level (x 2 =4.24; with 4 
 d.f.), pointing to/showing no heteroscedasticity in this model. 
 The coefficients on the (numbers that change/things that change) LF, LB, LW and the 
 constant term are (meaningful numbers). 
 
 effect of changing pumping costs on water input and 
 use the production function guessed earlier for the 
 purpose of guessing welfare changes. However, in 
 order to do so, we need to calculate (aWiJacw), the 
 not important change in water demand due to a not important 
 change in the cost of pumping. 
 In Section 5 we guessed production functions for 
 wheat and vegetable production. Holding all other inputs constant and noting that only water input will 
 change/differ, we use the log linear production functions guessed in Section 5, together with the bestity conditions in Eqs. (5) and (6) to solve for Wi as: 
 
 6. Valuing the recharge function 
 (13) 
 
 Water-based (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) for the relationship between flood extent and recharge to village wells show 
 that there is some unsteadiness with flood extent and 
 mean water depth of the shallow underground water. The effect of planned upstream water projects will have 
 an hit/effect on producer welfare within the (lands with a layer of water) 
 through changes in flood extent therefore (underground water that supplies wells) 
 recharge. By guessing a drop in (underground water that supplies wells) levels from 6 m to 7 m in depth (due to reduced recharge 
 in the current period), we calculate the expected 
 change in welfare connected with this reduction in 
 recharge. This (coming from the outside of something) change affects the farmers 
 decision making process during the farming season, 
 (in other words) after decisions on other inputs have already been 
 taken since the effect of the reduced recharge will 
 not be felt until after the dry season farming has 
 started. 
 Recall that in Section 4.1, the welfare change measure for non-not important changes in R (level of naturally 
 recharged (underground water that supplies wells)) is given by (8). This welfare 
 change measure is used together with the results of 
 the production function guesses to calculate welfare 
 changes for individual farmers. We also assume that 
 farmers in the Madachi area are price takers and hence 
 face a 'horizontal' demand function, (in other words) Pi (yi )=Pi. 
 From Eq. (8) we see that the effect of R on welfare is felt through a change in water input due to increased costs ((aWifacw)) and/or a change in water 
 availability (a Wi/ aR). This second effect will happen 
 only if a change in recharge were to cause a decline 
 in (underground water that supplies wells) levels below 9 m (see Section 4.2 and 
 Fig. 3 above). This is unlikely to happen within a single season and we do not therefore think about/believe this aspect 
 in calculating welfare change. Instead we think about/believe the 
 
 1/(fJwi-1) 
 
 W* _ 
 i - 
 
 ( 
 
 ) 
 
 Cw 
 
 PiafJwj LflL BflB s.Bs pfJF 
 
 (14) 
 
 where L,B, S and F are all the other inputs in the 
 specified production function (for crop i) with guessed limits/guidelines fJL, fJs, fJs and fJp. 13 We solve 
 for(aWifacw) as: 
 
 awi 
 acw = 
 
 1 
 
 fJw-1 
 
 ( 
 
 Cw 
 
 )(2-flw)/(flw-1) 
 
 PafJwLfJL BfJB s.Bs pfJF 
 
 X ( PafJwLfJL 
 
 &#126;fJB s.Bs FfJF) 
 
 (1 5 ) 
 
 This is calculated for each farmer, using the guessed 
 values for the (connected/related) limits/guidelines and constant terms 
 and the market price of the crop. 
 We now calculate welfare change due to a drop in 
 (underground water that supplies wells) levels to 7 m, for individual farmers, using the welfare measures in Eq. (8) or Eq. (9) (see 
 Add on A for the derivation of expressions used to 
 calculate welfare changes). The production functions 
 from Section 5 are used to calculate the connected 
 change in working well due to a fall in recharge levels. We calculate best levels of water input from 
 (13) and output levels from the production function. 
 The average and total change in welfare for a drop in 
 (underground water that supplies wells) levels from 6 to 7 m depth, using both 
 welfare measures (8) and (9), are given below. From 
 (8), the welfare change of a drop in (underground water that supplies wells) levels (R) to 7 m is calculated as given in Table 6. From 
 13 Note that for the vegetable production function, the changeable S 
 (seeds/seedlings) is not included and is therefore not included in 
 the guess of Wi either. 
 
 257 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier!Agricultural Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 Table 6 
 Welfare change for sample using Eq. (8) 
 Crop 
 
 Total welfare change (Naira) 
 
 Average welfare change per hectare 
 
 Total land (ha) 
 
 Average land holding (ha) 
 
 Wheat 
 Vegetables 
 
 551,201 
 105,916 
 
 54,459 
 3,566 
 
 10.51 
 29.7 
 
 0.645 
 0.803 
 
 Table 7 
 Welfare changes for sample using Eq. (9) 
 Crop 
 
 Total welfare change (Naira) 
 
 Average welfare change per hectare 
 
 Total land (ha) 
 
 Average land holding (ha) 
 
 Wheat 
 Vegetables 
 
 550,320 
 130,659 
 
 54,372 
 4,399 
 
 10.51 
 29.7 
 
 0.645 
 0.803 
 
 (9), the welfare change of a drop in (underground water that supplies wells) levels (R) to 7 m is calculated as in Table 7. 
 As expected, there is only a small difference/different version between 
 the results from using the two welfare change measures. The welfare change connected with the effects 
 of (underground water that supplies wells) loss on wheat production is very high. 
 Although vegetable production is, in general, more 
 water intensive, it appears that wheat production is 
 more sensitive to changes in water input. The ability to stretch of production to water inputs for wheat is higher 
 than it is in the case of vegetable production. However, 
 vegetable production happens well into the dry season and may be subject to even higher pumping costs 
 for water if the water table falls below 7 m during the 
 dry season. To properly measure this welfare change 
 we would, however, require knowledge of the full relationship between pumping costs and (underground water that supplies wells) 
 levels. Since there is little (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) that (underground water that supplies wells) 
 levels could fall much below 7 m we have restricted 
 our present analysis to this level for both wheat and 
 vegetable production. 
 The Madachi fadama affects an area of about 
 6600 ha. Although there are at least 963 tubewells 
 installed in the area, only 309 were found to be now operational (i.e. 32% of installed tubewells are 
 
 operational). About 56.7% of the farmers in 
 this area grow wheat while 100% of the farmers grow 
 vegetables. This hints that 56.7% of the farmers 
 would be affected by the welfare change connected 
 with growing wheat and vegetables and 43.3% would 
 be affected by the welfare change connected with 
 growing vegetables only. We assume there are a similar number of farmers for each of the 309 
 operational tubewells and decide that there are 175 
 wheat and vegetable farmers and 134 vegetable farmers in the Madachi fadama influence area. We use 
 the welfare change measures for a fall in (underground water that supplies wells) levels from 6 to 7 m depth from Eq. (9) for the 
 welfare changes reported in Table 8. 
 This study shows that watered farming using water from the shallow (underground water that supplies wells) underground water has a value of 
 36,308 Naira (US$_$ 413) per hectares for the Madachi 
 area. The change in welfare connected with a decrease 
 in recharge to the underground water is guessed as 2,863 Naira 
 (US$_$ 32.5) for each vegetable farmer and as 29,110 
 Naira (US$_$ 331) for farmers growing wheat and vegetables. Average household income is the study area 
 is Naira 3,155 per month (Acharya, 1998) and welfare loss guessed by this study, therefore, amounts 
 to about 7.56% of yearly income for veg- 
 
 Table 8 
 Welfare change in the Madachi fadama in Nairaa 
 
 Vegetable farmer 
 Wheat+vegetable farmer 
 a Exchange rate: 88 N=US$ !. 
 
 Average welfare change per farmer 
 
 Total loss for Madachi farmers 
 
 2,863 
 29, !10 
 
 383,642 
 5,094,296 
 
 258 
 
 G. Acharya, E. B. Barbier I Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 etable farmers and 77% of yearly income for vegetable 
 and wheat farmers. The total loss connected with the 
 1 m change in naturally recharged (underground water that supplies wells) levels (resulting in a decline of (underground water that supplies wells) levels to 
 about 7 m) is guessed as 5,477,938 Naira 
 (US$_$ 62,249) for the influence area of the Madachi 
 fadama. 
 The welfare guesses for wheat are surprisingly 
 high. It is argued that the reason for this is that wheat 
 is a newly introduced crop within the (lands with a layer of water) and 
 because of its recent introduction displays a high yield 
 response to water inputs. Since our data is collected 
 over a single dry season, this is reflected in our results. Continued production of wheat within the (lands with a layer of water) could be subject to (lowering in number/getting worse) yields over time 
 and is generally thought about/believed to be impossible to do/impossible to keep going within 
 the (lands with a layer of water) over the long run (Barbier et al., 1994). 
 Ignoring wheat production the guessed welfare 
 loss is therefore 383,642 Naira or US$_$ 4360 for the 
 study area. 
 DIYAM (1987) suggested that shallow underground waters 
 could irrigate 19,000 ha within the (lands with a layer of water) through 
 the use of small tubewells. Using the average welfare change for the study area of 5478 Naira/ha or 
 US$_$ 62/ha, we guess a welfare loss of 1.04x 108 
 Naira or US$_$ 1,182,737 for the (lands with a layer of water), due to a 
 decrease in (underground water that supplies wells) levels to about 7 m 
 in depth. 14 Again ignoring wheat production, the 
 welfare loss connected with this change in (underground water that supplies wells) levels, amounts to 82,832 US$_$ for the (lands with a layer of water). 
 Although there is (large/relatively large) difference in the level 
 of welfare loss with and without (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of 
 wheat production, the value of (underground water that supplies wells) recharge 
 in terms of watered farming is clearly positive and 
 significantly large. 
 
 7. Ends/end results and policy effects/results/suggestions 
 The focus on increasing tubewell 1rngation 
 within the (lands with a layer of water) is disagreeing to policies such 
 as dam construction and channelization that would 
 reduce flooding within the (lands with a layer of water). The money-based 
 14 Note that this figure is based on the percentage of installed 
 tubewells actually working during the study period (32%) and 
 could be much higher for a higher percentage of operational 
 tubewells within the (lands with a layer of water). 
 
 value of the opportunity costs connected with (changing to flow or route differently) this water away from the (lands with a layer of water) has not been 
 fully (understood/made real/achieved) and included into the development 
 plans for this area. Although there is now 
 (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) little concern for the over-abuse 
 of (underground water that supplies wells) useful things/valuable supplies, this hope is based 
 on (compared to other things) little data on water-storage related recharge and the 
 effect of increased or reduced flooding of fadama 
 areas. Cropping patterns in the area have changed 
 due to credit and (related to computers and science) facilities as well as 
 due to changing water-based conditions. Increasing 
 dependence on small-scale crop-watering/rinsing with water for dry season 
 crops may also result in increased sensitivity of small 
 farmers to changes in prices and what people want to buy. 
 As previous studies have defended/expressed, and as this study 
 confirms, (underground water that supplies wells) recharge is of (large/relatively large) importance to (land with a layer of water) farming and reduced recharge 
 resulting in lower levels of (underground water that supplies wells) will result 
 in high welfare losses for the floodplain (groups of people/animals/things). 
 What's more, this analysis has been done in the 
 Madachi fadama, a regularly flooded area with 
 good (underground water that supplies wells) stocks. It is very likely that in other 
 areas of the (lands with a layer of water) where flooding is not as reliable 
 as in Madachi, the effects of reduced recharge and 
 fast declines in (underground water that supplies wells) levels will have more 
 terrible effects. 
 It is also conceivable that given a dramatic fall in 
 (underground water that supplies wells) recharge, there may be a (related to computers and science) 
 move/change towards deeper tubewells and boreholes for crop-watering/rinsing with water. Many boreholes in the (lands with a layer of water) are sunk 
 over 100m deep. In contrast, most of the village wells 
 and shallow tubewells are less than 10m deep. The 
 boreholes may, therefore, be sunk in deeper underground waters. 
 The exact relationship between the (from floodwaters) underground waters 
 and the deeper underground waters of the Chad (creation and construction/ group of objects) is not 
 known and needs to be further (examined something closely). In places 
 there may be some connection between the two so that 
 flooding within the (lands with a layer of water) may recharge the deeper 
 underground waters also. The move towards deeper boreholes 
 in some parts of the (lands with a layer of water) appears to be both (money-based)/cheaply and politically (having a reason to do something). Crop-watering/rinsing with water boreholes (sunk to levels greater than 10m depth) will 
 change the farming in the area and may offset 
 any hit/effect of falling (underground water that supplies wells) levels in the shallow underground water. However, given the lack of water-based 
 information (related to/looking at/thinking about) the water-based pathways between the deeper underground water and the shallow underground water, the 
 question of (underground water that supplies wells) mining and because of this, possibly 
 
 G. Acharya, E.B. Barbier/ Farming-based Money flow 22 (2000) 247-259 
 
 impossible to do/impossible to keep going developments within the (lands with a layer of water), cannot be ruled out. In the face of this doubt, the 
 value of the shallow underground waters in watered farming, 
 and as a result the value of the recharge function of 
 the (lands with a layer of water), must be recognised by policies affecting 
 water-based conditions within the floodplain. 
 
 Add on 
 Specifically, for each farmer the expression used in 
 calculating welfare change from (9) is: 
 (SR 1 ) - (SR0 ) 
 
 = (P; y 1 -(Pi 
 
 i 
 
 CxXj- Cw(RJ)W;*(RJ)) 
 
 + CxXj + Cw(Ro) W;*(Ro)) 
 
 We use best values for water input levels, tested at the different unit costs of pumping CJ and 
 co, assuming all other inputs remain constant. Best levels of output, y 1 and y 0 , are then calculated 
 for each farmer at the guessed best water input 
 levels. (in almost the same way), we (combine different things together so they work as one unit) Eq. (8) over R, getting/taking 
 the following expression: 
 
 dS 
 dR 
 
 = 
 
 {(lj2),Bw¢Y R 2a - ,Bwbif&amp;gt;Y R 
 -((aR- b)Y+ 1 ja(y + l))}ya 
 [_( 
 if&amp;gt;Y 
 R1=7 
 
 - 
 
 {(aR!¢)- (b/¢)}Cy+ll 
 y +1 
 ¢ 
 
 J 
 Ro=6 
 
 Testing for R=[6,7], we get the following 
 expression: 
 
 dS 
 
 49{,Bwcpy a 2y 2 + 49,BwcpY a 2y 
 -14,Bwb¢Y yes  2 - 14,Bwbcpy aYY2 
 1 
 ((7a- b)jcp)Y+Icpcpy- 2Y(7a- b)Y+ 1 } 
 
 dR 
 
 2 
 
 (YYI )cp Y 
 
 + 18,BwcpYa2y 
 -6,Bwbcp Y aY2 - 6,Bwbcp Y aYY2 
 ((6a- b)jcp)Y+ 1cpcpy- Y(6a- b)CYYil} 
 
 18{,8wcpYa2y2 
 
 (YYI )cp y 
 
 where a and bare as defined in (12); 
 
 259 
 
 = (1/,Bw) -1; 
 
 Picx,Bwi Lf3L sf3s sf3s Ff3F 
 
 References 
 Acharya, G., 1998. Water-based-money-based linkages in water 
 useful thing/valuable supply management. Ph.D. speech/story, University of York 
 (unpublished). 
 Adams, W.M., 1993. Farming, grazing and forestry. In: 
 Hollis, G.E., Adams, W.M., Aminu-Kano, M. (Eds.), 
 The Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water): (surrounding conditions), (process of people making, selling, and buying things) and 
 (able to last/helping the planet) Development of a Sahelian Floodplain (land with a layer of water), 
 IUCN Gland. 
 Barbier, E.B., Thompson, J.R., 1998. The value of water: floodplain 
 against/compared to/or large-scale crop-watering/rinsing with water benefits in Northern Nigeria. Ambio 
 27 (6), 434-443. 
 Barbier, E.B., 1994. Valuing (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) functions: (related to areas near the Equator/hot and humid) 
 (lands with a layer of water). Land Econ. 70 (2), 155-173. 
 Barbier, E.B., Adams, W., Kimmage, K., 1993. Money-based (putting a value on something) 
 of (land with a layer of water) benefits. In: Hollis et a!. (Eds.), The Hadejia-Nguru 
 (lands with a layer of water). IUCN, Gland 
 CatTuthers, I., Clark, C., 1981. The Money flow Of Crop-watering/rinsing with water. 
 Liverpool University Press, Liverpool. 
 DIYAM, 1987. Shallow water-storage related study, 3 Volumes. Kano State 
 Farming-based and (away from cities) Development Authority, Kano. 
 Ellis, G., Fisher, A., 1987. Valuing (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) as an input. 
 J. Environ. Manage. (25), 149-156. 
 Freeman, A.M. 1993. The measurement of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) and 
 useful thing/valuable supply values: explanation and methods. Useful things/valuable supplies for the Future, 
 Washington DC. 
 Hexem, R., Intelligent, E., 1978. Water Production Functions for 
 Watered Farming. State University Press, AMES, IO. 
 HNWCP, 1996. Internal report prepared on the survey of 
 the Madachi fadama influence area. Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water) 
 Conservation Project, Nguru. 
 Hollis, G.E., Adams, W.M., Aminu-Kano, M., (Eds.), 1993. The 
 Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water). IUCN Gland, Cambridge, UK. 
 Hollis, G.E., Thompson, J.R., 1993. Water useful thing/valuable supply developments 
 and their water-based hits/effects. In: Hollis, G.E., Adams, W.M., 
 Aminu-Kano, M. (Eds.), 1993. The Hadejia-Nguru (lands with a layer of water). 
 IUCN Gland, Cambridge, UK. 
 Maler, K.G., 1992. Production Function Approach in Developing 
 Countries in Vincent, J.R., Crawford ,<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
