AGRICULTURAL 
 ECONOMICS 
 ELSEVIER 
 
 Farming-based Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 Population growth, farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse), 
 caused invention of new things and valuable thing from nature (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going): 
 An application of neoclassical growth explanation 
 John L. Pender* 
 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2033K St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 20006, USA 
 
 Abstract 
 Using a simple neoclassical type growth model including both man-made and natural capital as inputs to production, the 
 possible basis for aU-shaped relationship between farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) and farm household investment in renewable 
 useful thing/valuable supply capital is established. As development of technology, (set of machines), or markets increase the relative return to 
 investment in man-made capital over natural capital, useful thing/valuable supply (everything is gone) happens as man-made capital is substituted for lower 
 return natural capital. Once returns are made equal, both man-made and natural capital are saved. If labor and these forms 
 of capital are (completing/matching), the output effects outweigh the substitution effects in the long run, leading to net collection 
 of natural as well as man-made capital as a result of such (related to computers and science) or market development. Population growth also 
 causes investment in both man-made and valuable thing from nature capital in the long run by increasing their not important products. 
 However, population growth causes declining per person levels of both natural and man-made capital and production per person 
 in the long run, if technology is fixed and decreasing returns to scale. The model this way supports the Boserupian argument of 
 caused (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) and useful thing/valuable supply improvement, as well as the Malthusian argument of the (making) poor effects of 
 population growth. However, population growth may also cause development of (set of machines), markets, and (related to computers and science) or 
 institutional invention of new things by reducing the fixed costs per person of these changes, though these developments may not happen 
 automatically. Government policies can play a large role in affecting whether these possible benefits of population growth are 
 (understood/made real/achieved). Also, credit policies may reduce useful thing/valuable supply worsening caused by substitution of man-made for natural capital, 
 by allowing farmers to pile up man-made capital (such as (material that makes plants grow better)s) without using up/reducing their natural capital. Policies to 
 (make a part of you) the external (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) costs of using man-made capital will reduce both types of capital and production, 
 pointing to/showing a clear trade-off between facing (worries about the health of the Earth) on the one hand and reducing poorness and (helping increase/showing in a good way) 
 useful thing/valuable supply (protecting something from harm) investments on the other. Very differently, (making a part of you) the external benefits of investments in useful things/valuable supplies 
 increases wealth and production per person in the long run. The 'intertemporal externality' due to a higher private than social 
 rate of time preference does not permit helping actions to (help increase/show in a good way) investments in useful thing/valuable supply capital; rather it argues for the 
 promotion of savings and investment in general. © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Keywords: Population growth; Farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse); Caused invention of new things; Money-based growth; Valuable thing from nature (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 
 *Corresponding author. Tel.: +202 862 5645; fax: +202 467 4439; e-mail: j.pender@cgnet.com 
 0169-5150/98/$19.00 © 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
 Pll S0169-5150(98)00024-3 
 
 100 
 
 J.L. Pender I Farming-based Money flow 19 ( 1998) 99-112 
 
 1. Introduction 
 
 The hits/effects of population growth on farming-based 
 working well and the (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) of valuable things from nature 
 have been debated, at least since the time of Malthus. 
 In the past twenty years, there has been a new interest in 
 (negative thinking) about the hits/effects of population growth, 
 especially in quickly growing developing countries 
 (Club of Rome, 1972; Brown, 1974; Ehrlich and 
 Ehrlich, 1990). Slowing the growth of population in 
 developing countries is well-known as very important to 
 (accomplishing or gaining) (able to last/helping the planet) development in poor countries 
 (e.g. World Commission on (surrounding conditions) and Development, 1987). 
 At the same time, a more hopeful (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) has 
 came out. Boserup (1965) and many others have 
 argued that population pressure causes farming-based 
 (process by which something becomes stronger or worse), development of (set of machines) and 
 markets, and (related to computers and science) and/or institutional invention of new things (Ruthenberg, 1980; Darity, 1980; Pryor and 
 Maurer, 1982; Robinson and Schutjer, 1984; Hayami 
 and Ruttan, 1985; Binswanger and Mcintire, 1987; 
 Salehi-Isfahani, 1988). There has been debate, however, about whether this process improves or reduces 
 labor working well and human welfare (e.g. Robinson 
 and Schutjer vs. Salehi-Isfahani). The hits/effects on 
 valuable things from nature and (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) are also (discussed back and forth) 
 (Lele and Stone, 1989; Panayotou, 1993). 
 The (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on the hits/effects of population growth is 
 mixed. Many studies have shown a positive relationship between population densities or growth and 
 (chopping down trees), (allowing animals to eat too much grass and plants), soil wearing away, (lowering in number/getting worse) soil 
 life-creating ability, and other useful thing/valuable supply and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) problems 1. However, there are also many examples showing that population growth and very high population 
 densities can be agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with (able to last/helping the planet) farming-based practices (Templeton and Scherr, 1997). In an 
 often referred to study of land management in the Machakos 
 District of Kenya, big healing/fixing and 
 improvement of (before that/before now) insulted/got worse land useful things/valuable supplies 
 (including investments in terraces, tree planting, and 
 adoption of new technologies) was watched/followed to happen 
 between 1930's and 1990, (even though there is the existence of) (or maybe because 
 of) a five-fold increase in population (Tiffen et al., 
 1994). 
 1See, for example, the studies referred to by Panayotou (1993 ), Stem 
 et al. (1996) and Templeton and Scherr (1997). 
 
 Such (instances of watching, noticing, or making statements) have added/have given to the guess of a 'U-curve' type of relationship between 
 population growth and the condition of natural 
 useful things/valuable supplies and (the health of the Earth/the surrounding conditions) in developing countries 
 (Scherr and Hazell, 1994). Others have said an 
 inverted U-shaped relationship between money-based 
 growth and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) worsening (World Bank, 
 1992). A few (related to studying numbers) studies have examined the 
 relationship between different indicators of (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) or useful thing/valuable supply worsening (mainly measures of 
 pollution and (chopping down trees)) and money-based growth, 
 and some have found support for an inverted U-shaped 
 relationship between income per person and (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) worsening 2 . 
 The main purpose of this paper is to think about  the 
 possible basis for a U-shaped relationship between 
 the condition of valuable things from nature used in farming-based 
 production and population or money-based growth, and to 
 think about/believe the effects/results/suggestions of this explanation. The focus 
 is on productive valuable things from nature rather than nice things; this way, the argument is not based upon assuming a 
 high income ability to stretch of demand for (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 nice things, which may be a doubtful idea (you think is true) 3 . 
 The argument is a simple application of neoclassical explanation. At low levels of population density and 
 money-based development, families are well gave/given 
 with valuable thing from nature capital in the form afforests, soil 
 life-creating ability, etc., relative to their stock of human produced 
 capital. As money-based development go aheads, development of (set of machines), markets and technology tend 
 to reduce the price and/or increase the not important value 
 product of investments in human produced capital. 
 This causes substitution of human produced capital 
 for natural capital, resulting in (everything is gone) of natural 
 capital in the near term. Once the rate of return to these 
 different types of capital have made equal, however, 
 output effects take over and collection of both 
 natural and man-made capital will happen. If man-made 
 
 2 See Stem et al. (1996) for citations. The truth/trueness and (statement that's not detailed) 
 of these results has been questioned on possible and scientific 
 grounds (Stem et al., 1996; Arrow et al., 1995). 
 3 0ne recent study found that the income ability to stretch of demand for 
 (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) nice things is less than one in a few (related to Europe) 
 countries, arguing some arguments for the inverted U-curve 
 guess (Kristrtim and Riera, 1996). (event(s) or object(s) that prove something) on this issue is 
 still very limited, however, and almost non-existent for developing countries. 
 
 J.L. Pender/ Farming-based Money flow 19 ( 1998) 99-112 
 
 capital and natural capital are (completing/matching), output 
 effects will outweigh substitution effects in the long 
 run 4 - If labor supply is (completing/matching) to both types of 
 capital, then population growth causes investment in 
 both types of capital after their rates of return are 
 made equal. 
 This argument focuses on the positive role of 
 (when two things work together equally well) between renewable valuable thing from nature 
 capital and man-made capital in (helping increase/showing in a good way) (able to last/helping the planet) development. This contrasts sharply with the 
 situation for limited useful things/valuable supplies. Money-based growth 
 is impossible to do/impossible to keep going, if the ability to stretch of substitution 
 between limited useful things/valuable supplies and reproducible capital is less than togetherness (Hamilton, 1995). This is because 
 the rising price of the limited useful things/valuable supplies over time 
 reduces use of both useful things/valuable supplies and man-made capital 
 due to their (when two things work together equally well). 
 The model presented in this paper could be showed as 'Boserupian' given its hopeful (statements about the future) about the hits/effects of population growth on 
 investment in renewable useful things/valuable supplies and other forms 
 of capital. However, it also shares the Malthusian 
 (negative thinking) (related to/looking at/thinking about) the hits/effects of population growth 
 on per person production and consumption (holding 
 technology and market development fixed). This is 
 based on the idea (you think is true) that farming-based production 
 technology shows constant or decreasing returns to 
 scale. If there are nonconvexities in the production 
 function (such as, fixed costs), population growth may 
 have positive effects on production per person by 
 reducing the per person level of such fixed costs 
 (Krautkraemer, 1994). However, with (not totally pure/not totally correct) capital markets, the presence of such nonconvexities may 
 lead to a 'poverty trap', in which poorer families 
 are 'locked-in' to a low-level balance path (Pender, 1992; Barro and Sala-I-Martin, 1995; Fafchamps 
 and Pender, 1997). 
 Almost the same  arguments apply to nonconvexities that 
 exist more generally in the (process of people making, selling, and buying things), such as fixed 
 costs of (set of machines) development, (related to computers and science) and 
 institutional invention of new things. Population growth reduces 
 these costs per person and so may cause this form 
 
 &#126;hese changes/recalculations happen (one after the other), rather than immediately as in the standard static explanation of production, if the 
 changes involved are large, credit markets are not well functioning, 
 and natural capital is non-marketable. 
 
 101 
 
 of development, as argued by Boserup. However, the 
 ability to take advantage of these (lowering in number/getting worse) costs is 
 not automatic, since it depends on the ability to 
 (accomplish or gain with effort) total action (including government 
 action) to share these costs, or the development of 
 institutions allowing private agents to (make a part of you) the 
 external benefits of paying these fixed costs. In the 
 case of total action, rent looking (for) and transactions 
 costs may interfere with the ability to (accomplish or gain with effort) total 
 action, especially as population grows. In the case of 
 private agents, (one company that controls too much) power can become a restriction to money-based (wasting very little while working or producing something) and growth. So, the 
 effects/results/suggestions of population growth are more uncertain 
 when such nonconvexities are taken into account; and 
 are more strongly conditioned by the normal behavior or beliefss, 
 institutions, and government policies that influence 
 transactions costs and (one company that controls too much) power. 
 In addition to the effects of population growth, I 
 think about/believe the effects/results/suggestions of other factors affecting 
 farming-based (process by which something becomes stronger or worse), including changes in market prices, technology (whether or not caused by 
 population growth), the rate of time preference, and 
 externalities. Reductions in the market price of manmade capital relative to the output price or (related to computers and science) improvement lead to higher long-run levels of 
 both man-made and useful thing/valuable supply capital and higher levels 
 of per person production and consumption. A lower 
 rate of time preference has almost the same  (not numbers-based) long run 
 effects/results/suggestions, although it does not favor piling up 
 more of one type of capital than another. So, there is 
 no reasons for (helping increase/showing in a good way) investments in natural 
 useful thing/valuable supply capital relative to other investments to 
 address the (what people commonly call a/not really a) 'intertemporal externality' due 
 to a high private rate of time preference. What is 
 needed is promotion of savings and investment more 
 generally. Where (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) externalities exist, 
 the effects/results/suggestions of (making a part of you) them depends upon 
 whether they are external costs or benefits. For example, (making a part of you) the external costs of water pollution 
 connected with man-made capital will reduce the long 
 run level of both man-made and useful thing/valuable supply capital, and 
 production and consumption per person. In contrast, 
 (making a part of you) the external benefits of planting trees or 
 other (protecting something from harm) activities will lead to higher long 
 run levels of useful thing/valuable supply and man-made capital, production and consumption. So, the use of 'stick' 
 approaches to (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) problems in developing 
 countries, such as, taxes and rules, face serious 
 
 J.L. Pender/ Farming-based Money flow 19 ( 1998) 99-112 
 
 102 
 
 trade-offs with goals of reducing poorness and even 
 conserving valuable things from nature; while 'carrot' 
 approaches such as, payments for planting trees, 
 may serve all of these goals. 
 
 2. Explanation and (serving to compare two or more things) statics 
 Suppose families try to (make as big as possible) the intertemporal utility function 
 00 
 
 j e-Ptu(c 
 
 1) 
 
 dt 
 
 (1) 
 
 0 
 
 where u() is strictly curved. c 1 is per-person use, equal to 
 0= 
 
 F(Lr,Kr,Rr)- PKh,- PRIR, 
 Lr 
 
 m 
 
 where F() is the production function, L 1 is the population of the household5 , K1 is the stock of man-made 
 (marketable) capital, R 1 is the stock of useful thing/valuable supply (nonmarketable) capital6 , h, is investment in (bought something for money) 
 capital, IR, is investment in useful thing/valuable supply capital, PK is the 
 price (in units of the output) of (bought something for money) capital, and 
 PR is a technical coefficient (not a market price) 
 representing the amount of output used up to increase 
 the useful thing/valuable supply stock by 1 unit. For example, PR may 
 represent the amount of crop residue the farmer would 
 need to leave on his land to increase soil organic 
 matter by 1 ton per hectare. Land is taken to be fixed 
 and (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) secure. 
 The production function is assumed to be curved, 
 twice differentiable, and increasing the stock of any 
 input is assumed not to decrease the not important product 
 of other inputs 
 
 FLK 2': 0, hR 2': 0, FKR 2': 0 
 
 (3) 
 
 In the case of a constant ability to stretch of substitution 
 production function, these ideas (you think are true) are met if the 
 5This assumes that all household members are laborers, in effect 
 setting the dependency ratio to zero. Nothing in the (not numbers-based) 
 results will be changed if there is a positive dependency ratio, as 
 long as the ratio stays constant. 
 6Alternatively, production could be figured out by/decided by the flow of 
 services from L, K, and R. If such flows are functions only of these 
 stocks, there is no loss in (statement that's not detailed) in writing production as a 
 function of these stocks. 
 
 ability to stretch of substitution is less than or equal to 1. 
 Guesses from many studies using data from 
 different countries and different methods suggests 
 (when two things work together equally well) or unitary ability to stretch between labor 
 and capital, labor and (material that makes plants grow better), or labor and a (thing made up of different things) of other inputs (e.g. Ruttan and Hayami, 1988; 
 Antle and Aitah, 1983; Yotopolous et al., 1976; Binswanger, 1974; Srivistava and Intelligent, 1973). (definitely/as one would expect)
 there are exceptions to this; e.g. Ray (1982) and 
 Brown and Namesen (1981) guessed greater than 
 unitary ability to stretch between labor and (material that makes plants grow better) using US 
 data, and Lopez (1980) guessed greater than unitary 
 ability to stretch between labor and capital using data from 
 Canada. Guesses of the (when two things work together equally well) or substitutability between human produced capital and natural 
 capital are more rare. One study of wheat production 
 in the Punjab found a positive relationship between 
 organic soil carbon and labor and (material that makes plants grow better) demand, 
 suggesting (when two things work together equally well); though the relationship 
 was not (meaningful numbers) (Sidhu and Baanante, 
 1981). More research is needed on this issue. 
 The decision (numbers that change/things that change) at any moment are h, and 
 IR,· The non-marketability of useful thing/valuable supply capital hints 
 the restriction 
 (4) 
 
 Some of the man-made capital and useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital are assumed to be ate/destroyed in production 
 in each period. For example, man-made capital may 
 represent (not living) (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.) and useful thing/valuable supply capital may 
 represent organic matter in the soil, both of which are 
 ate/destroyed in crop production. The amount of each 
 type of capital ate/destroyed is assumed to be (fair in amount, related to/properly sized, related to) production (though the (fair in amount, related to something else/properly sized compared to something else)ity constants may differ) 
 
 = h,- 8KF(Lr,Kr,Rr) 
 
 (5) 
 
 Rr = IR, - 8RF(Lr, Kr, Rr) 
 
 (6) 
 
 Kr 
 
 Household population grows at an (coming from the outside of something)ly serious and stubborn rate n (2':0) 
 (7) 
 
 The (biggest increase/best possible extent) of Eq. (1), subject to the nonmarketability restriction on useful thing/valuable supply capital Eq. (4) 
 and the equations of movement for the state (numbers that change/things that change) 
 Eqs. (5)-(7), defines the household's optimization 
 problem. 
 
 103 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 The Add on shows that, if the non-marketability 
 restriction is non-binding, two Euler equations must be 
 made happy: 
 
 -/J,t = p + n - ( 1 - PKDK - PR8R ) -F K 
 
 (8) 
 
 -/J,t = p + n - ( 1 - PKDK - PRDR ) -FR 
 
 (9) 
 
 PK 
 
 /-lt 
 
 PR 
 
 1-lt 
 
 where p,1 is the not important utility of consumption at time 
 t (u'(c1)). Both Eqs. (8) and (9) can be made happy if and 
 only if: 
 FK 
 
 FR 
 
 PK 
 
 PR 
 
 If the production function is constant returns to 
 scale, production per worker (y1) is a curved function 
 of man-made capital per worker (K/L1=k1) and 
 useful thing/valuable supply capital per worker (R/L 1 =r1) 
 _ F(Lr,Kt,Rr) -j(k 
 Lr 
 
 - 
 
 r, Tr 
 
 ) 
 
 (12) 
 
 (10) 
 
 In words, if the first rate of return to man-made 
 capital is higher than the rate of return to useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital, useful thing/valuable supply capital will be used up/reduced until these 
 rates of return are made equal. The first unbalance 
 (defined as a violation ofEq. (10)) may be a result of a 
 (related to computers and science) or market development that increases (a lot) the not important return of man-made 
 capital or reduces its price. If that is the case, this 
 useful thing/valuable supply worsening is not 'population caused' 
 (unless the (related to computers and science) or market changes were 
 population caused), although it may occur with 
 population growth. I think about/believe the (serving to compare two or more things) statics 
 of the model and such (lasting for a short time) disequilibria further 
 below. 
 Once the returns to marketable and useful thing/valuable supply capital 
 are made equal, population growth will cause net 
 investment in both types of capital. Obviously, this 
 is because increasing labor supply increases the not important return to investment in both types of capital (as a 
 result of Eq. (3)). I illustrate this and other results 
 below for two cases: (1) constant returns to scale 
 is proved in the Add on. 
 
 2.1. Constant returns to scale 
 
 Yt - 
 
 Eq. (10) is the usual needed thing for technical (wasting very little while working or producing something). It states that the tax rate of return for 
 investment in man-made capital must be equal to the 
 tax rate of return for investment in natural 
 capital. In Eq. (10), PR plays the role of a price, even 
 though it is a technical coefficient. If F KIP K &amp;gt; F RIP R , 
 then the non-marketability restriction on useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital will be binding (h, =0) 7 and 
 
 7 This 
 
 technology, and (2) (being worth less) to scale technology. 
 
 It is plain/honest/easy to show that 
 (13) 
 
 So, we can replace F K and FR by A and fr in the 
 Euler Eqs. (8) and (9). Instead/in the place ofy state, consumption and the not important utility of consumption are 
 constant, which hints from Eqs. (8) and (9): 
 fk(k r) 
 ' 
 
 = 
 
 pK(p + n) 
 1 - PK(jK - PR8R 
 
 (14) 
 
 fr(k, r) 
 
 = 
 
 PR(P + n) 
 1 - PKDK - PR(jR 
 
 (15) 
 
 IfA andfr are greater than these values, c1, k 1 and r1 will 
 be rising towards their steady-state values, as in the 
 standard Ramsey growth model with only one capital 
 stock; (in the opposite way), ifA andfr are less than these values, 
 Cr, kr and r 1 will be falling 8 . 
 Since K/L1 and R/L1 approach is a steady state, K 1 
 and R 1 both eventually grow as population grows 9 . 
 This is population caused (process by which something becomes stronger or worse). Note that, if 
 k1 and r1 are, at first, below their steady- state levels, K1 
 and R 1 will grow faster than population, until the 
 steady state is reached. This added/more (process by which something becomes stronger or worse) 
 is caused by the (compared to other things) high initial returns to 
 investment. 
 8This problem can be easily converted to a growth problem with 
 a single capital stock. Since the production function is (group of things that are all pretty much the same), the center  of points happiness-causing Eq. (10) is a straight line 
 through the origin in r,k space. This way r=ak on this center  for some 
 a&amp;gt;O, and we can define g(k)=(l-pp;jK-PROR{)f(k,ak) as the new 
 production function. The problem is then a standard Ramsey 
 growth model, and all of the standard results apply. 
 9If k, and r, are, at first, above their steady-state levels, K, and R, 
 may (lower in number/get worse) for some time as k, and r1 decline. 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 104 
 
 Table I 
 (serving to compare two or more things) statics of the steady state-constant returns to scale 
 case 
 
 Table 2 
 (serving to compare two or more things) statics of the steady state-decreasing returns to scale 
 case 
 Endogenous (number or thing that changes) 
 
 Endogenous (number or thing that changes) 
 (coming from the outside of something) changeable 
 n 
 p 
 PK 
 PR 
 OK 
 OR 
 A (neutral technical change) 
 AK (capital increaseing 
 technical change) 
 AR (useful thing/valuable supply increasing 
 technical change) 
 
 k 
 
 r 
 
 + 
 
 y 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 +10 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 +10 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 The (serving to compare two or more things) statics of the steady state 
 are shown in Table 110- Increasing any of the 
 (coming from the outside of something) factors (p, n, PK- PR- 8K, 8R) increases 
 fk and fr instead/in the place ofy state, resulting in lower steady 
 state k, r, and y. The effect of neutral technical 
 change can be modeled by replacing f(k 1, r1) by 
 Af(k1, r1). Then A and fr in Eqs. (14) and (15) are 
 replaced by AA and Af, suggesting that an increase 
 in A leads to a reduction inA andfr instead/in the place ofy state, 
 and an increase in steady state k, r, and y. The effect 
 of capital or useful thing/valuable supply increaseing technical change 
 can be modeled using f(Akkr. Arr1) as the production 
 function. An increase in Ak or Ar also increases steady 
 state k, r, and y. 
 
 2.2. (being worth less) to scale 
 It might (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) be objected that the idea (you think is true) 
 
 of constant returns to scale is highly (serving to severely limit or control) and 
 probably silly in many facts or conditions (that surround someone). Given the 
 fact that land area (not quality) is assumed to be fixed 
 (or the ability to expand area is limited), it may be 
 more realistic to assume (being worth less) to scale. 
 In this case, there is no steady-state level of production 
 or consumption per person as population grows; 
 instead these will constantly fall as population rises 
 (unless offset by other changes such as improvements 
 
 10The 
 
 (serving to compare two or more things) statics results are received/made from in the Add on. 
 
 (coming from the outside of something) (number or thing that changes) 
 
 K 
 
 R 
 
 L 
 
 +10 
 
 +10 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 +10 
 
 + 
 + 
 
 +10 
 
 + 
 
 + 
 
 p 
 PK 
 PR 
 OK 
 OR 
 A (neutral technical change) 
 AK (capital increasing 
 techical change) 
 AR (useful thing/valuable supply increasing 
 techical change) 
 
 + 
 
 y 
 
 in technology) 11 - This is the classical Malthusian 
 picture/situation. 
 For a steady state to exist in this case, the population 
 growth rate must be zero. Unlike the constant returns 
 to scale case, in which only the growth rate and not the 
 level of population is important, the level of population is a important factor with (being worth less) to 
 scale. So, I assume that the population growth rate is 
 zero, but examine the hit/effect of changing the level of 
 population. 
 The equations deciding/figuring out the steady state in this case are almost the same as Eqs. (14) and (15) 
 PKP 
 8 
 8 
 - PK K- PR R 
 PRP 
 1 - PK 8K- PR 8R 
 
 FK(L,K,R)=1 
 
 (16) 
 
 FR (L, K, R ) 
 
 (17) 
 
 = 
 
 The (serving to compare two or more things) statics of the steady state are 
 shown in Table 2. If L increases, this tends to increase 
 FK and FR, so K and R increase 12 - So, population 
 11 This is most easily seen by (thinking about/when one thinks about) the case of only one 
 type of capital and assuming that, the production function F(L,K) is 
 (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree t, where t&amp;lt;l. Then FL, and F K are 
 (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree t-1. Suppose that a steady state did exist 
 in which production per person remained constant after population 
 increased by a factor of x. Then K would have to have increased by 
 more than x. But that would suggest that F K had (lowered in number/got worse/gotten worse), since this 
 function is (group of things that are all pretty much the same) to a negative degree. This would cause 
 Eq. (14) to be violated, arguing the idea (you think is true) of a steady 
 state. 
 12This result is proved in the Add on. 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 growth causes investment in both man-made capital 
 and useful things/valuable supplies even in the Malthusian picture/situation with 
 decreasing returns. This is different from the common 
 perception that a Malthusian (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) hints 
 useful thing/valuable supply worsening as population grows. It also 
 hints that there is not a disagreement 
 between the Malthusian (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important) and the Boserupian 'induced (process by which something becomes stronger or worse)' (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important). Consistent 
 with Boserup's logic, population pressure causes 
 investments to improve the working well of the land, 
 once edge of something/unexplored area (act of something getting bigger, wider, etc.) is no longer an option. But 
 agreeing with/matching up with/working regularly with Malthus, production and consumption 
 per person fall as a result of population growth 13 . So, 
 although population growth may eventually be good 
 news for useful thing/valuable supply (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.), it is a bad news for 
 human welfare. 
 The other (serving to compare two or more things) statics results are identical to 
 those for the constant returns to scale case. This should 
 not be surprising, since Eqs. (16) and (17) are mostly identical to Eqs. (14) and (15), if Lis constant 
 (ignoring the population growth rate (n)). The production function F(L,K,R) can be redefined as g(K,R) 
 (since L is constant), and g has the same properties 
 as f(k,r) (i.e. curviness, positive cross partial derivatives). 
 
 3. Effects/results/suggestions 
 These results suggest that the population growth may 
 not be responsible for useful thing/valuable supply worsening in developing countries, when worsening is due to substitution of more money-making forms of capital for useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital. In fact, population growth eventually causes 
 investments in useful thing/valuable supply improvements, where land is 
 becoming very hard to find and (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) is (compared to other things) secure. 
 Anyway, reducing the growth of population can 
 increase (or reduce the decline in) per person income 
 and consumption. The case for population control, 
 13 An argument almost the same as that in Note II demonstrates 
 that steady-state capital and useful thing/valuable supply stocks per person and 
 production per person falls after an increase in population, even 
 though total capital and useful thing/valuable supply stocks rise. If the production 
 function is (group of things that are all pretty much the same) of degree t&amp;lt;i, then increasing or holding 
 constant KIL and RIL would reduce FK and FR, this way violating 
 Eqs. (16) and (17). So, KIL and R/L fall, suggesting that F(L,K,R)I 
 L falls (since decreasing returns would require KIL and RIL to rise 
 if FIL were to be held constant or increase as L increases). 
 
 105 
 
 this way, may depend more on (things to carefully think about) of poorness 
 than on (things to carefully think about) of useful thing/valuable supply worsening or 
 improvement. 
 Other (proof that one thing definitely causes another) factors (show or prove) a (when two things work together equally well) between reducing poorness and improving useful thing/valuable supply 
 conditions. For example, (related to computers and science) improvements 
 (whether neutral or too nice tos increasing one of 
 the factors of production) tend to increase investments 
 in both man-made and useful thing/valuable supply capital and per person 
 income. (related to computers and science) improvements in the production of man-made capital may reduce PK- also increasing useful thing/valuable supply and other investments and per person 
 income in the long run. Improvements in transportation (set of machines) or other factors causing an increase 
 in output relative to input prices also may be reflected 
 by a reduction in PK· 
 Although such changes lead to useful thing/valuable supply improvements in the long run, they cause useful thing/valuable supply worsening 
 in the short run by increasing the rate of return to manmade capital relative to useful thing/valuable supply capital. This process 
 is illustrated in Fig. 1. An initial steady state at point 0 
 becomes inefficient after a reduction in PK· which 
 rotates the (wasting very little while working or producing something) center  (when a wheel turns so the top moves to the right). If useful thing/valuable supply 
 stocks were marketable, they would be immediately 
 sold and converted to man-made capital stocks, until 
 point Pin Fig. 1 was reached. Given the marketability 
 restriction, useful thing/valuable supply (everything is gone) will happen more slowly, 
 as man-made capital is being piled up, until the 
 rates of return are made equal at a point like Q in the 
 figure. After this point, investment in both useful things/valuable supplies 
 and man-made capital happen until the new steady state 
 (S) is reached. The results in Tables 1 and 2 suggest that 
 this new steady state will be at a higher stock of 
 useful things/valuable supplies per person than in the first steady state. 
 Because increasing man-made capital increases the 
 not important return to useful thing/valuable supply capital, the output effects 
 outweigh the substitution effects in the long run. 
 This example (shows or proves) that it is important not 
 to understand/explain useful thing/valuable supply (everything is gone) (by itself/in and of itself)  as a problem. 
 From the farmer's point of view, the first (everything is gone) 
 of useful things/valuable supplies in Fig. 1 represents the (producing the most with the least waste) way 
 to take advantage of the new opportunities afforded by 
 the reduction in PK- and to increase both man-made 
 capital and useful thing/valuable supply stocks in the long run. Policy 
 makers could try to halt or slow the first (everything is gone) of 
 useful things/valuable supplies by (helping increase/showing in a good way) investments in useful thing/valuable supply (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) and improvement, but farmer adoption of 
 such investments is likely to be low due to their lower 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 106 
 
 Center  with 
 fk 
 p 0 
 
 - - =-k&mdash;-+ 
 fr 
 
 Pr 
 
 Center  with 
 &#126;= Pk' 
 
 &#126;&#126; 
 r 
 
 Initial steady 
 state 
 
 Path with credit to 
 increase k quickly 
 
 &#126;____.____.L____.__. 
 
 &mdash;+-&#126;&#126;Pathwithl,=O 
 \\ 
 p 
 
 New steady state 
 
 R 
 
 " 
 
 \+--t 
 
 I 
 
 pI 
 Slope=-k 
 
 Pr 
 
 k 
 Fig. 1. Effect of a reduction in PK· 
 
 rate of return than other investments (unless big payments are given). For example, it is not 
 unusual/amazing for returns to capital invested in (material that makes plants grow better)s 
 to go beyond 100% in poor countries (e.g. Gandhi et al., 
 1995; Larson and Frisvold, 1996), while rates of return 
 on (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) practices are often much less than this 
 (Knife and Schreiber, 1994; Lutz et al., 1994; 
 Kumwenda et al., 1996). It is not surprising that 
 farmers often show little interest in such practices, 
 even though they may be money-making, if they have other 
 much more money-making ways to use their rare/not enough  labor 
 and savings. 
 Some development programs have tried to overcome the unwillingness of farmers to invest in lower 
 return (using less of something) technologies by bundling these 
 technologies with higher return investments in (material that makes plants grow better), seeds, etc. Fig. 1 hints that such an approach 
 may be most helpful and successful if it is combined 
 with (good) enough credit to enable the farmer to 'jump' to 
 a higher level of man-made capital close to the final 
 
 steady state (this way making equal the rates of return at a 
 point such as R in Fig. 1), rather than tracing out the 
 whole (everything is gone)/accumulation path. Then the farmer 
 will have (reward or reason for doing something) to invest immediately in useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital as well as man-made capital. Without such an 
 ability to pile up capital quickly, the farmer would 
 be better off shifting his valuable things towards those having 
 higher returns at first, and this would enable him 
 to pile up savings and approach the ·long run 
 steady state more quickly. (see/hear/become aware of) that this is true 
 even if, as we have assumed, increasing useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital increases the not important product of man-made 
 capital. 
 Of course, farmers' best decisions may not be 
 best from a social point of view if there are 
 externalities connected with their decisions. For 
 example, use of (material that makes plants grow better)s or other (bought something for money) capital 
 may create external costs on others that they do not 
 take into account, such as water pollution caused by 
 runoff and leaking of (not living) (vitamins, minerals, protein, etc.), or the 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 (thing that's given/work that's done) of the (material that makes plants grow better) production and transportation system to buildup of carbon dioxide and worldwide 
 warming 14- If farmers were take these costs into 
 account, the result would be (not surprisingly), less 
 investment in (material that makes plants grow better)s or other forms of capital 
 causing external costs, less investment in useful thing/valuable supply 
 capital (more surprising), and lower steady-state production and consumption per person. 
 To show this result, suppose that each person's 
 utility is reduced by the per person use of man-made 
 capital 
 u(ct, kt) 
 
 = u(ct- akt) 
 
 (18) 
 
 Then, Eq. (14) is replaced by: 
 
 fk(k, r) = PK(P + n) +a 
 1 - PKDK - PRDR 
 
 (19) 
 
 while Eq. (15) remains the same. It is plain/honest/easy 
 to show that an increase in a leads to a reduction in the 
 steady-state level of k, r, andy, almost the same as  the effect of 
 an increase in p/ 5 . (in the opposite way), if there are external 
 benefits of investment (e.g. if investing in planting 
 trees creates external benefits by reducing carbon 
 dioxide in the atmosphere), the steady-state levels of k, 
 r, and y would be increased if these benefits were 
 (felt inside of you), almost the same as  the effect of a reduction in PR· 
 These results suggest that there may be no conflict 
 among the goals of increasing farming-based working well, improving useful thing/valuable supply conditions, reducing 
 (away from cities) poorness, and facing (worries about the health of the Earth), 
 if payments are used to (make a part of you) external benefits of 
 improving useful thing/valuable supply conditions. On the other hand, 
 there are clear trade-offs involved if taxes or rules are used to (make a part of you) the external costs connected with farming-based production. Although an 
 best helping action will increase group social 
 welfare and reduce (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) costs, it will reduce 
 investment in useful thing/valuable supply capital as well as other capital, 
 14This 
 
 assumes that market prices of (material that makes plants grow better) do not reflect 
 these costs, which is likely to be true today, but could be healed/made better 
 if a worldwide  agreement to limit carbon dioxide (things sent out or given off) is reached 
 and this leads to higher prices of (coal, natural gas, oil, etc.). This also assumes 
 that, (material that makes plants grow better) production and use creates a net addition to 
 air-related carbon dioxide. This may not be true however, since 
 (material that makes plants grow better) use can add/give to the stock of living plant material, 
 which acts to reduce air-related carbon dioxide. 
 15 The effects are almost the same  in the case of decreasing returns to 
 scale. 
 
 107 
 
 reduce farming-based production and income per person. 
 There may also be bad distributional results since farmers in poor countries are often 
 poorer than their city-based  neighbors (and certainly 
 poorer than those in advanced countries), who benefit 
 from reducing the external costs of developing country 
 farming. 
 Another key issue from the standpoint of social 
 welfare is the (what people commonly call a/not really a) 'intertemporal externality'; (in other words) 
 the fact that decisions made by farmers today affect 
 the welfare of people who will live in the future, which they may not 
 well enough account for in their decisions 16 . This issue 
 may be reflected in the private rate of time preference 
 (p) being greater than the social rate of time preference. If the social rate of time preference were applied 
 to investment decisions instead of the private rate, 
 there would be a higher level of all types of capital and 
 higher per person incomes in the long run. Note that 
 this 'externality' affects all types of investments, not 
 only investments in useful thing/valuable supply capital, and does not 
 argue in favor of accepting a lower rate of return on 
 investments in useful thing/valuable supply (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.) than investments 
 in other forms of capital. So, it does not change the 
 hint/result/effect that it can be socially best to let 
 useful things/valuable supplies insult/worsen in the near term; rather, it changes 
 the steady state that will be approached after useful things/valuable supplies 
 have insulted/got worse (good or well enough) to make equal the rates of 
 return to different investments. 
 This issue is sometimes poorly understood in policy 
 (and even school-related) discussions. The 'intertemporal 
 externality' is sometimes used to permit rules or 
 payments to prevent useful thing/valuable supply worsening or increase 
 investment in useful thing/valuable supply (protection of natural things/using less energy, water, etc.). As I hope this 
 discussion makes clear, a high private rate of time 
 preference does not permit helping actions targeted specifically to useful things/valuable supplies, although it may permit efforts to 
 (help increase/show in a good way) savings and investment more generally. 
 
 4. Extensions 
 It is important to bring attention to the key ideas (you think are true) 
 driving these (statements about the future), to avoid over-generalizing 
 them. Of extreme importance are the ideas (you think are true) that 
 16! prefer not to refer to this as an externality, because I think it 
 leads to confusion. As argued by Solow ( 1993 ), this can be seen as 
 an issue of inter-generational equity. 
 
 108 
 
 J.L. Pender! Farming-based Money flow 19 ( 1998) 99-112 
 
 land area is fixed, that land (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) is secure and 
 private, that the returns to capital increase with labor 
 supply, and that man-made capital and useful thing/valuable supply capital are not substitutes. These ideas (you think are true) suggest that 
 the private returns to investment rise as population 
 grows, eventually causing investment in both types of 
 capital. If land area is not fixed and edge of something/unexplored area land is 
 available at (compared to other things) low cost, investment may not be 
 money-making until available edge of something/unexplored area land has been settled. 
 A great deal of useful thing/valuable supply worsening, caused or 
 increased by population growth, may happen in the 
 process of clearing and settling edge of something/unexplored area land. The 
 explanation presented here does not address this aspect 
 of people/of the group-useful thing/valuable supply worsening center. 
 Lack of secure (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) to land also changes the story, 
 in that the (reward or reason for doing something) to invest is reduced by insecure 
 (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment). This does not necessarily change the basic 
 (statements about the future) of the explanation, however. Suppose, for example, that there is obvious chance of throwing out during 
 each period, that this chance is independent of the 
 farmer's decisions and (related to numbers) independent over 
 time, and that if thrown out the farmer receives his 
 reservation utility of 0 from then on. The effect of 
 the chance of throwing out can be represented by an 
 increase in the rate of time preference, and so, 
 results in lower investment and income per person 
 in the long run 17 . Where the chance of throwing out 
 depends upon the investment behavior of the farmer, 
 this needs to be modeled clearly. If useful thing/valuable supply bad activities (such as, clearing trees) improve (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) 
 security, factors that (help increase/show in a good way) investment (such as, 
 lower time preference, increasing output prices, land 
 titling and credit programs) may increase worsening 
 (Angelsen, 1996). On the other hand, if planting trees 
 improves (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) security, more trees will be planted, 
 though this may not be socially best (Otsuka et al., 
 1997). 
 If (length of time at work or in power/right to permanent employment) is secure but shared rather than private, 
 the model (statements about the future) will hold at the community 
 level, if best total decisions are made by 
 the community. There is (enough information or physical objects that clearly prove something) that communities have been able to manage common property 
 productively in many developing country settings 
 
 (Baland and Platteau, 1996). However, the ability to 
 maintain effective total action may (lower in number/get worse) as 
 population grows, because the private benefits from 
 mentally sick behavior may rise while the costs of watching and enforcement increase. So, population 
 growth may cause useful thing/valuable supply worsening in the near 
 term by adding/giving to the breakdown of traditional 
 systems of shared useful thing/valuable supply management. 
 In the longer term, population growth may add/give to the development of more private and specific 
 property rights as the benefits of beginning and building on such 
 rights increases (Boserup, 1965; Demsetz, 1967; Binswanger and Mcintire, 1987). Also, the per person 
 costs of beginning and building on and enforcing private property 
 rights may fall as population grows, since a big 
 part of these costs may be fixed. However, 
 whether and how such institutional invention of new things will 
 happen in response to changing (rewards or reasons for doing something) is more 
 hard to (describe the future) than the responses of families 
 under a given institutional (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built). Given the 
 presence of high fixed costs, total action needed things, and the possibility of coordination failures, 
 institutional invention of new things may be a path dependent 
 process having multiple equilibria, with no promise 
 that socially best results will happen (North, 
 1990). 
 Almost the same  arguments apply to inventions. The process of inventions usually 
 involves big fixed costs (Romer, 1990), and the 
 per person level of these costs are reduced by population growth 18 . Also, population growth may 
 increase the returns to invention of new things, as argued in the 
 caused invention of new things books (Boserup, 1965; Hayami 
 and Ruttan, 1985). As with institutional invention of new things, 
 this process may be path dependent (David, 1985; 
 Arthur, 1989). 
 Government policies may have large hits/effects (for 
 good or ill) at certain critical times on which path of 
 institutional or (related to computers and science) change happens; however, 
 at other times, the technology or institutional (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built) may be 'locked-in' and policies (compared to other things) ineffective in changing them. Understanding such 
 pathways of change and the role of government poli- 
 
 17 In the big picture  of much/very repeated games, Kreps (1990), 
 chapter 14) points out that the commonly used huge discount 
 factor may result from a positive chance that the game will not 
 continue. 
 
 18 Romer argued, however, that population growth does not 
 necessarily cause invention of new things because he assumed that labor 
 supply is not an important input in the new and interesting part/area. 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 cies in affecting them is an important area for future 
 research. 
 The idea (you think is true) that man-made and natural capital 
 are not substitutes (FKR?.O) is a critical one. If they are 
 substitutes, the (statement about the future) that useful thing/valuable supply capital will 
 rise in the long run after a reduction in the price of 
 man-made capital or (related to computers and science) change increasing 
 the not important product of man-made capital could be 
 reversed. Note, however, that the condition F KR?.O is a 
 (good) enough and not a necessary condition for the (serving to compare two or more things) statics results. The (statements about the future) of the explanation 
 will still hold if the degree of substitutability is not too 
 large. 
 The model thought about/believed here also has the limitation 
 that risk is not incorporated. (serious thought/something to think about/respect) of risk and 
 risk disgust would qualify the end/end result that families try to equate tax rates of return. Instead, 
 farmers would be expected to hold a (smart money saving) of valuable things to reduce their exposure to risk, with 
 some maybe having lower expected returns. Families also would likely hold (related to doing things to prevent trouble or injury) savings as 
 a hedge against future income shortfalls. These extensions do not change  the basic understanding of the pre-decided 
 explanation, however; (in other words) large changes in prices or technology cause substitution of man-made for natural 
 capital in the near term and collection of both types 
 of capital over a long time. 
 It is also important to bring attention to what is not 
 assumed in the explanation presented here. I have not 
 assumed that perfect markets exist, although I assume 
 the existence of markets for the output and man-made 
 capital. No land, labor, or credit markets are assumed 
 to exist. If a perfect set of markets exists within 
 communities (no transaction costs and property rights 
 fully specified and enforced) and external markets for 
 output and man-made capital exist, the explanation presented here would apply at the community level. The 
 functioning of local factor markets (even if not perfect) tends to reduce the hit/effect on production decisions of differences among families in factor 
 gifts or preferences, since the not important products of production factors tend to make equal across 
 families. 
 However, these markets can also worsen distributional differences over time. For example, families with lower rates of time preference will tend to 
 save and invest more over time, and if land sales 
 markets are functioning, they will also get more 
 
 109 
 
 land. Local credit markets help this process by 
 encouraging 'patient' families (those whose rate of 
 time preference is lower than the local interest rate) to 
 become net lenders and pile up valuable things, while 
 impatient families become net borrowers and 
 remove of valuable things over time 19 . If labor markets are 
 functioning, these impatient families will become 
 landless laborers. While this process may be desirable 
 from the standpoint of (wasting very little while working or producing something) and (the ability to keep something around, or keep something going) 
 (since the lower rate of time preference of more patient 
 families will decide/figure out the long run level of valuable thing 
 collection), it is not desirable from the standpoint 
 of eliminating poorness. 
 
 5. End/end result 
 The explanation developed in this paper supports both the 
 Boserupian hope about the improvements in 
 useful thing/valuable supply management caused by population growth 
 and the Malthusian (negative thinking) about the hit/effect of 
 population growth on incomes and welfare. The Malthusian (negative thinking) is lessened to the extent that 
 population growth causes (set of machines) and market 
 development, and (related to computers and science) and institutional 
 invention of new things. However, these responses are not automatic and likely depend to a big extent upon 
 the first institutional (solid basic structure on which bigger things can be built), normal behavior or beliefss, and 
 government policies. So, governments have a very important role to play in helping the process of market 
 development and (related to computers and science) and institutional invention of new things. 
 Governments likely have much less hit/effect on the 
 long run effects/results/suggestions of (process by which something becomes stronger or worse), given the state 
 of technology and institutions; although they can 
 affect the path towards the long run steady state. In 
 particular, they can speed up the collection of 
 man-made capital by helping to make credit more 
 widely available (this does not suggest the use of 
 payments), and so reduce the (reward or reason for doing something) to use up/reduce 
 valuable things from nature in the near term. Policies to give money to the collection of natural capital are not 
 gave a reason for simply because people have a short time 
 (way of seeing things / sensible view of what is and is not important); this will simply result in lower production 
 19 Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995) p. 99) discuss this problem in 
 open (process of people making, selling, and buying things) growth models with differences/different versions in time preference. In 
 the limit, patient families get all of the marketable valuable things. 
 
 J.L. Pender/Agricultural Money flow 19 (1998) 99--112 
 
 110 
 
 and consumption in the near and long term. However, 
 if there are external (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) costs connected 
 with man-made capital collection, taxes or regulation can increase group welfare and reduce these 
 costs, but there will be a trade-off with goals of 
 reducing poorness and conserving valuable thing from nature 
 capital (if man-made and valuable thing from nature capital 
 are (completes/goes along with)). In contrast, if conserving natural 
 capital has external benefits, payments can increase 
 production and consumption as well as (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth) 
 quality over a long time. 
 The possibility of both/together serving (related to surrounding conditions or the health of the Earth), 
 money-based, and social goals by giving money to investments in useful thing/valuable supply capital is an attractive prospect. For 
 example, it hints that tries to address worldwide 
 warming by (helping increase/showing in a good way) tree planting (when this is 
 (completing/matching) to income and production goals) 
 might involve much fewer trade-offs than more legal/law-based or tax-based approaches. However, (understanding/making real/achieving) 
 such a win-win solution depends critically upon 
 whether natural capital and man-made capital are 
 (completes/goes along with) or substitutes, and this is not yet well 
 understood. Technical research identifying possible 
 complementarities between different forms of natural 
 and man-made capital could this way have a very high 
 possible payoff. 
 Add on 
 
 either K orR: 
 
 These derivatives represent the not important benefit (in 
 utility terms) of an increase in K or R. Since F K and F R 
 are positive, these will be positive if the term in 
 parentheses is positive, which can be shown to be 
 true if (1 - PK8K - PRDR &amp;gt; 0) 20 - The not important utility 
 cost of an increase inK is p&#126;'(c 1)/L1 and the not important 
 cost of an increase in R is pRu'(c1)/Lt. If the not important 
 benefit/cost ratio for investments in R is less than the 
 not important benefit cost ratio for investments in K, 
 investment in R will be zero. Eqs. (A2) and (A3) 
 suggest this if FKIPK&amp;gt;FRIPR· Investment in R will be 
 zero as long as this holds, causing R to fall Eq. (11) 
 until FKIPK=FRIPR· 
 Assume that the rates of return to K and R have 
 made equal (this way "f=O). (making different) the Hamiltonian 
 with respect to h, and IR, and setting these equal to 0, 
 we get 
 AK =pKu'(ct) 
 (A4) 
 Lt 
 
 AR =pRu'(cr) 
 Lt 
 
 Derivation of best path and (serving to compare two or more things) 
 statics results 
 
 The costate equations are 
 
 A. I Best Path 
 
 &amp;gt;..K = PAK- 
 
 The current value Hamiltonian for the household's 
 optimization problem is 
 
 H 
 
 (AS) 
 
 [u't)- AK8K- AR8R]FK 
 (A6) 
 
 )..R 
 
 = u [F(Lt,Kt,Rt) &#126;tPKh,- PRIR,] 
 
 :&#126; = PAK- 
 
 =PAR-:&#126;= PAR- 
 
 [U'i:r)- AK8K- ARDR] FR 
 (A7) 
 
 + AK[h,- 8KF(Lt,Kt,Rt)]_) 
 + AR[IR,- 8RF(L1,K1,R1)]_) + ALnL1 +"fiR, 
 
 (A1) 
 
 where 'Y is the Lagrangian multiplier connected with 
 the non-marketability restriction of useful thing/valuable supply capital 
 Eq. (4). 
 To show that FKIPK&amp;gt;FRIPR hints that IR=O, use 
 the envelope true idea to figure out/calculate  the effect on the 
 value function at timet (V(L1, K 1, R1)) of an increase in 
 
 20When the non-marketability restriction is binding, Eq. (AS) 
 below is replaced by 
 
 &amp;gt;..R +'Y =pRu'(c,) 
 L, 
 
 This equation and Eq. (A4) suggest that 
 
 u'(c 
 4 
 - &amp;gt;..K8K 1) 
 
 &amp;gt;..R8R = 
 
 4u'(c,) (I - PKDK - 
 
 PRDR) +"(DR 
 
 J.L Pender I Farming-based Money flow 19 (1998) 99-112 
 
 Defining: f..lr = u'(c1 ), solving Eqs. (A4) and 
 (A5) for A.K and A.R, and substituting these into 
 Eqs. (A6) and (A7) and simplifying, we get 
 Eqs. (8) and (9). 
 5.2. (serving to compare two or more things) statics of the steady state (constant 
 returns case) 
 Eqs. (14) and (15) are of the form 
 
 /k 
 
 =A 
 
 (A8) 
 
 fr =B 
 
 (A9) 
 
 where both A and B are increasing functions of p, n, 
 p K- p R- 8K- and 8R· Let z represent any of these 
 (coming from the outside of something) (numbers that change/things that change). Applying the understood function 
 true idea we get 
 
 dz 
 
 (dA/dz)frr- (dB/dz)fkr 
 fkdrr - f'/k 
 
 (AlO) 
 
 dr 
 dz 
 
 (dB/dz)!kk- (dA/dz)fkr 
 fkdrr - J'/k 
 
 (All) 
 
 dk 
 
 Strict curviness off(k,r) hints that the denominator 
 in Eqs. (AlO) and (All) are positive, and thatfkk and 
 frr are negative. By idea (you think is true) fk,?:_O. These results, 
 together with the facts that dA/dz and dB/dz are 
 positive, suggest that dkldz&amp;lt;O and dr/dz&amp;lt;O. This in turn 
 hints that dy/dz&amp;lt;O. 
 
 5.3. (serving to compare two or more things) statics (decreasing returns case) 
 I think about/believe only the effect of increasing L. The 
 effects of the other (numbers that change/things that change) are exactly the same 
 as in the constant returns to scale case. 
 We have equations of the form 
 
 =c 
 
 (Al2) 
 
 FR(L,K,R) = D 
 
 (A13) 
 
 FK(L,K,R) 
 
 Applying the understood function theor<p><strong>NOTE: This document is incomplete. It was shortened to the maximum document length of 50,000 characters.</strong></p><div style="clear:both">&nbsp;</div>
